




















































Hansard: March 09, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 27B  TUESDAY, MARCH 9, 2010, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4069 

 March 9, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 117 — The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping 

Heritage Act 

(continued) 

 

The Speaker: — Debate will resume on Bill No. 117. I 

recognize the member from Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to resume debate on Bill 117, and I’ll spend the last 

three or so hours of my speech talking about the real guts of this 

one-page Bill because there are very serious implications. Now 

I would be remiss — because I had a lot of time to think about 

it over dinner hour, and I practised my three-hour speech at the 

dinner hour and condensed it, but I would be remiss — if I 

didn’t mention some experiences I had growing up with some 

very impressive hunters. 

 

Now every fall you could count on a visit from a friend of ours 

that lived across the street. And he would invariably stop by and 

open the door without knocking and run up the stairs with his 

overalls that used to be white and were now absolutely blood 

soaked. And he’d be bragging about the deer he just shot and 

was in the back of his truck, and did we want to come over and 

have a look at it. And it always made my mom frustrated 

because he didn’t care that he had his boots on at the time, 

crawling up the stairs. But we always went out there and had a 

look and were very impressed and excited that he was excited 

about what he was doing. And that was hunting. And he always 

went to the northeast part of the province to do it. 

 

And what I didn’t know at the time, what we learned recently is 

that Wayne and Sue Schigol used to live across the street from 

us in Prince Albert. She ended up being the head of the 

Saskatchewan Outfitters Association, Wayne’s wife. And so 

we’ve had experiences dealing with different folks who have 

engaged in hunting, fishing, and trapping. And like I’d 

mentioned earlier, I’d done much of it myself and had personal 

experience with it. 

 

Now an interesting aspect to this Bill, right after the short title, 

is that “A person has the right to hunt, fish and trap in 

accordance with the law as it exists from time to time.” Now I 

find it interesting that you could ask to enshrine in the 

legislation an Act that commands that a person has the right to 

hunt, fish, and trap in accordance with the law when it took 

Métis peoples in Saskatchewan years to get the same rights to 

their traditional territory. And truthfully, those rights are still 

evolving as we speak. 

 

And so you have a Bill here that speaks directly to honouring 

hunting, fishing, and trapping in Saskatchewan and it creates a 

day that’s designated as a heritage day and it enshrines in the 

legislation that a person has the right to do these things. But 

there are groups of folks who have traditional rights — and as 

I’d mentioned, the government has the duty to consult with 

them and hasn’t done that — and their own rights are still 

evolving as we speak. So I do find that interesting. 

 

Now you might also want to talk about where a Bill originates. 

What’s the impetus for bringing a Bill forward? Now it appears 

that this Bill copies some laws that were brought forward by 

right wing organizations in the United States. It’s not clear who 

brought this forward, and so we’ll be asking questions certainly 

in committee about what the impetus of the Bill was, and what 

exactly they want to establish when they mention that “A 

person has the right to hunt, fish and trap in accordance with the 

law as it exists from time to time.” 

 

And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate on Bill 

No. 117. Thank you. Oh, sorry . . . [inaudible] . . . Sorry. 

 

The Speaker: — Yes. I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With the 

permission of the Assembly I want to enter the debate on the 

Bill 117, An Act respecting Hunting, Fishing and Trapping. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as you know, myself and the member from 

Prince Albert, the good member from Prince Albert — because 

there is one member that we don’t really agree should be there 

— but nonetheless, the good member from Prince Albert and 

the member from Cumberland, as well as myself, we are totally 

familiar with the issues around hunting, fishing, and trapping. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while at the outset . . . [inaudible] . . . this 

Act that talks about the need to respect the hunting, fishing, and 

trapping, I want to enter the debate and talk a bit about northern 

Saskatchewan and what they view in relation to the whole 

notion of this Act as it makes the reference of respecting 

fishermen, trappers, and hunters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, growing up in northern Saskatchewan, I had the 

extreme pleasure of living off the land as a result of many 

people that taught me how to do that and many people that 

actually had their families survive just living off northern 

Saskatchewan lands. And, Mr. Speaker, throughout time I can 

remember, as a young lad, my father hunting, and my uncles, 

and many of my friends’ families out fishing and many, many 

people trapping. And the most amazing thing, Mr. Speaker, is 

that these economies — hunting, fishing, and trapping — they 

sustained a lot of northern and Aboriginal communities. 

Because there are many people that are not Aboriginal that 

make northern Saskatchewan their home. And with all due 

respect to them, I don’t want to ignore their role as northern 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, throughout time, as in southern 

Saskatchewan and more so in northern Saskatchewan, the 

whole notion of hunting, fishing, and trapping has been a way 

of life for northern Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you look through the history of Western 

Canada and the country itself, the fur trade era really ushered in 

a lot of exploration. It ushered in a lot of pioneers. It ushered in 



4070 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

a lot of people that travel from throughout the world, 

throughout the globe, to travel to northern Saskatchewan, 

northern Alberta, northern BC, and Western Canada in general 

to do exactly what the Act talks about — to hunt, to fish, and 

more so to trap. 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker — a lot of people may not believe this 

— there are a lot of trappers that are still very, very involved 

with their trade. They are also teaching their young people. I 

know a lot of people, older people are showing younger people 

in the school system how to trap, how to properly set the traps, 

and what to look for. And there’s really a lot of education 

happening around the notion of hunting, fishing, and more so 

trapping. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, when I talk about the fur 

history that people often make reference to, some people said 

that the fur industry began 100 years ago, 175 years ago. 

Certainly from the perspective of the Aboriginal people it began 

many, many centuries ago as that’s how they were able to 

survive the cold, harsh climate of Canada. And it’s really truly 

through the efforts of trapping and using the animals to survive. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that when you look at the 

history, you look at the importance of trapping and hunting and 

fishing throughout northern Saskatchewan, what the Sask Party 

does, it puts up a Bill and says, oh we want to respect those 

particular aspects of hunting, fishing, and trapping. So we want 

to proclaim this Bill as an Act to respect that, respect those 

industries. And, Mr. Speaker, proclaiming an Act such as Bill 

117 through this Bill and actually following up and following 

through are two totally different stories, Mr. Speaker, two 

totally different stories. 

 

Now one of the examples that I made reference here to the 

fishing aspect — let me take the fishing aspect as an example, 

Mr. Speaker, a good example. In northern Saskatchewan, we 

have a really exciting opportunity in the commercial fishing 

industry. As people know, we have commercially fished many 

of our lakes throughout time. The commercial fishing industry 

was a very strong, vibrant industry and many, many families 

survived on that particular activity in that particular industry. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was during the ’30s and the ’40s, I believe, 

that people knew, people knew that the commercial fishing 

industry was very strong. There was a market for the 

commercially caught fish. 

 

As you look at northern Saskatchewan with the pristine lakes, 

with all the lakes that are out there and all the different types of 

fish, that people in the rest of the world really wanted to have 

some northern Saskatchewan fish to eat. So as a result of that, 

the commercial fishing industry was very vibrant and many, 

many families survived over many, many years as a result of 

the commercial fishing industry itself. 

 

And this Bill talks about fishing. So one of the things that I 

think is very important is to remind that government, the Sask 

Party government, that if you’re going to put Acts like this to 

respect fishing, then you better be comprehensive, you better be 

in consultation with many, many groups as it relates to not only 

sport fishing, but commercial fishing as well. And I’m 

assuming and I’m hoping and I’m praying, Mr. Speaker, that 

when they have the notion of An Act respecting Hunting, 

Fishing and Trapping, that part of that Act also includes respect 

for commercial fishing that many, many families have certainly 

survived over the years and continue to do so today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, over the last several months, this particular 

government decided in their wisdom and in particular the 

Minister of the Environment, I believe, got up and said that her 

plan was to get rid of the Freshwater Fish Marketing 

Corporation. And for brevity, just for the sake of being brief in 

my presentation — which I’m known for — I want to use the 

initials FFMC. So FFMC really is the Freshwater Fish 

Marketing Corporation. 

 

This corporation was established a number of years ago so that 

they’re able to . . . Instead of having 20, 30, 40 fish buyers that 

could really manipulate the fish price and to really put the 

commercial fishermen at a disadvantage, the province and the 

federal government all agreed to establish the Freshwater Fish 

Marketing Corporation. And the FFMC’s role was to not only 

gather the fish, but they have it inspected to process the fish and 

to market the fish. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this Act talks about fishing. So as a result of 

the commercial fishing industry, FFMC was created, and a lot 

of people were at the time quite pleased that they had a central 

body. They had a central organization that worked on their 

behalf to market, to collect, and of course to inspect and to 

package all their commercially caught fish, not only in 

Saskatchewan but Alberta and Manitoba and the Northwest 

Territories. 

 

Now this government comes along and says, okay, the people, 

some of the fishermen want to get rid of Freshwater Fish 

Marketing Corporation, FFMC. We will then turn around and 

we will say we’re opting out of the FFMC marketing plan; 

Saskatchewan by 2011 will opt out. And certainly from the 

perspective of Saskatchewan, they have that ability to opt out, 

and no longer will be forcing our fishermen to have to deal 

through a Freshwater Fish Marketing Corporation as a 

monopoly in terms of where you can sell your fish and who can 

market and sell fish throughout Canada and the world. 

 

So they said, okay, commercial fishermen, we’ll get rid of 

FFMC by 2011. So fishermen were calling me. Some of them 

were confused, saying, well we know we have to kind of hold 

FFMC accountable, but the fact of the matter is we’re not 

getting the prices we want, so I guess, where do we go from 

here? So what I told the commercial fishing industry is, well I 

would hope, I would hope that if the Saskatchewan Party 

government is going to get rid of the Freshwater Fish Marketing 

Corporation that takes your fish from Saskatchewan and from 

other western points and markets it on your behalf, if they take 

away that opportunity to work with FFMC, I pray that they’re 

going to put some money in for you guys to do your own 

processing, your own marketing and packaging. 

 

[19:15] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when the minister made it, made the bold 

announcement they’re going to move away from FFMC, the 

next question we had is, how much are they prepared to put in 

to help the commercial fishing industry build this industry, 

process their fish, package their fish, inspect their fish, and then 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4071 

certainly market their fish? I looked through all the budget 

documentation and not one red, single cent was set aside for the 

commercial fishing industry. Their only option was to get rid of 

FFMC. And guess what? There’s no money attached to it. No 

money whatsoever to help the commercial fishermen find their 

way through the whole notion of trying to look for new 

opportunities and new markets that did not involve FFMC. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as we look through all the documents, public 

accounts, the budgets, and we found out that this government, 

really the only solution to the problem was get rid of FFMC. 

And what happens after that to the commercial fishing industry, 

well it’s anybody’s guess. It’s anybody’s guess what’s going to 

happen. Not one red cent to any of these guys to help with the 

commercial fishing industry and the development of their 

industry. And, Mr. Speaker, they pretend to bring Bills like this 

to show what I think is really is false statements in the sense of 

trying to show respect to an industry such as fishing, and in this 

regard the commercial fishing industry itself. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I did have the opportunity to travel to 

Winnipeg and to meet with FFMC on numerous occasions, and 

we talked to the president there at the time. There was one 

president we spoke to, his name was Mr. Hand. Another 

president that we most recently spoke to was Mr. Wood. And 

they, of course, run FFMC. And they have operations in the 

Northwest Territories and Saskatchewan, a little bit in Alberta, 

but most of their activity happens in the Winnipeg area. Lake 

Winnipeg I guess produces most of the fish that they process 

and market. So their home base is probably 80 per cent, maybe 

75 per cent of the volume of fish that they process at the 

Winnipeg plant. 

 

And when we talked about the issues around the commercial 

fishing industry, I asked Mr. Wood the question: how important 

are the fishermen in Saskatchewan to FFMC? Exactly how 

much volume of fish do we send you guys each and every year? 

Because according to this new government that doesn’t have a 

clue what they are doing when it comes to the fishing industry, 

they want to get rid of you guys. They want to get rid of FFMC. 

 

And the question that I asked him is how much volume does 

Saskatchewan send to Winnipeg to make up what FFMC 

handles on an annual basis. And it’s bit surprising because I 

thought the number was higher, but he said 12 per cent. 

Roughly 12 per cent of our total volume here in Winnipeg we 

get from Saskatchewan-based commercial fishermen. Now that 

12 per cent is . . . Certainly the bulk of our operation’s around 

Lake Winnipeg. So we want to make sure we try and keep that 

12 per cent. 

 

So the next question I asked him was, well if the 12 per cent is 

interrupted, what then happens? What then happens? And he 

said, well we want to keep it because no CEO [chief executive 

officer] is worth their salt if they turn away 12 per cent of their 

volume of business. So his first priority as a president was, you 

wanted to keep it. 

 

And the problem is if you guys — the Saskatchewan Party — 

opt out, guess what? You don’t have that guaranteed 12 per cent 

from Saskatchewan, thereby allowing FFMC to shrink by that 

amount and really putting at risk the commercial fishing 

industry, not just in Saskatchewan, but throughout Western 

Canada, without having a backup plan in place. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I then ask the question is that, why aren’t 

we doing more for the commercial fishermen in Saskatchewan? 

Why aren’t we doing the things that we think are important to 

develop the commercial fishing industry? And the response I 

got is, more could be done. More could be done. 

 

But when you throw down the gauntlet of saying no more 

FFMC connection for Saskatchewan, without putting any 

money where your mouth is in terms of trying to help develop 

this industry, what it’s saying is now the industry is on its own. 

It’s at the mercy of private buyers. And guess what? We’re not 

going to put any money in there to help protect the commercial 

fishing industry in our province, in our province. 

 

So the first plan of action is get rid of FFMC by next year, 

2011, and no money to help the commercial fishermen navigate 

these uncharted waters for the last 30, 40 years in which they 

have to not only make sure their fish are properly processed and 

that they’re properly handled as CFIA [Canadian Food 

Inspection Agency] standards, but they’re also marketed 

properly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the fishermen in Saskatchewan don’t have 

no processing plant, they certainly don’t have no marketing 

firm waiting for them to come along and help them, and they 

don’t have no dollars to get that economy or that particular 

aspect of their economy moving, as they hope and that they 

aspire to do. 

 

So this Act, this Bill that talks about the fishing, the respect for 

fishing — it’s not worth the paper it’s written on because you 

guys didn’t put one red cent to back up this particular Bill. And 

I say shame on all of you. Shame because what you’re doing, 

what our theory is, what our theory is you guys are doing this to 

set up the commercial fishing industry for failure, and once you 

set it up for failure . . . And the minister could laugh because 

she finds that pretty funny. The minister can laugh because once 

you set it up for failure, then you can move in all your corporate 

buddies or your American business partners. They’ll come take 

over the sport fishing industry and kick the commercial 

fishermen out of these lakes. That’s what I think your plan is, 

madam. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the minister could laugh from her seat and say 

not so, but look around. There’s no money attached to your plan 

to get rid of Freshwater Fish Marketing Corporation. You’re 

going to boot them out. And if they deserve to be booted out, let 

them be booted out. But if you don’t have a backup plan, then 

obviously you don’t care for the commercial fishermen and you 

don’t care for the fishing industry in general. So this Act, this 

Bill 117 is not worth the paper it’s written on. 

 

And about the best thing I can do with this Bill, the best value I 

could see for this Bill and the paper that it’s written on is to 

start a fire in my home, in my fireplace, and keep my house 

warm. And that’s about the only thing it’s good for, is to start 

the kindling burning because it isn’t worth the paper it’s written 

on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would say to you, to the minister, and to the government in 

relation to Bill 117, that the Sask Party did not consult. They 



4072 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

just reacted very quick, saying, okay FFMC, you’re gone; 2011, 

you’re gone. But guess what? We have no action plan in place 

to help you develop your own fishing resource. We have no 

action plan to help you develop a processing plant. We have no 

money to help you market this fish. Guess what, you guys? You 

guys have to find those partners on your own. 

 

And now the Freshwater Fish Marketing Corporation says, well 

if we’re booted out of Saskatchewan, if we’re no longer allowed 

to work with the commercial fishing industry in Saskatchewan, 

then we have to make sure we protect our own customer base. 

So they’re not about to say to the commercial fishermen in 

Saskatchewan, here’s our marketing access. Here’s all our 

information. Here’s our contacts. I guess you guys can go ahead 

and try and see if you can get these customers. The Freshwater 

Fish Marketing Corporation has to protect themselves. So 

they’re not about to share all that information. 

 

So the minister says Freshwater is out. But guess what? No 

money set aside for the commercial fishing industry in northern 

Saskatchewan and in Saskatchewan in general. Because you 

look through their budget: not one red cent. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that leaves me the alternative to having no 

government support for the commercial fishing industry, and 

say, okay, where do we go from here? Is there opportunity in 

the private sector? Well generally the rule of thumb — and I tell 

a lot of commercial fishermen this — generally the rule of 

thumb, if you’re going to a private investor or a group of 

investors, guess what? They’re going to control where they put 

their investment dollars in. They’re going to dictate how these 

dollars are spent. They’re going to manage these dollars how 

they want those dollars managed. And quite frankly, when it 

comes to control, when it comes to the profits, it’s going to go 

to the investors that put the most money in. 

 

And in this case, Mr. Speaker, it isn’t going to be the 

commercial fishermen because they simply don’t have the 

money of that magnitude to try and control their own industry. 

In a perfect world, Mr. Speaker, if they had the money, they had 

the connections, they had the market, they had the plan, they 

could do wonderful things. But these guys simply took away 

one tool that they could’ve used or could’ve learned from — 

that’s FFMC — and left them no tools to work with when it 

came to the protection of their commercial fishing industry, Mr. 

Speaker. And I say shame. And I say shame, shame on the 

minister and shame on that party for letting these guys . . . for 

cutting their ties and letting them float out there, hoping 

somebody comes along to help them save that industry. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I say today to many of the commercial 

fishermen out there that yes, we made a decision to not deal 

with FFMC. Every person should respect that decision, but if 

somebody comes along and gets rid of FFMC without no 

backup plan and dollars to help you achieve what you want, 

then you are being set up, and being set up badly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So everywhere I go, everywhere I go I tell the fishermen one 

thing. The Sask Party got rid of the FFMC; it’s supposed to help 

you guys out. Did they put their money where their mouth is? 

The answer is absolutely not. 

 

So it leads me to believe today that you guys have no intention 

of backing up the commercial fishermen in any way, shape, or 

form. No intention. You’d rather move in people from other 

places, that they come along and to take that fish resource, try 

and spin it off to a tourism opportunity in which the commercial 

fishermen are no longer in control and no longer have the 

benefit of the fish stocks in northern Saskatchewan. And I say 

that today, that that’s what I believe. That’s been the plan from 

day one. 

 

Then all along you come along and you bring this so-called an 

Act to support and respect the fishing industry. This paper isn’t 

worth the ink it’s written on. I’ve said it four times and I’ll keep 

saying it for the rest of the evening if I can, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I’ll look at the issue again on the cost. Does the minister 

have any idea what it costs to build a processing plant? Does 

the minister have any idea what it costs to get your CFIA 

certification on food processing? Does the minister have any 

idea what it costs to actually get all the necessary equipment, 

and equipment has been proven and is safe for food production? 

Does the minister have any idea what it costs to market these 

fish? Does the minister have any idea that you have to have a 

certain amount of volume — it means you guarantee that 

volume going through this plant to make it sustainable — to 

make it profitable? 

 

The answer to all those questions is, she doesn’t have a clue. 

She doesn’t have a clue what it takes to get this industry going. 

So why is it you’re meddling, meddling in those affairs without 

putting money where your mouth is? Put money where . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I just want to 

remind the member the member is supposed to address the floor 

through the Chair and is not to bring into question members 

directly. You can speak about the government or a ministerial 

position but not the member directly. I recognize the member. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I feel fairly 

passionate about this issue and then when you see Bills of this 

sort you certainly want to . . . I’ll always follow the rules but I’ll 

point out, Mr. Speaker, that when you put Bills of this sort that 

don’t really respect the people that you’re trying to point out 

that you’re respecting, then obviously it’d have to be called and 

called to account for their wording. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ll give the minister somewhat of an idea, 

through you, what the costs are to establish a plant. I think 

based on some of the information that I received, you’re 

looking at anywhere between 10 and 12 million bucks just for 

the plant. Now you obviously have to have CFIA involved 

because if you’re going to be processing this fish there’s certain 

guidelines, and they’re very, very strict guidelines. Food 

processing is a very, very tough business, as people would 

know, and that in itself is a huge, huge cost factor. 

 

And so once you’ve got the plant, once you have CFIA on 

board, then you’ve got to do one thing, is to market it. And 

when you get these customers and you’re able to find customers 

— which is a very tough business — then you’ve got to make 

sure that you have the supply because if there is the demand for 

your product out there, then you better have the supply. 

Because if you don’t guarantee the supply, then customers that 

would normally come to you and get the fish from you are 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4073 

going to say, well you promised me X amount of volume of fish 

and I’m not getting it, so I’ve got to go somewhere else and I’ve 

got to get that fish from somebody else. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it really is a worrisome trend that I see when I 

talk about this notion of Bill 117, An Act respecting Hunting, 

Fishing and Trapping. In no way, shape, or form, Mr. Speaker, 

no way, shape, or form though I see any notion that this 

government or this minister respects the fishing industry in any, 

any shape or form. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to share with the members of 

the Assembly the names of individuals that have contacted me 

this past week, and these individuals are from the Dillon area, 

Buffalo River First Nations, otherwise known as Dillon. They 

work in concert and co-operation with the Buffalo Narrows 

fishermen. And these four fishermen — and, you know, I want 

to make sure I don’t give out their names — these four 

fishermen contacted me and said, what recently happened, 

Buckley, member from Athabasca, what happened last week 

was we lost our cheques. 

 

What happens is we go to the fish plant, we deliver our fish. We 

mark our fish properly. And then when we go to get our 

cheques, we’re told that the cheques have been seized. And they 

have been seized by the government, by SERM [Saskatchewan 

Environment and Resource Management]. And I think last 

week — and I could stand being corrected, but I’m pretty 

certain that — the amount that was seized from two or three 

fishermen was well over $10,000. Mr. Speaker, $10,000. And 

what happened was SERM didn’t go there and take the cheques 

from the fishermen. They went to the fish plant and basically 

said, all the cheques are to be given to us. And then they left. So 

when the fishermen come along to pick up their cheques, the 

fish plant manager told them that you can’t take your cheques. 

 

And these are the guys that worked. They got up early in the 

morning. They went to . . . It cost them money to get the fish 

out. They paid their workers. They paid for gas. And they 

worked really hard because it’s a very tough industry. They’ve 

done all these things. And then when it’s time for them to get 

paid, they go to the fish plant to get their pay, they’re told that 

the cheque has been taken. The cheque has been taken by 

SERM and by the Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

And what I told them — all the fishermen in the Dillon area that 

lost fish, that lost money because SERM took away their fish — 

is, quite frankly, this government is so broke that they’re hoping 

that the commercial fisherman like the four in Dillon that lost 

their cheques, they’re hoping that they’ll pay off this deficit 

from this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So today I’m challenging the minister: why don’t you give back 

those commercial fisherman their cheques? They worked hard. 

They paid their fishermen. They paid all the costs attached with 

this industry. And these guys come along and they take their 

cheque and they take food out of the children’s mouth, the 

grandchildren’s mouth. They take money away from this 

family. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these commercial fishermen from Dillon are 

very, very upset and that’s putting it mildly. And when they 

contacted me, they were quite upset with this minister and this 

government. Because quite frankly, their fish that they caught 

— they paid helpers, they paid fuel, they paid all the costs 

attached to this — they worked hard for that money, and what 

do they get paid? Oh, the cheque has been confiscated by the 

government, by that Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So today I’m joining them and I’m asking the minister to return 

that money and return that pay to those commercial fisherman 

because that is the right thing to do. And what they did was just 

totally unconscionable and was very disrespectful. And they 

really got people, a lot of people very, very upset, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again I would challenge the minister to do the right thing. If 

this Act is about respecting commercial fishing and respecting 

the trappers, then do the right thing and start working with them 

as opposed to taking their cheques from them to help cover your 

deficit, Mr. Speaker. You’re going to have to catch tonnes and 

tonnes and tonnes and tonnes of fish to help cover that deficit 

created by the Sask Party. And I say to them today that they 

shouldn’t expect the commercial fisherman to start backfilling 

some of your mismanagement in your budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again these are some of the examples of how they 

cut Freshwater loose: of how they have not put money into their 

plan; of how, I believe, they’re trying to get rid of the 

commercial fishing industry in Saskatchewan; of how, I 

believe, they’re giving away land, they’re giving away 

allocations. They’re giving all these resources away, and the 

northern people are sitting there wondering what’s going on. 

 

But the minister comes along and says, oh here, I have a Bill. 

This Bill says we’re going to respect hunting, fishing, and 

trapping. And that’s why I say today this Bill isn’t worth the 

paper it’s written on because quite frankly there is no intention 

by that minister or this government to respect any of the people 

that they talk about in here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again I point out a couple more examples on the commercial 

fishing file. The industry itself has worked very closely with a 

number of groups and a number of people. And even the COs 

[conservation officers], they worked quite closely with them. 

And over the years, the commercial fisherman worked very 

hard. They’ve always sustained their industry and they’ve 

always defended their industry. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s an 

industry that really has a lot of benefit to northern people. There 

are a lot of Aboriginal fisherman and a lot of non-Aboriginal 

fisherman. But the northern people really benefit from this 

industry. 

 

And our lakes are pristine. The fish are fresh, and people want 

them. So we look at all these attributes of the commercial 

fishing industry, and you wonder why would a government that 

claims to respect them through an Act like this turn around and 

do some of these things to the commercial fishers that are out 

there throughout the North. 

 

Because I say to them, their plan was to never support them. 

Their plan was to set them up and to destroy the commercial 

fishing industry. What they want to do, then they can bring in 

their buddies to take over all the fish stock in northern 

Saskatchewan and turn it all to sport fishing industry. And, Mr. 



4074 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

Speaker, the fishermen are a lot brighter than that. And they 

know the game and they know what’s going on. 

 

So again I would ask the minister for the fourth time in two 

days, will she return those cheques that she confiscated from the 

four fishermen in Dillon that was done a couple of weeks ago, 

Mr. Speaker? That’s my challenge to her, if she’s serious about 

this notion attached to the Bill respecting commercial 

fishermen. And I say to them that she’s not, and she isn’t going 

to do it. And you can just make sure to keep that information 

and share the information to all the people and to all the 

fishermen in their area. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out again, you look at the 

notion of the Act itself and hunting, and this is a good example 

in hunting as well. And I’ll shift gears here a bit. You look at 

what happened recently through the Department of Agriculture. 

The minister talks about the respect to hunt. And what we find 

out is that the Minister of Agriculture turned around and took 

away wildlife habitat lands without consulting with the Minister 

of the Environment. 

 

Now I think these guys should get their act together and figure 

things out. You don’t remove wildlife habitat protection lands if 

you want to respect hunting. I think wouldn’t you rather 

enhance those lands that you are trying to keep, as opposed to 

trying to reduce the amount of lands that you have available for 

habitat? And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of the Crown lands that the 

Minister of Agriculture has sold or given away as a result of 

these lands becoming not Crown lands but private lands now, 

now they can become posted, and as a result that means less 

hunting. So you have more lands that’s posted. Isn’t that 

generally means there’s less hunting? 

 

So I think before the minister brings Bills out of this sort to talk 

about the respect to . . . or an Act to respect hunting and fishing 

and trapping, once again we’ve seen totally different direction 

by this government by Bills that they pretend to put forward to 

try and fool people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would ask the minister where in this whole notion is the 

respect to defend and support hunting, when all you’ve done 

was remove wildlife habitat lands from protection, all you’ve 

done is sold off Crown land, all you’ve done is destroyed 

commercial fishing. Every single action that you’ve undertaken 

quite frankly shows that you’re not interested. Nor do you 

respect fishing, trapping, or hunting. 

 

So that’s why, as an opposition member, I tell people 

throughout the North that what these guys say and what they do 

are two radically different things, Mr. Speaker. Two radically 

different things. Their actions do not follow through with some 

of the wording that they use in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

So I’m going to say it, Mr. Speaker. I’ve said it once in Cree. 

I’ve just told the people of northern Saskatchewan, those that 

fish and trap for a living, if the Saskatchewan Party come along 

and say they’re going to do all of these wonderful things, I told 

them don’t believe them — absolutely not. They’ve done more 

damage, they have done more hurt to our northern communities, 

and they don’t care what happens to many of our commercial 

fishermen, many of our hunters, and many of our trappers. 

 

And it’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, because this Bill, this Bill, 

whether it’s action by the Department of Agriculture or action 

to get rid of Freshwater Fish Marketing Corporation, it does 

nothing. It does absolutely nothing to respect commercial 

fishing, to respect the hunters, and to respect the trappers. If you 

respect the hunting so much, why do you take wildlife habitat 

lands away? Why did you sell off our Crown lands? Why did 

you disrespect the First Nations and Métis people when it 

comes to their right to hunt, fish, and trap? Why is he trying to 

get rid of the commercial fishing industry? The list goes on and 

on and on, Mr. Speaker, in a sense that what the Sask Party’s 

failure is, quite frankly, is they shouldn’t be putting Bills of this 

sort forward because it doesn’t do anything to build credibility 

to the people that I know and the people that are involved with 

these industries. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s happening over there, and I 

look at the whole notion, the Minister of Agriculture gets up 

and he says, I’m removing all these wildlife habitat lands and 

I’m also selling all this Crown land because all these guys I’m 

selling to and removing it, they’re my buddies. They’re going to 

be voting for me. And of course the minister says, well hold it 

here. We’ve got some animals, we’ve got some hunters rights. 

And oh no, you just never mind; we’re going to do this and 

that’s that. 

 

So when you come along and we know how this works. You 

come along and you look at this Bill, An Act respecting 

Hunting, Fishing and Trapping, you don’t respect hunting if 

you’re going to take away wildlife habitat lands. People know 

that. You don’t respect trapping if you’re going to take away 

Crown lands that once had animals and people could access 

that, if you’re going to give those Crown lands away. You can’t 

have people posting lands on a more consistent and grander 

basis if you want to respect hunting and fishing and trapping. 

You don’t do that. You don’t get rid of a Freshwater Fish 

Marketing Corporation until you have a backup plan in place if 

you respect commercial fishing. You’re doing exactly that 

without having a backup plan. 

 

[19:45] 

 

So you look at all these issues, Mr. Speaker, all these issues of 

tax for that government. What they say and do out there is 

radically and totally different than what is being said in some of 

these Acts, in some of these Bills that they’re trying to convince 

us are good and general, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I look at the whole notion of this heritage day that they’re going 

to plan to say, okay today’s a grand day — and I hope it’s not 

budget day, but today is a grand day — to recognize hunting, 

fishing, and trapping. Now, Mr. Speaker, it may be 364 days of 

the year that they’re working against hunting, fishing, and 

trapping; there’s one day they want to take a break. And, Mr. 

Speaker, it should be the exact opposite. It should be the exact 

opposite. They should be working to respect commercial 

fishing, fishing of any sort, hunting and trapping 364 days out 

of the year and taking a day to recognize them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what’s happening — and I tell everybody 

across my travels — is Bill No. 117 is legislation to create a 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4075 

heritage day to recognize fishing, trapping, and hunting. And in 

the meantime, in the meantime they’re doing things radically 

different to hurt those three sectors. And, Mr. Speaker, I just 

pray some day that this government gets it, and I don’t think 

they ever will. But I know members across that way have a lot 

of hunters in their constituencies and a lot of people that support 

trapping and commercial fishing. And do the math, look at 

what’s going on in your backyard. 

 

If your Minister of Agriculture can arbitrarily take away huge 

chunks of wildlife lands without consultation with the Minister 

of the Environment, then guess what? You don’t have a team. 

And guess what? You shouldn’t be putting Bills of this sort 

proclaiming respect when you’re doing things exactly, exactly 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well the member from Moose Jaw North is pointing to the 

Speaker, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the first time I’ve seen any 

activity from that guy in the last two years. So I would 

encourage him to talk to his trappers, to talk to your fishermen. 

You know, do something instead of sitting in the background 

waving your fingers and try and get this government, if they 

want to respect hunting, fishing, and trapping, to maybe follow 

up and follow through with what you guys intend to do, Mr. 

Speaker. Maybe that’s what they should do. 

 

And as we look at what’s happening here, we know, we know 

across the way that Finance or the bigger departments trump 

any activity that’s being planned in relation to this Bill. And, 

Mr. Speaker, An Act respecting Hunting, Fishing and Trapping 

as presented by the Sask Party government is not worth the 

paper it’s written on because of the activity that they have 

undertaken, the decisions that they have made and, Mr. 

Speaker, more so for the set-ups that they’re going to have, not 

only to the commercial fishing industry but to the trappers and 

to the hunters. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a bit of time on trapping. As 

I mentioned before, many people in the old days talk about the 

value of trapping, the fact that there is still a lot of opportunity 

with trapping. And a lot of the older people still do it. It’s 

something that they love to do and they make a little bit of 

money on it when the fur prices are right. 

 

Now what happens now is that they talk about their traplines; 

there’s these little things called traplines. And when the Sask 

Party comes along and allocates all a whack of land to different 

American buyers and a bunch of outfitters, guess what? The 

traplines that the people have are not respected. The logging 

companies don’t respect some of the traplines and neither do 

some of the people you are bringing in to Saskatchewan that 

want to take over that land. 

 

So a lot of the trappers tell me, well one of the things they ought 

to do is have a trapline thought process where you would really 

engage the trappers in trying to figure out how they can protect 

the land. Mr. Speaker, when I was the minister of SERM, I 

often referred to the trappers as the conscience of the land 

because they are there to do one thing, was to make sure that 

the environment was taken care of. They took the animals that 

they needed and made sure they protected the land at all costs. 

So I always made the reference that the trappers were the 

conscience of the land and that we ought to really listen to what 

they have to say. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have seen no evidence of that whatsoever. 

I’ve seen land being given away and I’ve seen American and 

different people from all the place come along and buy land that 

these trappers never had the opportunity to own. But hey, it’s 

for sale. That’s the attitude of the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the traplines in northern Saskatchewan go a long ways. 

The Dene, the Métis, the non-Aboriginal people, a lot of people 

trap in northern Saskatchewan. And when you see people out 

there that come forward and they say, well we had an outfitter 

from the States come up and he ran his quads all over my 

trapline and destroyed it, and the chance of me getting animals 

back are pretty . . . You know, it’s not going to be very good for 

me in the future. You scare animals away. And so he brings his 

concerns forward to SERM, and guess what? The American 

trumps . . . the North American or the American trumps 

northern Saskatchewan trapper because they’ve got deeper 

pockets I guess, and they’re friends of the Sask Party. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you go back to the notion of respecting the 

trappers. Quite frankly trappers are saying time and time again 

that our traplines we value as our area and our land. We’ll 

protect that land. We will nurture that land and, as we’ve said 

before, we believe that they’re the conscience of that land. And 

you guys disregard the trappers. You don’t have any comment, 

nor do you have any support for them. And the trappers are not 

only in northern Saskatchewan. I want to make sure people 

know they’re in southern Saskatchewan as well. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you look at the notion of how the trappers 

themselves have hung on to their fur blocks. They’ve held on to 

their traplines. They’ve hung on to their industry. They’re really 

solid in terms of trying to teach the young people. They think 

it’s going to be an industry that’s going to survive many, many 

years. And you do this to the trappers and you start hurting 

them, they are not going to believe that this Bill is, just because 

you say you have a Bill here, is going to respect them. Your 

actions are speaking louder than words when it comes to this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So everywhere I go, on every front, whether it’s Dillon 

fishermen getting their cheques confiscated or whether there’s 

the traplines being destroyed by American outfitters or whether 

it’s lands being taken away from the Crown or being taken 

away from habitat protection for hunters, they’re not doing any 

of the work that they profess to do in this Bill. Not one bit. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, why should the people of Saskatchewan 

believe this government anymore? Why should they believe this 

government anymore when all their actions and all their activity 

is just massive confusion and massive hypocrisy and quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, doing exactly opposite of what they say 

they’re going to do in Bills like this, Mr. Speaker. So 

everywhere I go, everywhere I go I tell people they don’t have 

any intention, they have no intention of respecting the fishing 

industry, no intention of respecting the hunting industry, and no 

intention to protect the trapping industry. 

 

So one of the reasons why I’m going to stand up and I’m going 

to vote against this Bill when it comes to the vote is because 



4076 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

I’m going to vote for the trappers, for the fishermen, and for the 

hunters of this fine province by saying, maybe you guys should 

start backing up what you promise. And maybe you guys should 

start doing what you say you’re going to do in Bills like this, 

instead of doing exactly opposite, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t 

believe in any way, shape, or form we’re going to see that day 

that the Saskatchewan Party’s serious about protecting fishing, 

fishermen, protecting hunters, and protecting trappers, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think if they think it’s important, if they 

think it’s important, why don’t we have two or three things 

happen as a solution? Why don’t we have legislation that 

expands wildlife plans around our province? And if lands are 

not designated as protected wildlife lands for animals — 

hunting and trapping, something that our people should look 

forward to — then they should at least say we can’t do it. They 

should at least say we can’t do it. 

 

I remember the member from Lloydminster talking about 

horses, the great fanfare he put forward protecting these wild 

horses. And then a couple of weeks later, they removed more 

wildlife habitat lands. Why? Because they want to give it away. 

So why do you do one thing on one hand and do the exact 

opposite on the other hand? Like, it just doesn’t make any 

sense. You guys got to get with the program here. There is a 

thing called consistency, leadership, and vision. And, Mr. 

Speaker, on all those fronts, you don’t see anything in that 

regard. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, on An Act respecting Hunting, 

Fishing and Trapping, one of the things that people are telling 

us is you have to do the climate change stuff. It has a lot of 

effect on the ecosystems that have fish and certainly trapping 

habitat and hunting habitat. Now in this global warming 

challenge we face, should we not also consider the fact that 

dealing with climate change is pretty darn important in an effort 

to respect hunting, fishing and trapping? And we’ve seen these 

guys go backwards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one of the things that I mentioned with the Minister of the 

Environment, which this Bill is under, she talked about a clean 

air management system. A clean air management system which, 

in theory, would help hunting, fishing and trapping, Mr. 

Speaker, which follows through the intent of this Bill. And I tell 

people if you want to do an air quality management system, I 

pray every day they don’t follow their financial management 

system because we’ll be in a lot of trouble, Mr. Speaker. We’ll 

be in a lot of trouble. 

 

So I think what’s important to the people of Saskatchewan and 

people of the North and people of the South, West, and East — 

the hunters, the fishermen, the trappers — is everywhere you 

look, one promise after another promise after another promise 

has been broken. And actions that are totally, totally opposite of 

what the commercial fishermen want, what the hunters want, 

what the trappers want. Actions that they want to see 

undertaken, these guys are not doing. 

 

There is massive confusion over there, massive confusion. and I 

tell the people that this Bill isn’t worth the paper it’s written on, 

Mr. Speaker. It isn’t worth the paper it’s written on. This party, 

this MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] is going to be 

voting against this Bill because all it does is sets one day aside 

to say, okay, we’ll take a break from disrespecting hunters, 

from disrespecting trappers, and disrespecting fishermen. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that we have a lot more to 

say about this. We’re going to be talking to a lot of people 

involved with hunting, fishing, and trapping. And we’re going 

to continue debating this Bill as long and as hard as we can. So 

therefore I’d like to adjourn the debate on this Bill. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 117. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure to adjourn the motion? 

Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 101 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 101 — The 

Credit Union Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make 

other points on this Bill 101, The Credit Union Amendment Act, 

2009, the talking points. And Mr. Speaker, I didn’t see the Bill 

in its . . . [inaudible] . . . so what I want to do is I want to read in 

some of the points I wish to raise, not only to familiarize the 

people that are listening but also to familiarize myself with the 

Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan credit unions are an important part 

of the province’s history. When farmers and working families 

found that they couldn’t rely on the big banks, they built credit 

unions to serve the needs of their communities. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the credit unions are a powerful part of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and they always will be. 

 

And some of my recent involvement with the credit unions go 

back to the North West Credit Union out of Buffalo Narrows. 

We found out that many of the banks wouldn’t come and deal 

in northern Saskatchewan, so what happened was a number of 

communities got together and they approached the Credit Union 

Central, I believe, here in the city, to see if they’d be interested 

in setting up a northwest credit union. And I believe I was the 

mayor of Ile-a-la-Crosse at the time; I’m pretty certain of the 

date. But anyway, I remember giving support to the community 

of Buffalo Narrows for the creation of the North West Credit 

Union. And part of that process was to support each other and 

to actually put money into the credit union, to buy into it, which 

the community of Ile-a-la-Crosse did. 

 

And I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, that the credit union is still 

operating in Buffalo Narrows. And while they’re under The 

Battlefords credit union, certainly the credit union there 

continues remaining very strong and very vibrant 20-some 

years after somebody began the process to get a bank going. 

 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4077 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they are very, very necessary because we 

did have an experience in some of our northern communities. 

As an example, I think it was Beauval and Ile-a-la-Crosse and a 

number of other communities that were successful in getting a 

BMO [Bank of Montreal] branch. And the Bank of Montreal 

basically came up and set up shop in some of these northern 

communities. And they were there for just, I believe it was only 

for a couple of years. 

 

[20:00] 

 

And of course as the economy downturned and a bunch of other 

issues certainly hit some of the BMO branches, the decision to 

pull out the BMO branches from not only Ile-a-la-Crosse and 

Beauval but from some other northern locations was made in 

last fall. BMO pulled out their branch service in these 

communities. It was a huge blow for our communities. And 

through it all, the credit union in Buffalo Narrows, it continued 

to operate. It continued to operate and it stayed the course of the 

northwest people. And that’s something that we ought to be 

very, very proud of. 

 

And I would point out again, as I pointed out, that the credit 

unions are not only the leading edge in coming to northern 

Saskatchewan, working with many communities, but to stay the 

course in terms of keeping their branches open and the service 

available. And one of the things that people ought to know is 

that we in northern Saskatchewan certainly appreciate heavily 

and heartily the notion of having the credit union continue 

operating in Buffalo Narrows. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the credit union movement allows people to keep 

their money right here in the province, investing back into our 

local community at a time when global financial crisis have 

made many people more vulnerable about their personal 

finances. And the credit union certainly has been doing a 

remarkable job in Buffalo Narrows, not only serving the 

community of Buffalo Narrows, but as I mentioned, a number 

of neighbouring communities — La Loche, Turnor Lake, 

Ile-a-la-Crosse. And they really got their partnership together 

and they’ve got their act together. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the points that we want to make 

is that the credit union movement throughout Saskatchewan has 

a rich history. It is something that we appreciate. It was 

established that a lot of big banks wouldn’t deal with 

Saskatchewan communities. And we in northern Saskatchewan 

have certainly seen evidence of how effective they are, of how 

important they are, and of how valuable they are to not only 

Saskatchewan but to our communities as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that any amendments to The 

Credit Union Act strengthen that system and provide 

Saskatchewan consumers with the best possible service. And 

that’s one of the things I think people ought to know, is that 

from our perspective we want to take a reasoned approach. We 

want to take a responsible approach when it comes to 

supporting solid initiatives, good initiatives such as the credit 

union movement in our province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when the Sask Party comes forward with some 

of these Bills and some of these issues, we pay very close 

scrutiny to see and to make sure that not just one member but 

all the members of opposition are aware of what some of these 

Bills are trying to do or what some of the potential pitfalls of 

these Bills could be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the sake of people that are listening, there are 

provisions in this Bill around services and coercive tied selling 

which appear to be similar to the Bill’s existing provision. 

However upon closer inspection, the insertion of a phrase “a 

group of products or services” may give credit unions greater 

scope to offer other financial services such as insurance. This 

has been traditionally been prohibited in Saskatchewan. We 

need to consider the potential ramifications of these provisions 

for consumers and for other financial service providers in this 

province before rushing to judgment on this Bill. 

 

So any time there’s wording, there is a significant difference 

between may, shall, or will. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s always 

important that people know that scrutinizing the Bill, not just 

one member or the critic responsible on this side, but all the 

members of the opposition certainly have the opportunity to 

look at the Bill and see where this thing is going and some of 

the possible ramifications for any credit union, whether it’s in 

Buffalo Narrows, Regina, Saskatoon, or Yorkton. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I look at this Bill, and I point out that there’s 

also processes for handling the disputes between credit unions 

and their members, as an example, on the termination of a 

membership. As we all know, we joined the credit union under 

a membership, guys, and it’s appropriate that credit unions be 

involved in this process. And at the same time, it’s also 

important for people to have access to an independent process 

in the form of a registrar. Hopefully these new provisions 

maintain this balance.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out before, the credit union is a 

movement. It’s rich in its history. And we want to make sure 

that any kind of wording, any kind of amendments, any kind of 

changes, any kind of movement in that regard, that we watch it 

very carefully. Because what’s the use of supporting this 

particular industry if we’re not — this particular movement — 

if we’re not prepared to put the time and effort to watch where 

it’s going. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I pointed out the history of the Buffalo 

Narrows credit union, the Northwest Credit Union. It began 

operations a number of years ago, and we certainly worked 

closely with them. We opened an account there, and we didn’t 

put all that much money there, but we certainly used their 

services and always found their staff to be very professional. 

I’ve always found their board to be very co-operative, and I’ve 

always found the credit union itself a very impressive service in 

Buffalo Narrows. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that, as I mentioned, this is 

back probably in 1989-1990, that we’ve seen some of the effort 

actually come to bear in terms of an actual building being 

looked at when the credit union itself was finally established in 

Buffalo Narrows. 

 

The most amazing thing about the credit union movement in 

our region is how it brought the communities together. La 

Loche is the biggest community in my constituency. Buffalo 

Narrows is one of the most business-active communities in my 



4078 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

area. And Ile-a-la- Crosse also has a fair population, as does 

Beauval. And all these four communities were vying for the 

credit union. And Buffalo Narrows put together a very 

impressive package. They put a lot of work into it. I can 

remember the time. I believe the mayor was Dennis Shatilla, 

and I think he really pushed, along with other leaders in that 

community, to have this credit union established. 

 

And while there was competition between the communities, at 

the end of the day the leaders of the region thought it is better to 

have a bank somewhere in our area than having no bank at all. 

And we applauded the efforts of the credit union movement to 

bring that particular service, and a credit union itself, to Buffalo 

Narrows by co-operating and backing up the Buffalo Narrows 

proposal. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of history of the credit union 

movement in the province. And I tell people wherever I go that 

if there’s any way, shape, or form that we can build a credit 

union and make it stronger, we ought to do it. But more so 

when the Sask Party bring forward amendments, we better 

scrutinize them, each and every one, to make sure that the intent 

is to protect this movement, build this movement and not do 

something that they have been known to do and that’s to mess 

up a lot of things . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well let’s say 

for example the budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And while it has no direct bearing to the Bill, the connection is 

you want to make sure that if Bills are being brought forward 

by a government that has no credibility, you’d better make sure 

that you look through the Bill very carefully because we have to 

make sure these guys don’t make any more mistakes. And that’s 

the best we can do, is try and stop them. But they are pretty 

persistent; they are pretty persistent in making mistakes. 

 

And it’s just a fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, when you look at 

the whole notion, the whole notion of keeping these guys 

accountable. Every single Bill and every single word and every 

single amendment, no matter whether it’s a single word or a 

single phrase, right away we watch very carefully to make sure 

they are not trying to pull the wool over our eyes and certainly 

pull the wool over the people of Saskatchewan eyes in terms of 

messing with the credit union movement. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to, I want to point out in my final few 

minutes here, I want to talk about the effort of the credit union 

movement and to also talk about the fact that there will be other 

speakers on this particular Bill, so we are not going to be 

moving the Bill any further along the process now. And 

therefore in terms of the Bill itself, I have a few more minutes. I 

want to make a few more comments, and then we can certainly 

make a motion after we are done the comments. 

 

I would say that the credit movement, the credit union 

movement itself, when we first thought of the process, we came 

down to Regina, and we seen this big fancy building on the 

main street here. And we thought that Credit Union Central, we 

thought they would never ever give the opportunity to the 

people of the Northwest. And today we see that the credit union 

is still there, still operating, and is very strong. So that big 

building was there for us, and I was really, really impressive 

when they came along and said, yes, we would do it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we want to protect the credit union movement. 

And Bills of this sort coming from that particular government 

that doesn’t have a lot of credibility on many, many issues, we 

want to make sure that we look through it and really research it 

as best we can so we understand exactly what they are trying to 

do and to spread that message. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to now make a motion to adjourn the 

debate on Bill 101. And thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill 101. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 122 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 122 — The 

Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009 be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise to make 

a few comments on Bill No. 122, The Environmental 

Assessment Amendment Act, 2009. Mr. Speaker, this is a very 

important piece of legislation as the existing Act needed some 

amendments to it to bring it in line with present-day realities in 

the environment. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, before I truly get into making my comments, 

what is most disturbing on this is, Mr. Speaker, is the . . . is this 

Act, part of the amendments are based on the Ministry of 

Environment asking for a report, for a report from the Clifton 

Associates group to which they then made a number of 

recommendations which were either accepted or not accepted 

by this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the important part about that that is striking is that 

the Clifton report made some key recommendations. And in 

that report, one of the recommendations that they made was to 

facilitate — and this was the duty of consultation with the 

Indian, Métis, and the First Nations — to facilitate, as they put 

it here the “. . . First Nations and Métis to participate in 

consultation and engage in resource and land management 

issues.” Mr. Speaker, this is very important. 

 

Now in other places in the Clifton report the government simply 

flat out said, agree. But on this very important issue, the 

ministry response was that they agree in principle and that they 

go on to say, in the response to the report, that they will 

continue to facilitate capacity, co-ordinate, and participate in 

related consultation activities with First Nations and Métis. 

 

Now again, this is fairly significant, Mr. Speaker, because when 

you look at what’s being attempted here and this government’s 

record on consultation, this should be worrisome to all of us in 

Saskatchewan. Because what we’re trying to build here, we’re 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4079 

trying to build a model under which we will do set 

environmental standards for various projects in this province. 

 

And one of the . . . And the way the government has seen fit to 

deal with this issue among many others, and this one is 

probably key, is the government says that “Saskatchewan’s 

policy direction is that the Crown will lead the duty to consult 

with First Nations and Métis before any decision is made that 

will impact Treaty or Aboriginal rights.” 

 

Now again they could’ve simply accepted this recommendation 

but they did not. And that should be worrisome to us because I 

think leading from that is the involvement of the rest of the 

people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, on this very important 

issue. Consultation has not exactly been the high point of this 

government. We can look at any legislation that we have met, 

where people one day are called into meetings and told that they 

should expect new legislation in their areas, without any prior 

consultation or anything. 

 

Now in turning to the amendments in the Act and the speech by 

the minister, there were a number of areas that were covered 

that seem okay, Mr. Speaker, and one the minister started out 

that, as I did, that the Act has not been changed for 30 years and 

a lot has changed in that time. So we can all agree with that. 

 

[20:15] 

 

And again, the purpose of the Act was for the development of 

Saskatchewan, as Saskatchewan proceeds with environmental 

safeguards, and a process, a process that we could all agree on 

so that people building projects in this province would have an 

understanding of what their environmental responsibilities 

might be. 

 

Now a key issue here in this was the amendments include the 

ability to establish class assessment processes where projects 

have common characteristics, and this becomes something, 

when we build a model here, Mr. Speaker, as to what, what the 

thinking should be and what that model should be. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it reminds me, it reminds me of the 

occupational health and safety that we have. Here we have 

environmental standards that we need and sort of for the safety 

of the people of Saskatchewan. And this reminds me of 

occupational health and safety in our province, Mr. Speaker, 

where we require to look at and how will all these, how will we 

deal with the environment? How will we deal with projects in 

our province? And it’s very interesting that when we come 

upon this that we see, at a time when we need consultation, 

when we need to involve the community — perhaps the 

community should be part of the model of environmental 

consultation — that that is non-existent, Mr. Speaker, 

non-existent. 

 

And what is at the base of this, Mr. Speaker? What is at the 

base of this that people are looking for? What are they looking 

for? They’re looking for the ability to have some faith in the 

system, looking for the ability that their concerns will be 

addressed and that we will have a safe environment for not only 

ourselves but our children and our children’s children into the 

future. 

 

It is at that point that we lose a bit, a lack of faith because, Mr. 

Speaker, we have not yet heard from this government anything 

that would make us feel confident that they would deal with this 

in any other manner than they have on other pieces of 

legislation. And we don’t have to go over all the pieces of 

legislation that have been foisted on us so far, on the people of 

Saskatchewan, without fully realizing the impacts and what we 

are doing. We see a lot of times legislation that’s not thought 

out, that we’ve had instances of legislation being withdrawn 

and being redone and to the point of, we were at this point from 

our side, calling it redos, Mr. Speaker. A lot of redos were 

being done in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And it comes to the credibility, the credibility of the 

government to deal in this. They have changed, changed targets. 

We’ve seen them change targets on these issues, Mr. Speaker, 

going with the federal government even. And I’ll have more to 

say about that in terms of following and trying to make this sort 

of . . . coordinate this with the federal government. And in fact 

maybe it should, but I don’t think that the federal government 

should be held up as any sort of stellar model which these folks 

across should aspire to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we need and what is important is that we involve the 

people of Saskatchewan, and that we involve the people of 

Saskatchewan and we have a homemade environmental policy 

in Saskatchewan, a policy that would address our concerns, 

whether it be First Nations and Métis people and the land issues 

that they have, but not only that. Building a huge project close 

to the settlements is also important and they should be 

consulted. And we see a total failing on that issue when it 

comes to consultation, and not only with the First Nations and 

Métis but with all the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So there’s nothing in here, in this Act that would make us feel 

comfortable in terms of that there has been proper consultations 

with people. Although the minister talks about that there have 

been numerous consultations, we have not been able to see 

those consultations. We have not been able to look and 

determine or have any access to who exactly was consulted. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, as we did on a number of other Bills, the 

people who are consulted are in fact perhaps not even 

associated or not impacted directly on this. However when it 

comes to the environment, Mr. Speaker, we all, Mr. Speaker, 

we all are impacted by the environment and that should be of 

grave concern to us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so one of my concerns here is the credibility on 

environmental matters. We had heard the minister opposite on a 

number of occasions change like the changing weather we have 

in Saskatchewan, never knowing what we’re going to wake up 

to, Mr. Speaker. We know generally there will be a spring. 

Generally there’ll be a summer. But, Mr. Speaker, in that 

springtime and late fall we don’t know what the weather is like. 

We could get a snowstorm. And I want to say, put this on the 

record, that this government has changed more than that. So is it 

any wonder that no one here feels that they have the credibility 

on these environmental matters. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, whether it be on this government talking 

about the promise to stabilize greenhouse gas emissions by 

2010 . . . well they didn’t. They in fact said they would do this 

and they haven’t. And it’s just another broken promise and we 



4080 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

can . . . Again I can go into it in terms of the lack of 

consultations and the broken promises and the redos. It’s been 

quite a circus at times, Mr. Speaker, from where we sit over 

here. 

 

The greenhouse gas emissions and reduction and targets, again 

those are just some just within this area that we have to listen to 

here, whether it be in question period or the minister standing 

up in statements that she has made to this House and changing 

them a week later or saying that we have now established some 

new targets and saying that that was just fine. 

 

But what is lacking is the debate. What is lacking is the 

consultation. And what is particularly lacking here, Mr. 

Speaker, is not only the lack in consultations, but what is 

disturbing about all of this is that the engagement of the 

Saskatchewan public is not there. It simply is not there. 

 

And so what do we have? Is this another smokescreen for what 

we see daily for actions? We have just today, Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Health talking about how you negotiate an 

agreement and then, well we would implement it if we had the 

money. Now he didn’t quite say that but it came very close to 

saying that. So you can negotiate a deal and then just simply say 

it’s not a deal any more. 

 

I wonder how the many people who are in negotiations with this 

government feel when they hear comments like that — that we 

can just change after we come along, after both parties have 

spent perhaps hundreds of thousands of dollars in any 

negotiations. And then it’s changed, Mr. Speaker, changed at 

the last minute to mean nothing. 

 

And this is what we’ve seen on the environment file — daily 

and weekly and monthly changes, new targets. I guess the 

analogy in terms of hockey might be just ragging the puck, Mr. 

Speaker. Just absolutely doing nothing, going nowhere on this 

file, and hoping that nobody will notice. Yet they’re playing 

with the very lives, they’re playing with the . . . of the 

environment. Because it is, Mr. Speaker, on many times, on 

many times, whether that government who is so fond of doing 

all the polls and governing by them know that the 

environment’s important. So every time, I would suggest, that 

they get a new poll, they run out and we have a new policy. A 

new policy on the environment which impacts all of us, Mr. 

Speaker, impacts all of us. 

 

And now why should anybody believe them if they come out 

and they say, now we’re going to do something that’s so 

important for this province, and we consulted. We don’t know 

who they consulted. There’s been no papers on this as to who 

they talked to. And they say, trust us. Trust us again, Mr. 

Speaker. Trust us again on this one, and it’s so, so important. 

 

Is this going to be another redo, Mr. Speaker? Are we going to 

get new targets next week? Is that what we’re going to get — 

new targets? And maybe we’ll get a phone call to the Prime 

Minister, and we’ll say, well no he’s changed his targets too, so 

we better change them back here. We want to keep in line with 

that. I don’t know if that’s exactly the folks that I would be 

looking to, to be following. But I guess when you’re in bed with 

those fellows, I guess you go the way they do. So, so goes 

Saskatchewan. 

And it’s a sad tale. It’s a very sad tale that what we have today 

is, on an issue like this, a government with such low credibility 

on issues as we have today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister in her speech as well said, that “The 

Ministry of Environment is working to ensure its regulatory 

framework conserves and protects the environment while 

working at the pace of our growing economy.” Now I’m not 

sure exactly what that means: “The Ministry of Environment is 

working to ensure its regulatory framework conserves and 

protects the environment while working at the pace of our 

growing economy.” 

 

Now if we allow these people to stay around much longer, the 

pace of our growing economy is going to be zero, Mr. Speaker. 

And so does that mean environment stops because we’re going 

to be zero? 

 

So I’m a little stumped on saying that “. . . the environment 

while working at the pace of our growing economy” because 

the environment is something that we need done in all 

instances, Mr. Speaker. We need that done because there are 

larger projects in the works, and they need the regulations that 

we should do them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the ministry . . . This whole business, Mr. 

Speaker, perhaps I’m missing something, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps 

I’m missing something in terms of the “. . . framework 

conserves and protects the environment . . .” I’m not certain. 

But to me, that statement has certainly . . . I’ll be thinking about 

that a long time. 

 

Now again, these amendments, the minister went on to say, 

“The proposed amendments are based on the initial review of 

the ministry’s mandate and three rounds of stakeholder 

consultations.” Now we would like to know what those 

consultations were. There were three rounds of consultations. 

Who were the consultations with? What did the people say?  

 

Is it going to be similar to the consultations they did around the 

uranium file, where we had the Premier running around and 

talking about building nuclear reactors and then going out and 

doing consultations? And was it because of the consultations? 

Was it because of the cost? We could have saved them a huge 

headache and a lot of work, Mr. Speaker, if you simply would 

have not started out on something like that.  

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister further then went on to say that they 

will require regulation — and I will come back to this — to 

establish the kinds of developments that may be subject to class 

assessment, and “Our intention would be to seek advice from 

industry and . . . stakeholders about what sectors of the 

economy might benefit from a class assessment approach.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is worrisome to me. And it is worrisome 

because of the . . . Here we come to a crucial issue of where we 

need to, Mr. Speaker, be very careful that we include the right 

kinds . . . Here’s the balance that we need in terms of the 

balance that we need to achieve, Mr. Speaker, between 

communities and government. Communities and government 

must be involved. And the communities, the people of 

Saskatchewan, must be involved, and that should be part of this 

model. 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4081 

If we look at establishing a model, perhaps we should look at 

the occupational health and safety system in this province and 

how that model was established to give workers the safety that 

they require, to give workers the safety that they require. What 

the model there and what the thinking was there, and there is a 

progressive, Mr. Speaker, model which . . . But it requires, it 

requires the government to play a role in that model, to play a 

role in being there and policing it so that the regulations are 

adhered to. 

 

But within that model, Mr. Speaker, and this is what we should 

. . . We should all look at models because models can be taken 

from one system to another. The important thing about the 

occupational health and safety model is that it is based on a 

system of equal parties sitting down, equally represented by 

both — for example in occupational health and safety — 

employer and employees and that what is recorded there is then 

sent back to the occupational health and safety office where 

people there, the officers there, can look at that and take action 

from that. 

 

Now in the model here perhaps what we should be looking at, 

the model that we should be looking at is having the community 

or, in the case of First Nations and Métis, a model where you 

have the First Nations and Métis folks also look at and be 

involved in developing the regulations that are necessary. 

 

The approach where we take as general an approach, where we 

have the model being one of class assessment and so general, 

Mr. Speaker, there are many, many pitfalls in that, to simply 

say. It becomes what you might want to look at this and say, 

well what’s occurred here is that we . . . A lot of regulations and 

a lot of enforcement of the environment could fall by the 

wayside. 

 

Mr. Speaker, based on that — and these are points that we 

should be paying attention to — we need to look at this, and we 

need to study it carefully and look at what was happening 

because if we rush in on an important issue like this, rush in too 

quickly and say, well this will take a load off the government in 

terms of regulation . . . We have to be careful about that, Mr. 

Speaker. We have to be careful when we say that, well, we will 

maybe go and just set up some regulations and have people 

self-regulate. 

 

[20:30] 

 

It’s not saying that we shouldn’t have regulations and we 

shouldn’t have laws, environmental laws, and we shouldn’t 

have a model where companies would understand what the 

basic rules are. But, Mr. Speaker, when we allow and perhaps 

go too far afield and say, well, that we would not look at each 

project separately, that perhaps there should be plans submitted 

separately, we are in fact, Mr. Speaker . . . What this 

government a lot of times likes to do . . . because I don’t think 

they believe in government. They believe that if government 

went away and probably if unions would go away then the 

world would be better. But that’s not the way it works. But they 

haven’t learned that yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They haven’t 

learned that or anything, anything else. And so this could very 

well be another redo that they have to look at this. And they do 

that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it goes right back to the credibility issue of 

this government when they take on issues of this type. Do they 

ever think this through? And when they talk about 

consultations, I think more and more people in Saskatchewan 

are saying, oh boy, here they go again because their idea of 

consultation is getting somebody on the phone, calling them 

into an office for a half-an-hour meeting, and saying they 

consulted. And that’s sad, Mr. Speaker. That is really sad when 

you do that and especially when you do that on an issue like the 

environment. So we have where the minister says that she has 

consulted. Again we have not seen anything on that. 

 

And moving into the cost assessment area is an area that we 

should tread carefully, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it is on 

areas like this that we need to sit down and do some real 

thinking about this as to what we are doing here. It is very easy 

to say that we will set regulations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that 

through self-regulation or maybe — and I’m not certain what 

the thinking is here — maybe through occasional checks or 

something, that all will be well. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, a lot of projects are different, and there is 

a role for government in here. And I’m not seeing this, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m not seeing that, Mr. Speaker. In fact there is every 

reason to think that there’d be a privatization of environmental 

assessment, a privatization of environmental assessment. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve seen across . . . and I want to 

come back to the occupational health and safety model, when 

you might privatize something like that and have outside people 

doing the checks on this. You have to have a balance, and that 

balance is struck in a delicate manner where you involve all the 

people in our society. And a number of times our leader has 

spoken about the three pillars that we think, that we believe in 

on this side, that you need strong government, that you need 

strong business in the Crown sector, public and private, and that 

you need strong unions and the working people have to 

participate. 

 

And again here, as in this model that we see that that 

government over there, the Sask Party is not . . . their beliefs are 

coming through in where they think this should go. But this is 

the environment. It’s occupational health and safety. This is 

very important for the people of this province, and there is truly 

a lack of thinking here. 

 

And the directions that we’re going . . . and, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I return again to the lack of consultation where it 

would’ve been the easiest thing to say to the Clifton 

recommendations — the people that they got to do the 

environmental, to do some environmental work for them — to 

say yes, yes we’ll consult. We will consult with the First 

Nations and Métis people of this province and that’s just on. 

But that’s not what was said. We will work with, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. In other parts they would say, yes we agree but not in 

this instance. 

 

And will they work with the people of this province on an 

important issue like the environment? Will they work on that? 

Or whether they want to just push this off and to say, no we 

would like to privatize this and we’ll have somebody else do 

this, this is abdicating responsibility of the government, 

abdicating in some instances a model that perhaps would have 



4082 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

input from the community because we would make sure that 

that was there. 

 

And I think there’s a very significant difference in how this side 

would approach these issues and how the government of the 

day is approaching them. And the way that they are 

approaching them, Mr. Speaker, does not create any confidence 

in the people, for the people of Saskatchewan, that our 

environmental concerns will be looked after, and much as we 

have seen difficulties arising in our occupational safety system 

because of the lack of action by this government. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, it’s any wonder that 

perhaps this is happening. I just want to read a quote here, in 

terms of . . . and you know, sometimes it goes a long way when 

we can kind of look into the thinking of members from the 

other side. This was said by, this quote is from a Sask Party 

member and it says: 

 

. . . red tape and regulations that have been foisted onto 

the business community by this NDP government, be it 

through Workers’ Comp or occupational health and safety 

or various pieces of labour legislation, too often has 

driven businesses and jobs they create and the taxes they 

pay out of the province. 

 

This is a direct quote, the “red tape and regulation.” Now I’ve 

often said on this issue that I wonder if we went and we took 

this and said this to a family who just had experienced a death 

on the work site, I wonder how many of them would say that 

there’s been too much red tape and regulations. But you know 

who said this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You know who said this. 

This is the member from Swift Current. This is the member 

from Swift Current who said this and now sits as Premier of this 

province. 

 

That’s the thinking and that’s the difference. And I will, I will 

say that since members are wanting . . . they’re saying red tape 

and regulations have been foisted onto the business community 

by this government at that time, the NDP, be it through 

Workers’ Comp, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I couldn’t 

believe when I read this: “. . . or occupational health and safety 

or various pieces of labour legislation, too often has driven 

businesses and jobs they create and the taxes they pay out of the 

province.” 

 

Now, you know, this is outrageous, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 

outrageous that you could say this. I would like the Premier of 

this province, every time there’s a death in this province, to read 

this to those families in this province. That’s what I would like 

him to do. I’d like him to go around every family, and I’d like 

him to read this because I’ll tell you what . . . I just might do it. 

I just might do it. This is outrageous. This is outrageous, but 

that’s at the base of what these people are about, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

And now with all the rest of that, with the trust, they want us to 

work on this environment. What have they done? They’ve 

changed their targets. They’ve changed like the wind in 

Saskatchewan. They change like the wind in Saskatchewan. But 

I’ll tell you why they are like that, because that’s what they are 

about with occupational health and safety. And that’s important 

to the people of this province, and the environment’s important 

to the people. 

 

And that’s why the government is needed in this role, but they 

haven’t learned that. They haven’t learned that. No. They will 

always try and take a little bit away from the Crowns. They will 

always try and take a little bit away from the people because 

they think if there’s no government, all will be better. Let’s just 

leave it for free enterprise. And we see in the United States 

what happened when we allowed that. Then we’re bailing out, 

bailing out the banks, bailing out the banks because they 

abdicated their responsibility. 

 

And it’s so easy to abdicate your responsibility, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but it’s wrong. I’ll stand here, and I’ll say that’s 

wrong. That’s wrong and shame on them for doing this, for 

doing this. But, you know, the people of Saskatchewan are 

seeing through this because, as I travel around and I talk to 

people, they’re seeing through this. And they’re signing a lot of 

petitions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and all over the province, all 

over the province. And I was surprised at the change of how 

they view this party and how many people are saying, we’ve 

had enough and how many people are saying, we voted for 

them but we’ll never vote for them again. We’ll never vote for 

them again. 

 

And they think and they can sit there and they can release press 

releases, and you can deal with things like the environment 

here, but the credibility is gone. And you need the credibility on 

the environment, and you need the credibility on other pieces of 

legislation to do a proper job because you have to involve the 

community. And that’s lacking here. There is no involvement of 

the community. Where’s the model on the environment that 

says that when you consult that you involve the communities? 

 

I don’t see anything here about involving the First Nations and 

the Métis other than, we’ll continue to consult. Well they’ve 

had consult and consult and consult, and they don’t want any 

more consult. They want some action, and they want some 

truth, and they want to be involved. That’s what that means. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the other 

parts that is also of concern is the Clifton report also 

recommended harmonization of environmental assessments 

with Ottawa to the greatest extent possible. Now it would seem 

to be good, a good point to try and harmonize issues across this 

country. We should harmonize them. But there’s always the 

point about who is in Ottawa and what is happening there. 

 

Now the question, the question here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

question about this is that it sounds reasonable enough on the 

surface. It sounds reasonable enough on the surface, but will 

these folks stand up to the federal government, particularly the 

federal government that’s there? What will they do, other than 

perhaps, as we’ve seen, a lot of cheerleading? A lot of 

cheerleading. And what about the thinking through of the hard 

issues here? And how about standing up to the federal 

government and saying no, we disagree in Saskatchewan? That 

isn’t good for Saskatchewan. 

 

We don’t hear a lot any more about how great the 

Conservatives are in Ottawa. We don’t hear a lot about that 

from this party, where there was a lot of cheerleading going on 

before. But that’s an issue. And the issue of harmonization is 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4083 

good but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have to be careful about 

where we’re going on that. 

 

The other issue, if I could, one of the positive things in here, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, are the financial penalties, allowing the 

courts to impose these. And perhaps that said, you know, the 

. . . Again if it was the role of the government to do this, that’s 

not really clear of how this is going to happen, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, how this is going to happen. 

 

Are we going to, are we, in fact with the model that’s being 

presented here, are we going into a system of courts and people 

suing each other? Is that where we’re heading here? And I think 

it is. And if it is that, then there are going to be some losers. 

There will be some losers here. The losers will be the people of 

Saskatchewan because you will need money. You will need 

money so that you can fight environmental cases. And that’s 

because if you are injured, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ll need 

money to fight these cases. And the losers will be the people, 

Mr. Speaker. They will be. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the environment is an important issue for 

this province. It is important for us here. And it is important that 

we take the time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to do the right job, to do 

the good job here that needs to be done . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Yes. You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the 

issue of losers, that the Sask Party has spent the amount of 

money that they did on the issue of . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m having trouble 

hearing the member that has the floor, and it’s his own 

members that are drowning him out. I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I did not hear . . . I 

think of it not interfering with my speaking from this side, but 

that’s fine. 

 

Now on the issue of losers, on the issue of losers, you know I 

talked about some of the difficulties people would be having 

with this. But about the issue of losers, I’ve had people who 

have come to me — and this should be worrisome — and asked 

if we were running ads about the Premier, asked if we were 

paying for ads about that. 

 

And I was wondering about that, the amount of money that they 

spent on that. And the people were saying, well we know he’s a 

loser, but, you know, why are you running ads to say that 

somebody is a loser? And it took me some time to have to 

explain that it wasn’t our ads that were saying that this person 

was a loser. It was the Sask Party ads that were a loser. So it got 

very confusing. 

 

In fact, I wanted to talk to him about the environment, but we 

got talking about losers. Who was the losers . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

[20:45] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’ll ask the member to discuss 

the Bill that is on the order paper at this time. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Yes. I’ve heard it said that the first time that 

that person was ever mistaken for an athlete, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that . . . Luger. 

 

Anyways, now another potential problem with the class 

environmental assessments, again as I mentioned, one of the 

key things could arise from the government’s duty to consult 

and accommodate First Nations. 

 

Now I guess one of the other things is that it’s not only 

consultation because similar projects, when we look at what the 

class environmental assessments could do, are approved on this, 

could fall on to traditional land of several different First 

Nations. And the government has an obligation to ensure that 

the duty to consult and accommodate is not shortchanged in the 

haste to push a project forward — not in haste to do this. And 

right now, and I just would review with you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that there were difficulties in this area, difficulties in 

this area here where the Clifton report, the key 

recommendations — and I would just like to put those on the 

record — where it says recommendation no. 39: 

 

The Ministry should: 

 

Facilitate capacity of First Nations and Métis to 

participate in consultation and engage in resource and 

land management issues; 

 

Point no. 2: 

 

Participate in cross-Ministry efforts to build a revised 

consultation and accommodation policy; 

 

These are the recommendations of the Clifton report: 

 

Formalize coordination, communication and 

documentation of consultation activities within the 

Ministry; 

 

Build capacity within Ministry of Environment branches 

to increase understanding and application of the Duty to 

Consult, and ensure affected branches are resourced 

effectively to manage consultation . . . 

 

We don’t know who was consulted. And here is a 

recommendation — a recommendation that the government 

paid for — to build capacity within the ministry. Now we 

wonder what kind of capacity has been built in that ministry on 

the duty to consult, on the duty to consult First Nations and 

Métis. I wonder what they’ve done here because that’s a 

recommendation. 

 

Now, “In cooperation with other Ministries, create partnerships 

with First Nations,” it goes on. And here’s the reply . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . And they should have probably run 

some ads on the environment and inviting people to consult and 

inviting people to come out and talk about this very important 

issue, but they have different priorities. And I guess that’s a 

government who want to talk about losers. But perhaps we’ll 

have a general ad next time about a group of people being 

losers. 



4084 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

The ministry response to these issues: the Ministry of 

Environment agrees in principle with their recommendations as 

stated. And again I said, in other parts of the report — and I 

could probably, I’m not sure what it would do — but in any 

other parts of the report it’s very clearly where the ministry says 

agree, agree. So they still can’t agree on the issue of the 

principle on a key issue such as to consult. 

 

Now that is worrisome. That is worrisome as a core belief. That 

is worrisome as a core principle. That is worrisome, should be 

to all people in Saskatchewan. And then if you combine that, if 

you combine that with having to take this issue through the 

courts, we see the difficulties, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We see the 

difficulties when you abandon, when you abandon, when 

government abandons its role in society. 

 

Historically, historically there’s always been this issue. And we 

have come a long, a long way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in setting 

up a model of democracy. Every once in a while we get the 

kind of thing about the red tape and regulations. Well you 

know, I mean it’s a setback for us all but we’ll live through that. 

We’ll live through that because people see through that and 

they know that that kind of thinking is not on. They know, you 

know, it’s not on and perhaps they sometimes will forgive that 

kind of thinking but it builds up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and there 

will be the piper to pay one day, Mr. Speaker, with that kind of 

thinking, because it’s just not on for the province here. Because 

historically the things that we have built, the things that we 

cherish in our democratic societies are not based on that; and 

that is old-style thinking and that is not a modern economy and 

that is in the past. 

 

But to get back to the consultation and what we have and what 

the difficult issues that we come up against when we’re not 

prepared to move forward on the duty to consult and 

accommodate when it comes to First Nations and Métis on an 

important issue like the environment. Because, Mr. Speaker, 

everybody knows a large portion of our resources are in 

northern Saskatchewan and throughout this province and we 

also know that there are numerous reserves that we must deal 

with and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t see any of that here. I 

don’t see of that in here. 

 

Again, I would say that in this that it’s time to have a look at 

this. No question we should look at this, at this Bill to bring it, 

bring it forward to the modern age but it’s worrisome, 

worrisome to me in terms of the way it’s being done and then of 

course overall it’s worrisome for what we’ve seen in these last 

two years. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s say one thing, do another. Look at the 

Department of Finance. Look at the disaster and what people 

are saying about that. I mean it’s unbelievable that you can have 

the amount of money and then be in a deficit position. It’s, you 

know, we read in the papers, incompetence. Those are serious 

words and we don’t see anything from the government that 

there’s any change. No. Other than a few more glum faces 

around here, not a lot of change, you know, so all is well. And 

that leads to some other problems because there’s no two-way 

conversation, no two-way conversation. 

 

Just further on the class environmental assessments. Now even 

if there was, if we grant them that there is some merit to this 

idea, there is always the concern that without the proper 

consultation process that this approach might be general, too 

general, and in terms of taking in too many projects at a time. 

And if we don’t have the policing and the regulatory framework 

in there to go out and check whether the environmental 

standards are being met, that does not leave anyone here feel 

secure. Or in fact if we have some projects now that we might 

go to, perhaps we should be talking about, are those the 

standards that we want before we move everybody in together 

and say everybody will follow those standards. 

 

And the concern is here is that every time there’s standards set 

or targets, these folks change them. They change these 

standards and it’s hard to tell where you are on any given day. 

The finances are being redone. They change the environmental 

standards and they change . . . You name it. And they were 

redoing Bills. 

 

It’s disheartening. It’s disheartening to the people of 

Saskatchewan when they see what is going on. But they have 

the memory. And the memory that they have, they will 

remember this when they go to the polls in 2011, and that’s not 

that far away. That’s not that far away. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what more can be said? I think 

perhaps a bit of the review of the most important points that 

I’ve made. But I think we could probably sum it up to a lack of 

credibility on this file. And a government must have credibility, 

must have integrity in order to deal with issues like this. But 

you lose that when you don’t consult, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You 

lose that when you don’t consult. You lose that when you have 

beliefs that are so out of touch, that are so out of place, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I would say, in a modern economy. And then 

you try and deal with issues like this, and you wonder why there 

is no confidence, no confidence in that. So legislation, perhaps 

is well said here, built on quicksand, built on quicksand. 

 

So again, just to review on the credibility issue. Government 

that promised to stabilize greenhouse gas emissions by 2010. 

Where is that, Mr. Speaker? Where is that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? 

 

It’s a government that promised to implement NDP targets of 

greenhouse gas emission reductions and later admitted they will 

be breaking that promise as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So now 

we have, now we have that. 

 

Now this is a government, perhaps we could say, led by a 

Premier who, in terms as I used before, perhaps ragging the 

puck, that’s probably not quite grasping the issue, a Premier 

who in fact you wonder what, if any, concerns he has, 

particularly when we are dealing with situations of occupational 

health and safety — what I would say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, life 

and death issues — that we have the kinds of statements that 

were being made here. You wonder, if that kind of thinking is 

applied to the environment, is it any wonder that we can change 

targets, that we can change things like stabilizing greenhouse 

gas emissions in a week’s time, in a day’s time? 

 

An Hon. Member: — But why is it always lower targets? Why 

is it always weaker . . . 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Well it’s . . . Yes, and we wonder why. And 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4085 

where’s the scientific data? Where’s the research to show that 

we should be going lower and not higher, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

In fact it wasn’t that long ago that I’m sure a lot of members 

over there, whether there in fact is a belief that there is such a 

thing as climate change. And that’s maybe for another speech 

on that issue, whether or not there is in fact a belief over there. 

 

So what do we make of a government that promised to stabilize 

greenhouse gas emissions by 2010 and didn’t? They promised 

to implement the NDP targets for greenhouse gas emission 

reductions and had to admit it later they’d be breaking that. And 

a Premier who we can tell philosophically is not that keen on 

environmental regulations — in fact any regulations — because 

at the base of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they do not believe in 

government. They do not. Get government out of the way 

would be what they would say. Get government out of the way. 

 

And when you get government out of the way and you do that, 

you perhaps should be careful when you do that because there 

are regulations. There is a role for government to play in a 

modern society, and unfortunately sometimes we are witness to 

people believing that that’s not so. And that goes deep because 

that is more of an ideological kind of position to take than in 

fact a position that’s very objective and perhaps dealing with 

the reality of the situation we face. 

 

Again the other things, just to go over the result of a model like 

this, where there is the balance and that’s not very clear in the 

legislation what that balance will be, responsibility of 

environmental protection where the government comes in after, 

after the fact instead of being proactive on these issues, 

proactive like we need proactive things in occupational health 

and safety to be proactive to be out there and doing the work 

that should be done to protect the lives of Saskatchewan people. 

We need the government to be proactive on files like these so 

that they are proactive on this so that we do not get into 

environmental calamities, environmental disasters, that we are 

proactive and we head them off. 

 

And we have to discuss, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have to 

discuss what the standards will be. We have to set those 

standards and we have to carefully assess who it will be that 

will police these standards and who it will be, how do we do 

that, and what role the government plays in that and what role 

we might want to hand over to self-regulating companies — 

what role we would hand over to people outside of the 

industries that would do this. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

don’t see any of that. 

 

We see a lot of changes and we see a lot of broken promises. 

And on top of it all we see a government floundering in the very 

important issue of finances, of being able to manage the 

finances of this province. And now we’re being asked that this 

government would manage the environmental file. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve made my points on what I see as 

the privatization of the assessment. And I’ve made it. But, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I don’t want people to forget that the thing we 

have to be very careful on, one further point on the 

environmental assessment, is that when you apply and you do 

the class assessments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the generality that 

you could fall into, class environmental assessments, it’s very 

important that we have the proper regulations so that when we 

compare projects that we are not comparing to the lowest 

possible standards, that we are in fact in Saskatchewan 

achieving the higher standards. 

 

[21:00] 

 

And it often reminded me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of when we 

had the disaster at the mine. And our miners were safe because 

the time had been taken by government at that time to put in 

safety standards so that they thought ahead, if there were 

disasters, of what we would do, of what we would do and so 

that we would need safety rooms. 

 

For those of us who’ve had the opportunities of going into 

mines across this— be it potash, uranium, or other mines — and 

looking and being there to see clearly that when you sit down 

and you do a file properly, you don’t end up in a disaster and 

then react because it’s too late. And when you do the due 

diligence upfront, it saves. And the due diligence, whether it be 

finances, whether it be occupational health and safety, has to be 

done, or otherwise you get newspaper articles that say 

incompetence. You’ve got newspaper articles that say 

incompetence, but by that point in time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as 

unfortunately the members opposite have learned, it’s too late. 

It’s too late then because now we’ve got a problem. And boy, 

do we have a problem. You know, what a bunch of glum chums 

over there. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, had they done the work and had they 

. . . probably do the best work that they could, they wouldn’t be 

sitting in this problem . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, he 

wouldn’t have done that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it’s perhaps getting more difficult to speak 

here. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess it depends on the tone 

of the statement or the type of statement it is to knock off a 

good speech. 

 

But anyways, so the things, I guess, that finally that, in terms of 

what the minister has had to say, we could probably review that 

one last time. It is in the record. But I would just like to . . . 

some of the things again which perhaps I will need to myself do 

a bit more work. But the one statement that keeps coming back 

to me: “The Ministry of Environment is working to ensure its 

regulatory framework conserves and protects the environment 

while working at the pace of our growing economy.” What does 

that mean? There it is. Because if it was regulations keeping up 

with the . . . Does it mean regulations keeping up with the Act? 

Or does it mean regulatory framework? But I think that means 

something larger, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and at the pace of our 

growing economy. So if the economy that these folks are 

putting the brakes on, does that mean the environment will stop 

because we will not be growing at the pace of our economy? Is 

that what this means? 

 

What does this mean? That they will not go ahead “while 

working at the pace of our growing economy”? It’s perhaps . . . 

But it was read into the record. I’m not sure if the minister 

wrote this herself or if in fact someone had written. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Was it the minister or the minister’s 

officials? 

 



4086 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Yes. Well we’ll be now saying that this is 

somebody else’s fault. Was it probably somebody else’s? Yes. 

Or is it like that? Yes, as the member here has said. Will we be 

now getting the staff to come out and answer these questions 

around what is happening here? What is going on here? 

 

Now the proposed amendments are based on the initial review 

by the ministry’s mandate and three rounds of the stakeholder 

consultations. Again what consultations were held here? With 

who? When were they held? Are they ongoing? Were they a 

telephone call, as this government is so well noted for, a 

telephone call and a 15-minute meeting? Is in fact, perhaps, is 

this a meeting, a conference call, or perhaps an email? Maybe 

this is all about an email, sending a few emails back and forth, 

or a casual reminder, a casual remark in passing over a coffee. 

 

We don’t necessarily know what the consultation that the 

government over there . . . In fact they’ve had Bills come 

forward and without anyone knowing about them and they have 

said that they held consultations, for perhaps it was some event 

that occurred and they interpreted that they needed some 

direction from that. And they went ahead and they called that 

consultations. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is many, many things that you could 

spend a lot of hours here thinking, what is going on, but I think 

we would best see, perhaps, what will come out of here. But 

again, if the minister would gladly not bring up the issue, if we 

knew where these three rounds of stakeholder consultations . . . 

because there will be further consultations on the class 

assessment would be what kind of . . . to talk about their 

intention that they’re going to seek from industry and other 

stakeholders about sectors which might benefit from the class 

action approach. 

 

Will they actually hold meetings to explain what their intention 

is? Who will they be contacting? Will they be contacting the 

people of . . . Are the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, are the people of Saskatchewan a stakeholder in these 

consultations? Are the people of Saskatchewan going to be 

stakeholders in these consultations? That’s what I wonder. But 

it’s not very clear, and that information does not seem to be 

forthcoming. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in conclusion I would again just want 

to say that on issues of environment, I would say that there 

needs to be credibility, credibility for the government, and 

that’s sorely lacking. And the issue’s here that the government 

had promised again to stabilize greenhouse gas emissions by 

2010. A government that set targets, moved those targets, said 

that’s okay . . . we’re changing today. And again a government 

led by a Premier who, I would say, ideologically is not 

necessarily interested in the environment. 

 

And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would look forward to 

more of my colleagues entering the debate on this issue, 

entering the debate on this very important issue for the people 

on the environment. But at this time I would like to adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Fairview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 122, The 

Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 97 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Bjornerud that Bill No. 97 — The 

Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to enter into the debate on the Act to amend The 

Agri-Food Act, 2009. As I understand it, this Act is essentially 

going to change the way the refundable provincial levy is 

collected on cattle sold in Saskatchewan. And I have the honour 

to have been the Agriculture critic for our party after we formed 

opposition in 2007. And it became immediately obvious to a lot 

of cattle producers in the province that the minister was moving 

away from the way the check off was collected and distributed 

and that there was going to be a new organization created to 

represent the livestock producers in the province. 

 

And so in essence, what this Bill is doing is putting into law the 

creation of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association. And this 

Bill is going to give the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association 

— note cattlemen’s association, not cattle producers but 

Cattlemen’s Association — the ability to collect a $2 refundable 

provincial levy. And for the first time they’re also going to be 

able to collect a national, non-refundable levy which wasn’t 

allowed under the old legislation and regulations. So what this 

Bill does is it gives the Cattlemen’s Association the power to 

collect both the refundable provincial and the non-refundable 

national levy on cattle that are sold and marketed in the 

province of Saskatchewan. This Bill will repeal The Cattle 

Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 and subsequent amendments. 

And this will allow the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association 

to collect both levies. 

 

Now it was interesting, the minister probably spent about three 

minutes in his second reading speech talking about this, and I 

think I know why. There is a petition that has gone across 

Saskatchewan among livestock producers, and they don’t like 

this idea one little bit. 

 

They think that the Sask Party only favours a certain group, 

philosophical group, of livestock producers, and hence this new 

piece of legislation, and hence the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association. And they really don’t like the fact that the Stock 

Growers basically will be blown up, as well as another livestock 

organization. And they’ve signed a petition. They tried to talk 

to the minister; that didn’t really work. They went from auction 

sale to auction sale to auction sale getting petitions and 

signatures from livestock producers saying they didn’t like this 

idea. 

 

And why don’t they like this idea? Because they think that the 

money isn’t going to go into research. They think that this 

money is going to go into meeting after meeting after meeting 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4087 

of people that will want to meet on livestock issues and that it’ll 

no longer be basically a volunteer organization that acts 

frugally, but it will be an organization that spends a lot of time 

meeting and meeting and meeting and not a lot of time dealing 

with research and development of the industry. 

 

So the question will be, how much of this money is going to go 

to the day-to-day operations and marketing of the Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen’s Association? That’s one of the things that livestock 

producers in the province, that don’t support this organization 

that the minister is creating . . . they want to know how much is 

it going to cost, out of their levy, how much is it going to cost to 

run the day-to-day operations of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association? 

 

And, you know, the other question is, will other cattle producer 

organizations such as the Stock Growers — because not 

everybody agrees with the creation of this organization — are 

they going to benefit from this levy? And will the Stock 

Growers still receive money from these levies to use for their 

operation and marketing as they did under the old system? And 

I think the answer is no. 

 

So the question is, who within the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association will determine where and when these funds are 

going to be allocated? Because that’s what individual livestock 

producers want to know about. And if a board is being put in 

place to allocate the use of these funds, what’s the makeup of 

the board? 

 

Because here’s what the government is doing. What they’re 

saying is, you cattle producer — every cow, every steer, every 

heifer that you sell in this province — you’re going to pay two 

bucks, and it’s going to go to the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association, and they’re going to get to decide how that money 

is spent. And if you want to, you can ask for a refund on this $2 

levy. 

 

Well a lot of people, like the Stock Growers, they were 

involved in this. They liked the fact that the ministry held the 

money. They liked that fact that the money went for the most 

part into research. And they’re not at all sure that this new 

organization is going to represent the long-term interest of the 

cattle producers in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now if you look at the legislation, there is going to be the 

windup of the Cattle Marketing Deductions Fund, and all of the 

assets and liabilities of the fund are going to be transferred to 

the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association. Well apparently, 

and odd that of all of the accounts and the financial statements 

as well as a report of the activities of the former fund and 

financial statements showing the business of the former fund for 

the period commencing April 1, 2009 and ending on the day 

that that comes into force, this going to be tabled by the 

Minister of Agriculture. 

 

[21:15] 

 

Well the question is this: is that report going to be shared with 

individual producers? And as an individual producer, there’s a 

whole bunch of people that don’t want to have a mandatory 

check-off to go to the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association. 

They’re opposed to this and they’ve let this government know 

this. And in fact they are literally thousands of individual 

producers that are opposed. They’ve let them know, but they 

haven’t paid one iota of attention to what these producers have 

to say. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know you do represent some people in the 

cattle industry. I know there’s a few folks over there that 

represent some people in the cattle industry. And there are 

literally thousands of people that have signed these petitions, 

but these guys haven’t listened to what individual cattle 

producers have had to say. They have only listened to a few 

select friends. They’ve listened to them, but they haven’t 

listened to people on the ground. And this causes people in the 

livestock industry a great deal of difficulty, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what’s interesting is that we see coming into the 

Legislative Assembly many pieces of legislation where they are 

turning over the administration of funds to other organizations, 

outside organizations. And right now the fund is essentially 

administered by the industry, but it is in the Ministry of 

Agriculture. 

 

Earlier today we had a Bill put into the legislature where they’re 

blowing up the fund that’s administered by the tourism ministry 

and culture for Doukhobors in the province of Saskatchewan. 

And now what they’re doing is they’re getting rid of the 

previous legislation and they’re creating the Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen’s Association and they’re going to get to administer 

the fund. And there is a whole bunch of people in the industry 

that absolutely are opposed to what this government is doing 

when it comes to this compulsory fund that’s going to be 

administered by an organization that these livestock producers 

do not support. 

 

Now you would think that they might be given a vote to decide 

whether or not they want the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association to represent them. You would think they might be 

given a choice. You’d think they might be given the ability to 

say no, I don’t want to pay two bucks; I don’t want this money 

to go to the Cattlemen’s Association. Yes, I can apply to get it 

back, but these folks have absolutely no choice. 

 

So, you know, here is a group of men and women that declare 

themselves as a bunch of free enterprisers and let individuals 

determine what they want to do with their money. Well, we 

have livestock producers in the province of Saskatchewan that 

sell an animal, and they are forced by this legislation to pay a 

$2 check-off fee to the Saskatchewan — per animal — to the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association. And they’ve had 

absolutely nothing to do with the creation of this organization. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, thousands of producers have 

signed a petition saying they are opposed to this, and these men 

and women have absolutely nothing to say to these producers. 

They are hell-bent and determined that they are going to ram 

through this legislation and amendments to create an 

organization that benefits a few of their buds, and people don’t 

like it. 

 

Now these free enterprisers over here, they tell us that it should 

be individual choice. They tell us that it should be up to the 

individual producer to make their way, determine how they 

want to farm, determine how they want to ranch. But when it 



4088 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

comes to a cattle check-off, they are determining that the 

check-off is going to be compulsory, and it’s going to be given 

to the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association. No one got to 

vote on this, not at all. This has been jammed down people’s 

throats and there’s absolutely nothing people can do. They can 

sign a petition, they can tell the minister. And they have been 

told apparently that the petition wasn’t put in the proper form. It 

didn’t have the humbly prayith and this sort of thing, and so 

therefore it can’t be presented in the legislature. But they have 

given it to the opposition. 

 

None of their members over there would put it into the 

legislature. They wouldn’t tell the minister, lookit, we’ve got 

thousands of signatures, we want you to think about this. 

Maybe we should back off. Maybe we should go back to the 

drawing board. Maybe we should do further consultation with 

individual farmers and ranchers and livestock producers. Maybe 

we should talk to people on the ground. Maybe we should go 

out to those auction marts, see what those ranchers and 

producers really think about this. 

 

Did they do that? Absolutely not. Not at all because they had a 

few of their buds that wanted the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association to be the representatives of the industry, to do the 

checks, have the money from the check-off, and determine how 

that money was going to be spent. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, these guys are losing support in rural 

Saskatchewan. They’re losing support. They are determined to 

. . . They have decided how, when, and where individual 

livestock producers are going to pay their check-off and to 

which organization — no choice, no choice there. 

 

They’ve decided that, gee, we’re not going to have educational 

assistants out in those rural schools anymore to support learning 

disabled students or physically disabled students or mentally 

challenged students. We’re going to get rid of them. 

 

They’ve decided that, they created a Crown corporation, for 

heaven’s sakes, to attract doctors to rural Saskatchewan. And 

they’re against Crown corporations, but they Created a Crown 

corporation. Now tell me why we need to have a Treasury 

Board Crown to recruit doctors to the province of 

Saskatchewan. This is a group of men and women that bird 

dogged the NDP government on all the Crown corporations in 

Saskatchewan. And what do we have? We’ve got a Crown 

corporation for the railroad hub out here. I think they’ve got 

some member over there that’s the Chair of the board collecting 

money. 

 

Now we’ve got another Crown corporation to get doctors. And 

guess what? A lot of their friends are sitting on the board 

getting big per diems at another Crown corporation. I’m sure 

that those people like getting a Crown per diem to recruit 

doctors to rural Saskatchewan and yet there is plastic bags over 

hospital signs on highway after highway after highway on 

weekends. And why is that? Because this group of men and 

women — and by goodness they’ve had two and a half years to 

get this little job done — they can’t recruit a doctor to rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, you know, I was the Minister of Health. And I can 

honestly say there were doctors in Shaunavon. There were 

doctors in Shaunavon when I was the minister, but are there 

doctors in Shaunavon under the Sask Party? Absolutely not. 

And what happened? What happened to the doctors in 

Shaunavon? They moved over to Swift Current. And that’s 

okay apparently, even though they were given a little 

enhancement grant to go down to Shaunavon. But these guys 

can’t get doctors in Shaunavon. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, getting to the point. This is a group of men 

and women that think they’ve got the rural vote all sewed up. 

They think they’ve got the pitchforks. They’ve got that rural 

vote and now they’re going for the city vote. You know, Grant 

Devine used to . . . There was a great, great cartoon done by 

Brian Gable. It was Grant Devine and Eric Berntson with their 

pitchfork. And it was going for the rural vote. In fact I still have 

that cartoon. It’s hilarious. 

 

But now it’s the Premier with his, I guess, glass of wine, going 

for the urban vote. That’s what he’s trying to do. And while 

he’s going for the urban vote, guess who he’s leaving behind? 

The rural vote. They don’t care about livestock producers, 

thousands of petitions given to those members. And are they 

prepared to put them into this House or tell the minister? 

Absolutely not, absolutely not. They’re going to let the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association and their few friends, 

they’re going to control this fund. Doesn’t matter what 

individual livestock producers have to say. No, it doesn’t 

matter. 

 

You know, hundreds and hundreds and hundreds, I’ll say 

thousands of women work as educational assistants in rural 

Saskatchewan. Thousands of women work as educational 

assistants. A lot of these educational assistants are married to 

farmers and they have a job at the local school. They’ve been 

able to get that education and training through the regional 

colleges in their rural communities. They’ve got the skills and 

the training and they can get a job in their home community to 

support their families and the farm. 

 

And what’s this outfit over here doing? Well they’ve got this 

lovely plan; page 18. The minister doesn’t want to talk about 

page 18. Page 18 shows how it’s their plan to get rid of 75 per 

cent of educational assistants in the province of Saskatchewan 

in six years. Those are rural jobs for the most part, Mr. Speaker, 

but they’re going to get rid of them. 

 

And then let’s talk about another little flight of fancy by this 

government. Let’s talk about what they’re doing to home care 

workers. Home care workers work in rural Saskatchewan and 

they’re married to livestock producers. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I ask the member, the Bill up 

for debate is The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009. I would ask 

that the member stick to the topic that is on the floor. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, it’s 

coming together nicely. Home care workers are married to 

livestock producers. And why, and why are they working in 

home care? Because they can’t make a buck. They can’t make a 

buck in the cattle industry because it’s gone down the tubes 

since these guys came to office; but anyway. So a lot of these 

livestock producers’ spouses have gone and got some training 

through their regional college and they’ve become home care 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4089 

workers. They have the skills and the education and that home 

care job helps support the family farm or the family ranch. 

 

What is this bright group of men and women over there 

proposing for home care workers? Home care workers work an 

eight-hour shift, eight hours a day, kind of normal. Well this 

group of bright lights over here, their plan is to have them work 

that eight hours in a 12-hour period. And guess who these 

people are? They’re women. And guess what they do? They not 

only work at their job at home care but they look after children, 

they look after the household, they help their husbands, their 

business, the farm, whatever. And these bright people over here, 

they want to say to these women, you can go to work from 8 

until 12, go back to the farm, have a little rest, I guess, and then 

come back in four hours and work another four. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, how does that support rural families and how does that 

support rural women? 

 

[21:30] 

 

But do they care about this? Oh, no. Oh, no, no, no, no. They 

want to get a cheap little deal with the unions. You know, let’s 

get the one and a half or whatever it is per cent. But be damned, 

be damned if we have those women who are going to work a 

12-hour shift and get paid for eight hours. And that is simply 

wrong, Mr. Speaker. It is wrong. It goes against good labour 

relations and it goes against what women have struggled for and 

worked for for decades, to get to the point where split shifts are 

gone. But this group of men and women are taking us back to 

the past and it is wrong, wrong, wrong. And they’re not going 

to let people have a choice. It’s wrong. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, now let’s talk about rural day care. Let’s 

talk about rural day care because a lot of those livestock 

producers, a lot of those livestock producers have little kids. 

And apparently all of these spaces are going to go into creating 

rural day care to support rural farm families and rural people — 

farm families that are involved in the livestock industry. And 

have any of those spaces been created? No. No they haven’t, 

not at all. 

 

And yet we have families that are trying to work to support that 

farm because the cattle industry is in the hole. The hog industry 

is in the hole. And guess what? In 2010, the farm is going to be 

in serious problem because of what’s happened with 

commodity prices. And where are the supports for these rural 

families? Absolutely nowhere. So we’ll be very interested in the 

budget. 

 

Will there be a program, and will we get rural doctors? I don’t 

think so. I don’t think so. Will we see more spaces because 

there are literally hundreds of families, thousands of families 

waiting for child day care in rural Saskatchewan, urban 

Saskatchewan? Absolutely not. I suspect not. And will we see 

doctors in rural Saskatchewan? And I don’t think so. I don’t 

think so. 

 

So you see what we have over here is a group of men and 

women; they’re really good at the spin. They’re really good at 

the spin. You know, shaking hands, slapping people on the 

back. We are for you. We’re the rural people. We’re the rural 

revitalization people. Everything’s going well. Well it’s not. It’s 

not going well in rural Saskatchewan, not at all. There are a lot 

of people that can’t afford the rent. They can’t afford to pay the 

bills. The cattle industry is in the dumper. The hog industry is in 

the dumper. Commodities aren’t selling. And I would think, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, you might know this. Maybe you know this; I 

think you do. And yet we have . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — [Inaudible] . . . the member not to 

draw the Speaker into the debate. I think she knows better than 

that. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I guess what I’d 

like to say to my colleagues is, it takes more than a pair . . . I 

think it takes more than a pair of blue jeans and cowboy boots. 

It takes more than that. You have to have public policy that 

people can relate to. And this piece of legislation . . . You 

know, you can go out to the stockyards and the auctions with 

your cowboy boots and your blue jeans on and the stetson, but 

there’s a whole group of people — lots, thousands of people — 

that do not support this legislation. They do not support this 

legislation. They think that this is a cooked-up deal between a 

few friends in the Sask Party and the Sask Party for the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in order to be a politician I think you have 

to appeal to a few more people than a couple of people. I think 

so. And your friends. I think you need to think about the people 

who don’t like things — and they may very well be your 

supporters. But this is how you start to lose support, Mr. 

Speaker, and this is how you’re seen as not listening and not 

caring about what people in the industry are saying on the 

ground. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve said enough about this 

legislation. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I think I have. I know that I have other 

colleagues that want to speak on this legislation. We have a 

petition of thousands of signatures that we’d like the legislature 

to accept because people are opposed, people are opposed to 

this and you folks need to know that. They do not like the 

compulsory nature of this and they do not like the fact that this 

organization is being forced upon them and they weren’t asked 

to choose. And that’s wrong. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn debate and no doubt 

that other people will enter into other debates. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 97. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 108 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 108 — The 

Cities Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 



4090 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I’m 

pleased to be on my feet to enter into debate this evening on 

Bill 108, An Act to amend The Cities Act and to make a 

consequential amendment to The Land Surveys Act, 2000. 

 

Now essentially what this legislation aims to do is a few very 

simple things. It’s at least what it aims to do. What it does 

firstly though is reduce the provincial government’s role in 

approving of street closures except in the case of provincial 

highways passing through cities. Seems like a reasonable idea. 

 

And I just spent some time at the SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] convention, and went to 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and 

note that the various municipalities around Saskatchewan do an 

absolutely tremendous job of managing their cities and towns 

and rural municipalities. And certainly we would applaud the 

work that the men and women who are part of these 

organizations do on a daily basis to make their communities 

better places to live and to make this province a better place to 

be. And so we appreciate the work that’s done and we 

appreciate that they are perhaps in the best position to make 

some of these decisions with respect to their own streets and 

whether or not they should be closed or sold or retired. 

 

Additionally this legislation does something unique and perhaps 

interesting to some folks. It gives municipalities the power to 

seize mobile homes in cases where property taxes have gone 

unpaid and there’s a concern that the mobile home could be 

moved. 

 

Now what’s interesting is that you have to consider what might 

cause somebody to be behind on their taxes on their mobile 

home. You know, a lot of folks choose to live in mobile homes 

because their work is transient in nature. They work in one oil 

field in one part of the province, and they work in another oil 

field in another part of the province. So they’ll travel with their 

home and set it down in whatever jurisdiction they live in. 

Some folks live in mobile homes because they’re less expensive 

than permanent dwellings with a basement. 

 

Now what would cause somebody in one of these situations to 

have property taxes that have gone unpaid? If you look at a list 

of things that this government has influence over, you’ll note 

that many, many fees in Saskatchewan have increased under 

this government. Virtually everything related to the cost of 

living has increased under this government. And it certainly 

would cause you to be behind on the taxes on your mobile 

home. There are homes in Duck Lake where they’re paying 

three times as much for their water than they were in the past. 

I’m told that 80 per cent of the people whose water in Duck 

Lake they’re unable to pay their bill for are Aboriginal. And so 

it’s a sad and shameful thing. 

 

Now you might ask yourself how this affects property taxes. 

Well if you can’t afford water, you’re probably going to buy 

your water ahead of paying your property taxes. So you’d be 

behind on those. Additionally, SaskPower rates: they raise them 

by 20 per cent, and they reduce them by 5. And then they raise 

them by another 8, and then they’ll reduce them by 2, and then 

they’ll raise them by 14. So power rates have gone up 

exponentially under the Saskatchewan Party government in 

Saskatchewan. That might cause you to be behind on your taxes 

and have your mobile home fall under this jurisdiction. 

 

SaskEnergy rates, same principle applies. They’ll raise them by 

20 per cent in the wintertime when your bill’s higher. In the 

spring, they’ll reduce them by another 5 per cent, and then 

they’ll raise them again in the fall when it gets cold out. That’s 

another case where you might not be able to afford your taxes 

on your mobile home, and you might have some issues related 

to Bill 108. 

 

Now if you look at tuition costs in Saskatchewan for the last 

four years or so, up to 2007 there was a tuition freeze in 

Saskatchewan. Students in Saskatchewan paid exactly the same 

for their tuition as they paid the year before. Now for many, 

many students, in fact virtually any student attending a 

post-secondary institution in Saskatchewan, that’s not the case 

and hasn’t been the case for two years. And it’s my 

understanding in discussion with students and student leaders 

that they are fully expecting increases between 5 and 10 per 

cent because this government can’t control their own spending. 

And so they take it out on the students of the province. 

 

Many of those students in Prince Albert that I’ve talked to live 

in mobile homes and might fall under this legislation because 

they are unable to pay their taxes. Because if I have a choice to 

pay my tuition or my property taxes, I’d make sure that my 

tuition was paid first. 

 

Additionally, if you look strictly at the cost of housing, it’s 

unbelievably expensive. And it’s gone up unbelievably under 

this government. And what do they choose to do about it? Well 

they’ll take a cheque from Boardwalk for $10,000 to support 

their party to ensure the rent controls aren’t put in place. 

 

Well how does that help the average person in a mobile home in 

Saskatchewan? Their rent is through the roof. It might cause 

them to be unable to pay property taxes. 

 

Additionally, because we found once again this year that people 

aren’t appreciating their parks enough, the Saskatchewan Party 

government decided that they’d raise the rates on camping fees. 

So they laughed and joked and thought it was funny that you 

would apply a fee to somebody who wanted to use firewood, 

but they take that off, the $3, and add $10 worth of other fees 

across the board for everybody that . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Now they’re arguing, they’re arguing that they got rid of it. 

 

But their own members have no idea what’s going on in their 

caucus. I’m not sure if the minister responsible is not telling 

them. But some folks might choose to go camping — though 

I’m sure it’s going to be fewer and fewer — and they’re going 

to pay more. And they’re going to pay more every year under 

this government because when you can’t control your own 

finances, when you have no idea what you’re doing when you 

take in $10.2 billion in one year but you spend 11 and you 

blame it on potash, you have to make up the fees somewhere. 

And so you’ll make them up on camping, and that might cause 

somebody to not be able to pay the fees and taxes on their 

trailer home. 

 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4091 

Now we understand today that if you’ve got a sore back, you 

are going to have to pay more for your chiropractor. If you 

don’t have insurance to go see a chiropractor, it’s going to cost 

you more because they are going to de-insure them. There is no 

longer going to be a co-pay by the Government of 

Saskatchewan for chiropractic services. It’s become clear today 

with the answers from the Minister of Health. 

 

[21:45] 

 

So if you have to pay more because your back has been hurt at 

work, you might not be able to pay your property taxes on your 

mobile home while you’re . . . You might have put your back 

out hauling your own water in Duck Lake by hand because the 

water is so bad there that you have to haul it by hand. And I’m 

sure they don’t carry it all the way from P.A. And so if that 

happens and you injure your back carrying your own water in 

Duck Lake uphill both ways, there might be a case where it 

causes . . . So you hurt your back. And so then you go to the 

chiropractor and you find out there that they de-insured them. 

And so now you have to pay the full bill and that might cause 

you to be in a position where your property taxes have gone 

unpaid. 

 

Now additionally you might be an entrepreneur that wants to — 

this ought to get the members’ attention — you might want to 

be an entrepreneur that comes to Saskatchewan. And so if you 

are an entrepreneur that wants to come to Saskatchewan, before 

recently you could do it without paying a $2,500 levy, but now 

if you have to pay the levy, you might not be able to pay your 

property taxes, and therefore the municipality may have power 

to seize your mobile home. 

 

Additionally what these guys could have done when they 

inherited a $2.3 billion surplus is keep the lowest cost utility 

bundle to ensure that people in Saskatchewan have the lowest 

cost utilities in the country. Why wouldn’t they do that? 

Because they know that they are going to overspend. It doesn’t 

suit what they want to do with the Crown corporations, which is 

overspend on the general revenue side, draw it down from the 

Crown corporations so that they meet in the middle. And you 

can’t do that if you are not charging people through the roof for 

their power. Because they love the back door so much, they’re 

going to use that to get fees from people and pay . . . Their 

power bills will be a lot higher. 

 

So those might be some of the reasons where you’d have your 

mobile home seized by the municipality in cases where your 

property taxes have gone unpaid.  

 

Another interesting aspect to this portion of the Bill is, and I’ll 

quote from the minister’s speech on November 16 of 2009: 

 

The timing is slightly different. A city can seize or 

immobilize a trailer during the year the taxes are due if, 

for example, the city determines the trailer is likely to be 

moved before the taxes are paid. 

 

I’m not sure what towns are going to do. But the city can do this 

anyway. 

 

This may not seem like a significant issue, but it 

demonstrates a present inequity in our property tax 

system and a challenge for cities. 

 

Now what they are saying is that a city has the opportunity to 

seize a mobile home if it determines the trailer is likely to be 

moved before the taxes are paid. So they’re going to look into 

their Sask Party crystal ball — that’s pink now because it’s 

stained with potash — and they’re going to try to determine 

whether or not they can seize somebody’s mobile home and 

whether or not it’s likely to be moved before they pay them. So 

before somebody has a chance to not pay their taxes, they are 

going to attempt to seize their mobile home because it’s likely 

to be moved. What kind of sense does that make, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Well they’ve got . . . I’m sure that all of the money that should 

have went to HTC that could go to research in Saskatchewan is 

going to the Sask Party crystal ball to get the pink out of it so 

that you can actually see through it to determine whose trailer is 

likely to be seized under this legislation. So I find that another 

interesting piece of this legislation. I don’t know how they 

legislate that you can guess whether somebody is likely to move 

their mobile home or not. I have no idea how you are going to 

do that. Sask Party map and geography lessons have been rough 

today and apparently science is no better. 

 

Now in addition, I’d like to read another portion of the 

minister’s speech where he says: 

 

I’d just like to remind the Assembly, the purpose of 

allowing such checks is not to prevent someone with a 

criminal record for running for municipal office. It is to 

allow municipalities to decide locally if they want to 

require a higher level of public transparency in the 

election process. 

 

Now it’s unclear of who can bring the legislation to bear in this 

case. So when a private citizen has a concern about somebody 

that’s running for public office, can they bring it forward to the 

government to ensure that there’s a record check? If there is a 

municipality, does the municipality make the decision? Does a 

private citizen that has a concern make the decision? Who 

makes the decision on whether or not there is a higher level of 

public transparency?  

 

And if you want to talk a little further about how they create 

legislation that will apply to everybody else in Saskatchewan 

but them, this is it. So they’ll have somebody that may be 

affected by this legislation working in their own caucus and 

they ensure that it only applies to municipalities. It doesn’t 

apply on the provincial level because well, trust us. We’ll do 

our own checks, thank you. I wonder why that is? 

 

It’s not much different than Bill 103, the miscellaneous statues 

professions Act where they list 40 different professions, and I 

read them here last night. And who’s exempt? Police officers. 

And why? I think people can draw their own conclusions. But 

what would be the point? It’s two cases in two nights in this 

legislature where they design legislation that exempts 

themselves. I find it hard to believe. 

 

Now it also says . . . And I’ll quote the minister again in his 

speech. Maybe he’ll give a shorter speech next time, and I 

won’t be able to quote so much of it: 

 



4092 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

The ministries of Highways and Infrastructure and Justice 

were highly involved in developing the amendments 

relating to streets to ensure that the provincial interest, 

role, and responsibility is appropriate.  

 

So when it comes to ensuring that the province doesn’t have a 

vested interest in a street, in somebody’s back alley, in their 

home, then we’re going to consult the ministries and ensure that 

we get the right information. 

 

But when it comes to guessing on how much we’re going to 

take in on potash revenue in Saskatchewan, who do we talk to? 

No, no, you wouldn’t talk to your ministry then. You wouldn’t 

talk to the officials who would be in the best position to make 

that judgment. No, no, you would exempt yourself from doing 

that. But when it comes to ensuring that somebody’s back alley 

can be moved under city jurisdiction or municipal jurisdiction, 

that’s when you consult your Ministry of Highways and 

Infrastructure or Justice. 

 

I find that a bit strange where, when it comes to an alley in a 

city, you would ensure that you do a great big consultation with 

the ministry. But when it comes to the revenue of the province 

and guessing, which is what ended up happening, whether or 

not you’d have 3 billion as was suggested by the Minister of 

Energy and Resources, whether you’d have 2 billion which was 

the Premier’s best guess — the Minister of Finance tried to sell 

that to Saskatchewan people — or whether it would end up at 

being 100 or minus $204 million, where you end up in a 

position where you’re paying back resource companies to take 

the resource out of your province. The only place in the world 

where that happens is Saskatchewan. 

 

And would you consult with your ministry to determine 

whether or not you’d have appropriate income to match the 

level of spending? No, because that’s somehow deemed to be 

unimportant. But when you try to ensure that the back alley of a 

city or a town is treated properly by the municipality, that’s 

when you consult your Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure 

and Justice. I find that a little bit, a little bit strange and tough to 

take as well, Mr. Speaker. And it is, I would argue, as the 

member from Saskatoon Silver Springs suggests, disingenuous. 

 

Now if you would also look at what it says specifically about 

some of the clauses in here, it says in here that they’ll add the 

following clause after clause (hh), and that is: 

 

‘travel trailer’ means a structure that: 

 

is equipped to travel on a road. 

 

Well “equipped to travel on a road” could mean nearly 

anything. The member from Regina Rosemont is strong enough 

to carry one on his back. Now is that equipped to travel on a 

road? I’m not sure. So I think we need to work on, in this Bill, 

what some of these things mean exactly. What is it to be 

equipped to travel on a road? Does it have to have wheels and 

tires or can it be put on the back of a flatdeck? So what exactly 

does that mean? 

 

And so we have many questions about the specifics of the Bill. 

We also have questions about the general principles of the Bill 

and how they came to make these decisions. And so we have 

questions that we’ll want to ask in committee, and with that, I 

move to adjourn debate on this Bill this evening. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 108. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 121 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 121 — The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased tonight to 

enter into the debate on this Bill for the environmental 

management and protection in our province. 

 

The minister spoke at length and I read her remarks. And 

honestly I don’t know who wrote them, but it’s almost, it’s not 

really terribly understandable, a lot of big words. 

 

And I do notice when I read the report that was commissioned 

by the government, the Clifton report, towards a results-based 

environmental regulatory system for Saskatchewan. This was 

commissioned by the government in 2008, and it took about a 

year to come into this form as the report. And that was in 

February of ’09, and now it is February or March of 2010, a 

year later.  

 

And reading through the recommendations, there’s 40 of them 

in the report, and I imagine there was a fair amount of 

taxpayers’ money spent on this report. And it reminds me of the 

Patient First Review that took a year to do, in health, spent a lot 

of money, a lot of the taxpayers’ money. And basically we’ve 

heard nothing of that report or likely will we ever hear anything 

that’s been done with that report. 

 

So this one is . . . We have serious issues with whether this 

report’s recommendations will ever be implemented. And 

reading through the recommendations, 40 of them, the minister 

agrees with every recommendation, but the recommendations 

are wide-ranging, wide-sweeping, expensive recommendations. 

And the report even mentions that the ministry does not have 

the capacity, the human resource capacity to do the things that 

they see need to be done. So basically the few amendments and 

the changes in legislation are a minor part of this Clifton report 

that talks about the environment and what this province needs 

to do for that.  

 

This government really has no credibility on environmental 

issues. We’re two, plus two years into the mandate of the 

government and have seen nothing but this report and very little 

else from the minister. And like I said, her speech in the 

legislature, her second reading speech, is almost 

incomprehensible. and it doesn’t speak to, really, things that 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4093 

people can see will happen with our environment. 

 

And the report is actually interestingly enough called Go Green 

Saskatchewan. I imagine by the time anything is done with this, 

go green will have now been able to be called gone brown. 

Because there’s really . . . I can’t see how anything’s going to 

be done that’s going to fix any of the things that are in this 

Clifton report. 

 

And their recommendations, given the budgetary situation we 

have, most of these recommendations that will deal with 

environmental management and protection are very costly, even 

in up to and including the electronic databases that are 

recommended, more people to supervise, standardize, looking 

at some of the things that have to be done in the industry. 

 

And I can hardly see that this government will have the capacity 

to do anything on environmental issues other than put some 

legislation, tweak some legislation, which is basically is all this 

is doing. It is putting together some Acts, changing a few 

things, putting them all into one and basically has done nothing 

to do anything to it, nothing to enhance the environment. 

 

[22:00] 

 

The Clifton report, as I said, clearly says that the ministry 

doesn’t have the capacity to implement the recommendations. 

So looking at the budget that’s going to be coming up this 

month, I can’t imagine how we’re going to find this government 

seeing any money added into the environmental ministry to deal 

with any of these very serious issues on the environment. And I 

think, as usual, we will likely see nothing happening. And like I 

said, the Patient First Review, it makes me think of that one 

because nothing’s happened with that one either. 

 

So I think it’s quite interesting that a government that promised 

to implement some targets for greenhouse gas emission 

reductions hasn’t been able to do anything. And basically 

another study is now a year old, and all we have seen generated 

from that are some of the minor legislative changes that we see. 

 

Some of the things that were suggested in the legislation — 

environmental codes — a lot of these things sound good on 

paper, but the fact is the government is asking us to pass this 

legislation without knowing what the minimal standards will be. 

Who’s going to write these standards? And who’s the 

government going to consult with? Mostly the industry itself it 

sounds like. 

 

And I know when the federal government was looking at giving 

the meat industry self-regulation and trying to save money at 

the federal level — so cutting back on meat inspectors, going to 

give the inspection and the standards setting and basically the 

self-regulatory job to the meat industry itself — and then all of 

a sudden listeriosis hit. And that was totally, totally removed 

from the federal government’s agenda. They realized that you 

can’t let an industry police itself alone. There has to be 

government intervention, government oversight. 

 

This is something that the people of the province are sincerely, 

sincerely interested in and committed to — the environmental 

issues. And they’ve seen nothing from this government, nothing 

in just over two years. There’s been nothing. And I can see with 

these legislative changes very little that’s going to move the 

environmental issues forward at all. And I think, given that the 

government thinks they’re going to set baseline emissions, 

simply can’t . . . we haven’t seen anything. We’ve seen a lot of 

talk, and basically nothing has happened. In fact the talk has 

even died down. I really haven’t heard much of that left over 

either. 

 

So it’s interesting that, as I said, that the government is going to 

let the industry be accountable for the damage that they do to 

the environment, for example. And I think people expect the 

government to actually do more than just tell the industry that 

they’ve done damage after it has been done. I think they expect 

more responsible action from the government when they think 

that the environment is sometimes irreparable, irreplaceable too. 

But sometimes the damage that’s done is irreparable, and we 

can’t be letting industry set all of the standards and give all of 

the guidelines without some government intervention or 

oversight. 

 

And I think that there is some merit in some of the changes that 

the government has suggested. There is some proposals that 

would suggest that there’s going to be baseline objectives that 

the industry would be required to meet. But again, I think a lot 

depends on how those objectives are set and whether they’re 

rigorous enough to be meaningful in any way. And the 

principle, as I said, is probably a good one. 

 

But given the things that we have seen from this government, 

it’s hard for anybody to actually believe that something will be 

done. And when we see a report that took a year to do, and 

basically in the report it said that, in the minister’s comments, 

consultation has happened. Well consultation to this 

government doesn’t mean the same thing it does to most people. 

A lot of people have just had passing comments construed as 

consultation. 

 

And I found that out in the wild ponies Act. The band that we 

were being told had been consulted, when I talked to them, they 

had not been. They did not think a passing comment at a 

meeting about a Bill that might be coming was, in their view, 

consultation. And they were promised that they might see the 

Bill when it came. They never saw that either. So I really don’t 

think people have a great deal of faith in the definition of 

consultation from these government members and their various 

ministries. 

 

And I think that people do think that environmental 

management and protection is really a core responsibility of 

government. I don’t think you can give it to industry. There’s a 

role for industry. There’s a role for businesses. There’s a role 

for private investors. But the role of government is to prevent 

environmental degradation where possible and not simply, as I 

said, to make a judgment after the fact when the damage has 

been done. And it’s also the government’s responsibility at 

times to step in and prohibit specific activities that we know are 

going to be harmful to the environment. 

 

There’s going to be some . . . There was a recommendation 

made in the Clifton report that suggested, for example, that 

there would be permits to construct facilities that would be 

discontinued except in certain extraordinary cases. The 

government indicated that they agreed with that 



4094 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

recommendation. As I said, they agreed with all 40 

recommendations which is interesting because, like I said, I 

don’t know if anybody costed this report and the 

recommendations. I would like to actually see that, and that 

would be a question I think I’ll ask in committee because the 

cost of doing what the Clifton report recommends is, I would 

think, fairly high. And it would be interesting to see that cost if 

somebody has done it. And I don’t have any actual faith or 

anything that I would see that this has been done. 

 

There’s things that also in the report . . . I mentioned earlier on 

that the report says itself that Saskatchewan doesn’t have the 

current “staff capacity or capability to monitor and regulate the 

current industry and oversee the social licence.” And that was a 

quote that’s from the actual report. And it notes that the 

Environment ministry is short of certain important skill sets, not 

only at the ministerial level but in the ministry with engineers, 

hydrogeologists, water quality and air quality specialists, 

toxicologists, epidemiologists, and risk assessment specialists. 

In other words, the report says the Ministry of the Environment 

doesn’t have the people to do the job. 

 

And I think we can basically see that. I think everybody 

believes in the province that this is one of the things that has 

been dropped by the Sask Party government, a promise that was 

made and certainly not kept. People are waiting to hear what is 

going to happen with the environment. What’s the government 

going to propose? What’s the government going to do, because 

basically proposing isn’t going to actually fix anything. 

 

And the report did suggest that the Ministry of the Environment 

should consider developing a long-term preferred supplier — 

for example — relationship with a private sector firm who 

could be kept on retainer. And the government again agreed. So 

there is some room to build expertise outside of government 

and in places actually use the private sector. But there is a 

fundamental role of protecting of the environment and the 

protection of the people’s long, long, long-standing view of the 

environment as being theirs and that the government is a 

steward of the environment. 

 

So we can’t see that building expertise in government to protect 

the environment is one thing and contracting out is another. So 

there has to be a careful balance that you don’t privatize by 

another name here. 

 

And I said people are really not convinced that this government 

has the ability to deliver on environmental issues. I’m pretty 

sure that if you asked anybody that they do say that health care 

of course is first on their list of concerns, but the environment 

comes a fairly close second. And I don’t think we’ve seen 

anything that would encourage the public to believe that this 

government, the Sask Party government, has a handle on this, 

has a commitment to it. And certainly having a report done a 

year ago and coming forward with . . . The only thing we see 

coming forward in the year following is a few pieces of 

legislation that do really nothing to establish any actual plan. 

 

I would like to see of those 40 recommendations, when the 

minister agrees with every recommendation, is there a work 

plan to actually address each of those? Are there targets to 

achieve what the report has asked for in the recommendations? 

Forty recommendations and all you do is say we agree. Well 

that’s pretty light and superficial. I don’t think anybody can . . . 

Most people who know about action plans and work plans and 

getting things done, you have to have a work plan. And I don’t 

see that happening here, and I don’t think three pieces of 

legislation is going to constitute much of a work plan. 

 

And this results-based environmental regulatory framework for 

Saskatchewan sounds really good, but I’m not sure. I haven’t 

seen anything that says how this will happen, how it’s going to 

be facilitated, and certainly not with the legislation that I’ve 

seen. 

 

And there’s people that of course are excited about this because 

basically it’s the only thing we’ve heard. So I think people 

would consider a report of this nature from Clifton Associates 

to be a starting point, but I don’t know how long you wait to 

start actually doing the action. And right now I don’t think 

anybody has any, any confidence in the government to put any 

plans in action. And I am certain that there isn’t going to be any 

money to address the 40 recommendations that are in this report 

that go far and beyond legislation and the few legislative 

changes that are contemplated here today. 

 

So I think that we’ll probably be disappointed again in an 

environmental plan from the government. And I think that 

people will be concerned, continue to be concerned about what 

is lacking in protecting their environment and protecting the 

environment for their children and for their grandchildren. I 

think people, like I said, have this as a top-of-the-mind issue. 

 

And really we’ve heard nothing from the Minister. You know, a 

second reading speech, like I said, was pretty vague, full of 

long, big words and really nothing in commitment, nothing that 

would signal to the people of Saskatchewan that there’s 

something that is going to be done. And I think consulting 

various stakeholders, First Nations and Métis Nation they talk 

about, most of that consultation is really considered to be fairly 

non-productive. And I think First Nations and the Métis Nation 

have a need and a requirement to be consulted on many things 

in a meaningful way. None of this, none of the consultation that 

has been done so far has been meaningful or productive. 

 

And like I said, when I saw the small Bill or the Bill that was 

done with the wild ponies, it showed me that really what 

somebody defines as consultation and sincerely, I think, 

believed that that was good enough, was significantly lacking in 

the eyes of the people who had a significant interest in this Bill. 

It was on traditional treaty land, and they needed to see 

something in the Act that would protect that, and indeed it was 

in the hunting and fishing Act that government proposed itself. 

And yet they objected to putting it in this other Act, mainly 

because I think it was, you know, grandstanding, grandstanding 

because they didn’t think of it. And it was pointed out that they 

did it wrong. And they didn’t really like that; they’re fairly 

thin-skinned. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty hard to follow my 

colleague from Athabasca. He does such a wonderful job on 

environmental issues. And it’s interesting. It’s always 

interesting to listen to him. And I think people enjoy hearing his 

comments on a really, really, really, important issue, but to 

make it real to them. I think he always makes it real to them. 

 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4095 

And I think people are looking at the government to deliver on 

their promise of greenhouse gas emission targets, on 

environmental stewardship, and they’re not getting it. And 

they’re not getting it. And I don’t think they’re going to get it in 

this budget because there’s simply no money. When this 

government has mismanaged the finances so badly over the last 

two years, there’s lots of things people are not going to get, and 

that things that people need and this province needs aren’t 

going to happen. 

 

So I think there’s going to be lots of questions when we get this 

Bill into committee about what it all means because if there’s 

changes to the legislation that actually enable some of the 

recommendations to be put in place, good. How much did the 

report cost? Interesting. Legislation that does nothing but 

basically do housekeeping, combine some Acts, isn’t going to 

move us forward on environmental issues or change our 

commitment to the province. It isn’t going to deliver. And I’m 

sorry to say I think this is what all this legislation is going to be 

. . . fairly useless, I would think, to actually achieve many of 

those goals. It will be a very, very, very small step forward, if at 

all. 

 

So with those remarks I will move adjournment of debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Eastview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 121. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 104 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 104 — The 

Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 
be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank my 

colleagues. Mr. Speaker, tonight is . . . actually the first two 

days of session have been pretty great days as we are debating a 

significant number of Bills. And there’s one thread that has 

come through as I make my preliminary remarks on the Act to 

amend The Summary Offences Procedures Act, 1990. 

 

One thing that seems to be a common thread through all of the 

discussion, all of the debate, Mr. Speaker, is the inability of the 

people of Saskatchewan to trust the government’s word on what 

it is they’re doing, on consultation that’s taken place. And there 

are many examples where the consultation . . . One that just 

came to mind earlier today, that was brought to light earlier 

today was the chiropractors, where chiropractors negotiated an 

agreement with the Ministry of Health. The ministry had the 

press release all ready to go, and then now nearly three months 

later it’s on indefinite hold. And that’s the kindest way I could 

put it. 

 

[22:15] 

Mr. Speaker, that’s just one of the things that lead us to 

question what it is that the Sask Party government is doing. And 

Bill 104, the summary offences procedures Act seems like a 

fairly reasoned, maybe even reasonable Act at first blush. At 

first blush, it does. But you know, Mr. Speaker, this Act allows 

for tickets to be served via mail, and it’s a change from the 

status quo where a ticket has to be served in person. 

 

Now I know I hear the members opposite saying, well what’s 

good, what’s bad, what’s wrong with that? Well let me tell you, 

Mr. Speaker, that we get elected, all of us in this Chamber get 

elected to pass laws. And we pass laws with the blessing of our 

constituents, which is made up of our neighbours, our friends, 

our relatives, our family are constituents. And we make laws 

based on the experiences that we have in our lives, but what we 

need to be sure we’re doing, Mr. Speaker, is passing good laws. 

 

And the reason that I say it has to be good laws is if you have 

the opportunity to travel throughout the world — I’ve had some 

ability to do that in my lifetime — as I have travelled around 

the world, I have seen laws that make no sense at all. And I 

have seen local populations where that’s the case, that defy 

every law — every law. We have a great society in Canada. 

Saskatchewan is the best province in the entire country; I argue 

Saskatchewan is the place in the world to be. This is an 

awesome place to live and to call home. 

 

But what we need, Mr. Speaker, is good laws that make sense 

and that work and so that people want to follow these laws. 

People have to understand them. It has to be clear, it has to be 

concise, and it has to make sense. We’ve got some questions 

with this summary offences procedure Act: you know, how 

many tickets are going to be converted to a mail system, how 

many tickets; how many person-years of time will that mean 

that police don’t have to spend serving tickets? That clearly, 

clearly should be the upside to this debate. But then the 

question is, well now what happens then with these 

person-years of saved time? Does that mean we’re going to 

have more police patrolling or more investigation into crimes? 

Or does it mean more holiday pay or more doughnuts? I don’t 

know what the answer is. Will it be better utilization of police 

time? And if that’s the case, if it was just straight-up better 

utilization of police time, it’s a no-brainer. Of course we would 

support that legislation. That’s just automatic. 

 

But what we need to be sure is that we don’t change the system 

of sending out tickets, of making sure that people are aware 

they’re being charged with a summary offence in a way that 

leaves some doubt. If people have an ability to say, gee you 

know, I didn’t do that crime or that I didn’t do something to 

cause that summary offence to take place, then they’ll balk. And 

then what’s the fallback position? How do we recover from 

that? 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, I know I see a lot of people 

wondering what is it I’m talking about here. Let me put some 

wheels, let me put some wheels under it for the Justice minister 

and others. 

 

Many years ago in a previous lifetime I lent my car to a good 

friend’s wife who took the car, who took the car to a town that 

had parking meters. And she got a ticket. The fine in those days 

was $1 — $1. And so . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It tells 



4096 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

how old I am, and absolutely it tells how old I am. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the point of this story is that my buddy’s 

wife, who was also my friend obviously, didn’t tell me, didn’t 

pay the ticket. And I went about my business, I’m at my 

workplace in Whitewood at the Pool Farm Service Centre there. 

And I was a little slow getting out at lunch hour and in walked 

an RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] officer. I’m all 

alone in there. And I’m behind the sales counter, and I jokingly 

put my arms in the air. And he said, are you Kim Trew? And 

my jaw hit the floor, and I admitted to who I was, and he served 

me with a summary offence ticket. And it was now not $1, but 

it was $10. 

 

And I had quite a significant exchange of mail with the town of 

Nipawin because initially I said, look, I wasn’t even there. How 

could I possibly have this ticket? I wasn’t even there. And it 

was true. Anyway it’s a little late to shorten an already too-long 

story, but I wound up paying the $10 and have suffered the 

embarrassment ever since. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we’re changing the summary offences 

procedure Act and how we deliver tickets, we want to make 

sure that we don’t wind up with . . . Let me rephrase it. We 

want to make sure that individuals have the opportunity to have 

their say — to say, I wasn’t there. Give me the description of 

the vehicle, if it’s a parking thing. Which the town of Nipawin 

was able to do; they gave the description of my vehicle, and that 

kind of got me thinking. 

 

But we need to provide for people the ability to have their say 

— guilty, not guilty; here were the circumstances — so that 

they are participating in the ongoing way our society operates, 

the ongoing good of the general society. Because we all, 

virtually everybody, supports that you should not drink and 

drive. Virtually everybody. You can hardly find anybody that 

says, oh it should be legal for someone to drink and drive. 

People don’t even, I don’t think, think in those terms anymore. 

 

So what we need is a society where all of us appreciate what 

legislation is about and want to support it. Our laws should be 

protecting people, our society from harm and protecting our 

civil freedoms. And I’m just not sure how this mail serving of 

tickets affects our collective rights, Mr. Speaker, particularly as 

I’ve said, our ability to have our say respecting guilt or 

innocence. 

 

Now I know in the notes it says that there was consultation 

made around this particular piece of legislation. And I want to 

again say that we are skeptical about when the government says 

there’s been consultation, we wonder with whom. Was it 

perhaps a little tea party with their staff, or was it something a 

little more refined than that? Because the record around 

consultation of the government members opposite is very 

anemic, very weak, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that just about a year ago now, we were told that there 

was much consultation with potash experts throughout the 

potash industry and that the province of Saskatchewan was 

going to get $1.9 billion from potash, 1.9 billion. That’s $1,900 

for every man, woman, and child for all 1 million Saskatchewan 

people. And, Mr. Speaker, that 1.9, the member for Kindersley 

said, oh it could easily pass 3 billion. He said that at that very 

time. 

 

Well that 3 billion quickly became 1.9, and then halfway 

through the year, mid-term report, it became maybe 250 

million. And now, Mr. Speaker, due to their consultation, the 

consultation of Sask Party members, we find out that the 

government had to pay $204 million to the potash industry. This 

is after consultation, the major consultation on the biggest 

single item in the budget year that we’re just finishing up. The 

biggest single budget item, and they were more than 100 per 

cent out after much consultation. So we are really, really 

skeptical. Their batting average on consultation is grim. It is 

dismal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have chiropractors that negotiated a deal, 

negotiated a deal with the government in good faith. Nearly 

three months later after they had an agreement that the 

chiropractors signed, that the Ministry of Health said they were 

going to sign, nearly three months later, no signature. No deal, 

and it’s very much up in the air whether they’re going to honour 

that deal. How do you consult any more widely, any more 

directly with an interest group, a group that’s interested, than 

what they did with the chiropractors? They negotiated the 

collective agreement with them for heaven sakes and then won’t 

honour it. What is the point of consulting, Mr. Speaker? 

 

What consulting was done around The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act, 1990? We’re told there was consultation, but 

I’m not sure how much consultation it was. 

 

We’re told that with respect to there’s environmental questions 

out there, the law on the environment is being changed. We’re 

told, Mr. Speaker, that as a result of the consultations there that 

the government, the Sask Party has an air management 

program. Well I want to tell you, air management’s more than 

breathe in, breathe out. Breathe in, breathe out. And 

consultation should be much more than that too. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they consulted on education property taxes. They 

had a mandate in the last election to deliver on education 

property taxes. What’s the situation this year? Well, nothing. 

Nothing this year. Nothing. Municipal tax revenue stream: to 

describe that as being on hold is generous, Mr. Speaker. Well I 

mean there’s consultation, there’s announcements, and then 

nothing. What a sad record. What a sad record it is. 

 

You know they used to say that Saskatchewan was in the pink. 

And then they stopped selling it. Now it’s in the red. Now we’re 

in the red. I don’t know how a government could take us from 

prosperity, from boom to bust, in two years. How we could go 

from a $2 billion surplus to more than a $1 billion deficit in two 

short years, how is that possible? I haven’t even started to talk 

about essential services legislation where I don’t believe there 

was consultation in any meaningful way done at all. There’s 

lots of credible business people that say there’s no need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the best example I can give you around this is Bill 

80, the construction labour relations Act where for 17 years 

now there has not been a strike — 17 years. The Saskatchewan 

construction industry has been booming, Mr. Speaker, booming. 

It is not broken. 

 

And yet what is the Sask Party doing? They’re saying, oh we’ve 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4097 

got to fix this. Well fix things where there’s a problem for 

heaven sakes. Fix things where there’s a problem. Don’t be 

pretending, make up problems. Don’t put the boots to working 

people of Saskatchewan just for the sake that you can because 

the Premier said, I’m going to go to war with working people. 

I’m going to go to war with unions. Just because he said it, I 

mean surely you could break that promise like you’ve broken 

all the rest of the promises. Surely you could do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don’t believe the consultation has taken place. 

We don’t believe the consultations are done in good faith, if 

they’re done at all. We think this legislation needs to be looked 

at very, very seriously. 

 

The Speaker: — It being 10:30 this Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 117 — The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4069 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4069 

 Bill No. 101 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4076 

 Bill No. 122 — The Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4078 

 Bill No. 97 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4086 

 Bill No. 108 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2009 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4090 

 Bill No. 121 — The Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4092 

 Bill No. 104 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4095 

 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 




