




















































Hansard: March 15, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 30B  MONDAY, MARCH 15, 2010, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4195 

 March 15, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 117 — The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping 

Heritage Act 

(continued) 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time being 7 p.m., the House is 

now back in session. I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s nice to be 

back here this evening and have the opportunity to continue on the 

brief few words I have to offer as I started off this afternoon. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, we’re discussing probably a very 

important Bill, Bill 117, the Act respecting hunting, fishing, and 

trapping. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before I go any further I want 

to correct an error I made in my comments earlier this afternoon. 

At that time, I was under the impression that the member, my 

good friend and colleague, the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood had a fishing hut out on the ice on a lake 

somewhere in Saskatchewan here. I was misinformed, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ve been since corrected, and he does not have a hut out 

on the ice. And I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that if he would have had a 

hut out on that ice this winter that he would have had it off well 

before the deadline was required by the Act. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to apologize to my good friend and 

colleague, the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood, for 

misleading unintentionally, but misleading the thousands of 

people watching because of misinformation that I had. He does 

not have a hut out on a lake somewhere in Saskatchewan and 

certainly not . . . and if he did, like I said, if he would have had, 

I’m sure it’d been off well before now. 

 

I understand though that the member has had a fair amount of 

experience at ice fishing, but his experience in ice fishing 

probably goes along the same line as mine. There’s really two 

things that I catch when I go ice fishing. One of course is ice. I 

get large volumes of ice. I take large chunks of ice home. But 

the other one is I usually catch a cold. But that’s about the 

extent of my good luck in fishing. I understand his is much the 

same. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill that certainly warrants the 

opportunity to have fair and reasonable consultation done with 

the parties involved or the parties that may be affected by this. 

And I’m hoping that the government at some point in time, 

before this Bill is rammed and jammed through this Assembly, 

the government will provide the opposition with some 

indication as to what level of consultation the government may 

have done in regards to making the changes to this Bill. 

 

I mean, let’s start . . . [inaudible] . . . at the beginning. Who 

came forward to the government and asked for this? Who came 

forward to the government and asked for this Bill to be brought 

about? What organization, what group of people, what 

individuals may have approached the government and said that 

they would like to see this Bill implemented and brought 

forward through the Legislative Assembly process, the debate 

to take place, and then it’ll eventually be proclaimed and 

become law. And that would be interesting to see that, Mr. 

Speaker. As well as in that process that the government was 

doing its research, its consultations to ensure that whatever 

effects this Bill may have wouldn’t be negative to those out 

there in this great province of ours that may find it necessary to 

be making a living off of hunting or fishing or trapping, that this 

Bill wouldn’t directly or indirectly create that many negative 

issues, any problems certainly within their own personal 

atmosphere or perhaps even within their business and their 

community. 

 

And I would like to have those assurances, Mr. Speaker, but 

until we have them, I suppose it’s difficult to go forward with 

the government’s assumption of saying to the opposition, well 

yes this is a good piece of legislation; just pass it and trust us. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I find that a bit of a stretch because that’s 

certainly not the role of an opposition. The role of the 

opposition is to hold the government accountable, to hold the 

government to task for its actions. 

 

And I wish that the government would come clean, come clean 

with what their intentions really are with this particular Bill. Is 

it as it appears to be, simply a Bill that wants to recognize the 

heritage and the contribution made by those who are involved 

in the hunting and fishing and trapping industry over the years, 

and I mean years, long before this province was a province? 

Certainly we had trapping going on, and we had hunting going 

on, and we had fishing going on. Probably even before the 

trapping was the fishing and hunting, which was a mainstay of 

providing food for many of our native ancestry, the First 

Nations people and the Métis people, to be able to feed their 

families with. And this is of course very, very important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we need to look further than just simply 

recognizing a day, picking a day on the calendar and 

recognizing that day as a heritage day for hunting and fishing 

and trapping. What we have to look at is ensuring that into the 

future that we have the ability to continue to recognize such a 

heritage day, and having the ability to recognize that because 

we have a strong population of wildlife in this great province of 

ours, whether it be fowl or whether it be fish or whether it be 

big game. Whatever is involved as far as the wildlife is 

concerned in this great province of ours, we want to ensure that 

we have that ability to maintain that population, not just for our 

own benefit and for our own use but for that of the future. 

 

There is something unique and special about the wildlife that 

we have in this great province, and we want to ensure that 

future generations can enjoy them, not only from the sports side 

but just also from the fact to go out there and watch them and to 

see them. And I know there are many, many people who have 

never, ever hunted a wild creature, never hunted a wild creature, 

but enjoy seeing them in their native surroundings, enjoy 

driving down a highway and seeing off to the side some 

white-tailed deer or off to the side seeing, perhaps, a moose. 



4196 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

And in the northern areas you can see a number of wild 

animals, birds, and probably a very, very beautiful sight is 

watching a flock of geese fly over top with their V-shape and 

hearing their honking. And there’s something about it just stirs 

something in a being when you hear that. And those are the 

things we want to ensure that we are able to retain for, not only 

for our own use and our own enjoyment today, but for that of 

future generations. 

 

But in order to do that we must ensure that we have an 

environment that will continue to be suited to supporting that 

type of wildlife. We don’t want a situation where we have an 

environment that deteriorates through pollution and through 

mismanagement and through ill planning, and certainly not 

being supported in a way it should be that would cause that 

environment to slowly become polluted, and thus polluting off 

that wildlife that depends on that environment for its livelihood. 

 

We must ensure that we don’t allow that to happen, whether it 

be in a hunting grounds — for example the white-tailed deer or 

moose or elk — that they have, the areas that they can graze on, 

that they can raise their families on, that they stay strong and 

healthy for reproductive purposes so we maintain a strong and 

healthy herd. 

 

Yes, we have to ensure that there’s a balance here. Mother 

nature has her own way of insuring a balance, of maintaining 

that population. I think there’s a role for man to play there, and 

I think if it’s looked after and handled properly in a balanced 

way, there’s room for everyone. There’s room for mother nature 

to do its thing. There’s also room for man to enjoy his sporting 

activity that comes along with hunting and fishing and trapping. 

And if it’s handled properly, then I believe that we can maintain 

that strong herd, I guess you would say, and to provide that 

opportunity for that herd to thrive, to do so in a healthy way so 

that it’s here for future generations. 

 

And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that that is our goal, and I hope that 

all of those involved with that industry, immediately and those 

even further removed, will keep that in mind, and that should be 

their overall goal . . . is ensure that we have a strong population, 

a strong herd. 

 

We must make sure that our lakes and our rivers remain as pure 

as possible, and I think we are very fortunate in this province 

right now to enjoy that. That’s not the same in other areas as I 

understand it, not having had that much experience, but from 

reading news reports, from reading stories in magazines and 

actually talking to some people from particularly Eastern 

Canada that will tell me of their life spent out there, maybe 

some 40, 50 years that they spent there, how they’ve seen the 

water, and perhaps in their lake close to them, how that water 

has deteriorated because of pollution and mismanagement of 

the resources. And as a result of that, they’re seeing certainly 

the types, the species that used to live in that water that they 

used to be able to fish and retrieve on a regular basis now not 

available to them. And those that are, are often polluted with 

mercury and other chemicals that no longer make them 

available for human consumption. 

 

And I know that’s the case certainly in the United States, Mr. 

Speaker. And I say I know that because I have a number of 

relatives that live in the United States. I also have some very 

good friends down in Cedar Valle, Kansas. And my friends 

particularly are great sportsmen. They like to fish, not so much 

hunting, but they certainly like to do their fishing. 

 

And when up here they just, well they think they’ve gone to 

heaven when they come up here because we’ve taken them up 

fishing to some of the lakes in — I want to say northern 

Saskatchewan, but in the parkland area, just into the forest 

reserve — Parr Hill Lake for one, Townsend Lake for another, 

Smallfish for another, Spirit Lake, Good Spirit Lake also. But 

these are lakes in, you know, really in the southern part of the 

province, and though there’s a lot of agricultural activities in the 

area and so on and so forth, they’ve been well looked after. 

They’ve been maintained. They’re relatively free of pollutants. 

 

And I hope that we’re able to keep that because we, when my 

good friends from the States come up here and we go fishing, 

like I said, they think they’ve gone to heaven because they just 

can’t believe that you can catch a fish in those waters and head 

to shore and start a fire in the frying pan and do that fish right 

on the shores of the lake because they can’t do it down there. 

Those fish are so polluted that they simply catch them, but they 

don’t consume them because of the mercury and other 

chemicals that’s in the water and within the fish. But that’s not 

the case here. We really enjoy that uniqueness, I suppose, and 

of having pure fish, pure waters. 

 

And I hope we keep it that way. We have to work at it. It’s not 

something that’s going to just happen by itself. We have to be 

conscious of the decisions that we make around the 

environment. We have to ensure that we have good enforcement 

of the regulations, environment regulations, that we pass here 

based on the information provided to us by officials and those 

people across this great province. But we have to make sure that 

that enforcement is sufficient enough to ensure that our lakes do 

not get polluted and that we are able to enjoy fresh water and 

freshwater fish for many, many, many generations to come. 

 

I suppose that there are, you know, there’s always exceptions to 

that rule. We’re seeing some indication that some of the activity 

that’s going on in the tar sands in Alberta there is certainly 

causing some polluting problems within some of our freshwater 

areas in the northwest part of the province. And I would hope, 

Mr. Speaker, if that is the case, then there is discussions going 

on between our officials and those in Alberta that will stop that 

polluting and, if at all possible, reverse the tide because we 

certainly don’t want to see our fresh water polluted in any 

manner, shape, or form. 

 

It’s going to destroy a resource that we’ll never, never get back 

and a resource that we should be holding very, very precious to 

us because there are many areas in this world of ours who once 

enjoyed the same opportunity, once enjoyed the same fresh 

water, the same freshwater opportunities as fishing presents 

itself here that is no longer available because they didn’t look 

after it. They didn’t look after it. They lost control of it. The 

industry expanded too rapidly without the necessary safeguards 

to ensure that the water was not polluted. Polluting took place, 

and once there, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think you can reverse it 

totally. I know that modern science allows for certain cleanups 

and to improve situations. But I think once you’ve lost a 

freshwater source, you’ve lost it. You never get it back to the 

same level. 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4197 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that this government is aware of 

that and this government is taking those measures to ensure that 

the freshwater resources that we enjoy in this province — not 

only in the centre part of the province or in the South but that 

we enjoy right across this great province of ours — is protected 

and safeguarded so that they will be there for the wildlife, the 

fish life, the wildlife to be able to use into the future to ensure 

that through that, that’s one small part of ensuring that we have 

a strong, healthy, safe wildlife herd and/or schools of fish and 

that we have the ability to have wildlife that can survive on 

their own, in their native way, in the natural way here in this 

great province of ours for generations to enjoy well into the 

future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are, you know, there are a number of things 

that need to be discussed here. And I’m hoping that we will be 

able to enjoy the ability to maintain a strong wildlife herd as far 

as the hunting aspect of our industry is concerned. I hope that 

we can enjoy clean and pure waters as far as the fishing aspect 

of our industry is concerned. And I’m hoping that there will be 

the opportunity for trappers and for the trapping profession or 

industry to survive. 

 

[19:15] 

 

Now I know it’s under a lot of pressure with the drying up of 

the fur market and the fact that in Europe, which has always 

been the major market for furs out of North America, that 

market has really, really dried up in the last few years. And it’s 

dried up because there’s been kind of really an awareness or a 

conscious effort by those out there who oppose trapping and the 

killing of wildlife. 

 

And I suppose there is, you know, there’s some truth to that. 

You know, we all value life, and I think we all experience that 

life of any sort — whether it be a wild animal or whether it be 

others — certainly has a true value, certainly has a significant 

value. And, Mr. Speaker, at the same time I would hope that the 

experience of trappers, the trapping industry, won’t get lost in 

this particular period of time when there is no real demand for 

the furs and that industry is really drying up and starting to 

shrink. 

 

I had the opportunity when I was in Black Lake a couple years 

ago to talk to some of the individuals up there who, quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, the bulk of their income — up to that time 

at least — the bulk of their income would have been arrived to 

them through the trapping industry, by trapping of various 

fur-bearing animals that were in the area. And at that time — 

that was two years ago — at that time they were telling me that 

many of those who have traplines were no longer keeping them 

up, were no longer participating in trapping simply because 

there wasn’t any return there. In many cases, it was suggested to 

me that, in many cases, that a trapper would go out throughout 

the winter months and his entire success of that time spent 

trapping wouldn’t return him enough money to pay for the gas 

it took to operate his Ski-Doo during that period of time. They 

just couldn’t get enough money back out of the furs to pay for 

the Ski-Doo gas, never mind replacing the Ski-Doo or all the 

effort and work that went to it. 

 

So for course as a result of it, Mr. Speaker, many people quit 

and specifically they weren’t pursuing the trapping industry, 

and that’s understandable. That’s economics. But at the same 

time I would hope that there would be some mechanism to 

ensure that the techniques of trapping, the knowledge, the 

wisdom that’s been taught often from father to son, from 

generation to generation, doesn’t get lost during this period of 

time of low income or low prices, fur prices, because there’s a 

wealth of knowledge there that I don’t think we can learn 

anywhere else other than in the field, in a practical way, and 

that’s first-hand trapping. 

 

And of course if you don’t have that, you don’t have the ability 

for the elders to pass that information on to younger people, 

well it’ll get lost. And once lost, again, it’s going to be very 

hard to get back. With that information that is lost, then there’s 

less of a chance of an industry returning. 

 

So I would hope that . . . and I don’t have the answer to that, 

Mr. Speaker. I honestly I don’t have the answer to it. I just 

know what the issue is. I know what the problem is. I know up 

in my area there — I was born and raised, that I said earlier — 

many of my relatives through marriage used to hold traplines. 

Some still do. And some do a moderate bit of trapping. I think if 

they do it, more of a recreation now than actually attempt to 

generate revenue out of it. And it’s maybe an opportunity just to 

get out and enjoy the winter months and to ride the toboggan 

and just sort of maintain their cabin and catch a few fur, and do 

it simply because it’s something that they’ve always done and 

it’s a bit of a recreation. But no longer is there a real drive to 

ensure that the trapping gets done and that the fur gets harvested 

in a proper way. 

 

Years ago that was not the case. Years ago it was certainly a hot 

commodity with a trapline. And if a trapper was retiring or had 

a line up for sale, certainly his lease would never . . . You’d sell 

a lease. You don’t own the land. It was leased from the 

government. But they’d sell the lease, and the lease would fetch 

a pretty good dollar. 

 

That’s not the case today because the fur prices, having backed 

right off, there are many hunters who — and trappers I should 

say; pardon me, Mr. Speaker — not hunters but trappers who no 

longer really maintain their lease. I think many of them hold it. 

I don’t know if they’re even paying the fees on it any more or 

not. Many have dropped that. 

 

So it’s interesting because how time changes and how industries 

react to that time. Certainly at one time, it was very popular in 

the fashion runways around the world for models to be wearing 

furs, fur coats, etc., etc., and now that’s all gone to the side, Mr. 

Speaker, with the fact that furs are no longer the popular thing 

to wear. When that happens, of course the fur price is depressed 

dramatically now to the point where I don’t even know if 

there’s a market for furs. At one time, we used to have a fur 

exchange here in the city of Regina. I believe that’s closed 

down now. I think the only fur exchange that exists is in 

Winnipeg, and I think again that’s probably on a limited basis 

only. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is an interest that a government, for 

whatever reason, has decided to jam the opposition on this 

particular Bill. The Bill really only has five clauses in it, and if 

you take out the short title and you take out the coming into 

force, it’s down to three. 



4198 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

An Hon. Member: — There’s nothing left. 

 

Mr. Harper: — There’s not much left; that’s right. And yet the 

government has decided to jam the opposition and not give us 

the opportunity to have the ability to discuss this particular Bill 

with those people who are mostly affected — for our First 

Nations people, the Métis people, the people in the hunting 

industry, those people who belong to hunting organizations, 

sportsmen’s organizations. 

 

We don’t have the opportunity to talk to them. We don’t have 

the opportunity to talk to those people who . . . Hunting and the 

activity around hunting, the spinoff from that activity is 

important to them and their commerce, for example, those 

people in motels, who run motels, hotels, and lodges across this 

great province of ours who really look to that hunting season for 

the opportunity to really generate a fair amount of revenue 

because of the activity around there and the willingness of 

hunters to come and stay in a motel or stay in a lodge. 

 

Or even how this would affect the outfitters . . . We have 

outfitters across this great province of ours in south, centre, or 

north of the province that really depend upon that activity, 

depend upon the ability to have individuals come and take part, 

I guess you would say, in their services that they provide. And 

we really have a strong, an active outfitting industry in this 

province. 

 

When I did my tour up north two years ago in regards to 

northern overtime exemptions, that was one group that I had a 

lot of discussions with, and that was with the outfitting industry 

and the Saskatchewan outfitters’ industry whose head office is 

in Prince Albert. And I had the opportunity to meet with our 

chief executive officer on a number of occasions, but beyond 

that I was able to meet with many of the outfitting operators in 

the North on their turf in their own community, had discussions 

with them. 

 

And later that same year, I had the opportunity of attending 

their fall convention in Prince Albert. And I found that very 

interesting because they are truly sharp business people. They 

know their business; they know it well. Many of them have had 

years and years of experience in it. And they know that the 

importance of ensuring that they have a strong wildlife 

population because that’s the basis of their business. That’s the 

basis that draws customers to their businesses and to this great 

province of ours. And they don’t just rely certainly not on only 

local people. They rely on visitors from and customers from all 

across the world. 

 

One outfitter I was talking to at the convention there runs a nice 

operation up in northern Saskatchewan, another one in, another 

satellite operation in central Saskatchewan. And he was telling 

me that on a regular basis he will get contacts or calls or emails 

from people in Great Britain, Scotland, Europe. Germany is one 

of the countries that he had mentioned. Switzerland was another 

one, people who are looking at booking with him and coming to 

this great province for fishing. Fishing was a large part of it. 

They do a very, very active fishing business in the summer with 

people coming from all over the place, from Europe, from the 

United States to their business, to the lodges to participate in 

fishing and also in hunting. 

 

I was surprised. I didn’t realize this, but there was a fair amount 

of uptake on their ads and their offers and their packages from 

people from Europe. I know the United States, there’s a fair 

amount of outfitting industry in my old turf there where I was 

born and raised. And they too enjoy a good support from the 

Americans, or at least they have in the past enjoyed good 

support from American hunters and sportsmen. But I didn’t 

realize that the Europeans played such a large role in this 

particular industry too. And in talking with some of the 

outfitters, particularly in northern Saskatchewan, they’re telling 

me of the number of inquiries they would get from Europe, 

particularly from Scotland and from Great Britain. Germany 

seemed to be a country that was commonly mentioned also. 

 

So it seemed like it was pretty widespread, and they would look 

at coming into Saskatchewan here and participating in an 

outfitting holiday. Sometimes it was only a week and 

sometimes it was 10 days. And that you could imagine, Mr. 

Speaker, was really a benefit to them, to not only the outfitters 

but a benefit to our province here because what we have here is 

foreign dollars, money from Germany coming and being spent 

here in Saskatchewan, being left here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So that’s money from outside the province. There’s just not 

money in this province circulating between the individuals 

within this province. This is fresh money, new money coming 

from outside of Saskatchewan and being brought to this great 

province of ours. And it’s done through the tourism industry, 

done through wildlife and the maintenance of a strong wildlife 

herd here that was able to support a business on an ongoing 

basis, a thriving business in the outfitting industry. 

 

And outfitters, when you talk to them, Mr. Speaker, they fully 

realize that the basis of that operation is the animals themselves, 

the wildlife population that we have here themselves, whether it 

be the bear or deer, moose, elk, or in the summer months the 

fishing and the ability to enjoy pristine lakes and rivers that are 

pollutant free, that you can actually drink the water without any 

fear, that you can actually have fish in there that you can catch 

that fish and take it home or head to the shore and build a fire 

and do that fish right on the frying pan over an open fire, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It’s great because a lot of countries, people can’t do that. A lot 

of European countries can’t do that. A lot of Americans can’t 

do that because they’ve lost their fresh water. They’ve lost their 

fresh water because they didn’t have the rules and regulations or 

the enforcement in place to ensure that they were able to sustain 

that, sustain it for their own use but more importantly sustain it 

for future, for future generations. 

 

And I think that’s something that we all have a duty, we all 

have a duty to ensure that we don’t deprive the future because 

of mismanagement or mis-decisions or the greed of today. We 

owe that. That’s a duty that we all have. I think that maybe that 

duty is double enhanced when it’s on elected people. I believe 

that elected people carry even a greater responsibility to ensure 

that we have the rules in place, rules in place to ensure that the 

future generations will not be deprived of the opportunity to 

have that fresh fish, the opportunity to enjoy fresh water, the 

opportunity to enjoy big game in this great province of ours 

simply because we’ve made mistakes or we didn’t do what 

needed to be done at the time. That, Mr. Speaker, would be the 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4199 

worst possible legacy we could possibly leave for the future, is 

that we didn’t do the right thing to ensure that they had the 

opportunity to enjoy the benefits in this great province that we 

enjoy today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are just briefly some of the points that 

comes to mind and has been brought to my attention by the 

people of my great constituency, the people of Regina 

Northeast. I know, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said this before, but it 

bears repeating that whenever you travel this great province of 

Saskatchewan — it doesn’t matter where you go, it doesn’t 

matter what community you’re in — you’re going to meet 

warm and friendly and hospitable people. And I can say exactly 

the same thing for the fine folks of Regina Northeast. There are 

no better people in this great province than those who live in 

Regina Northeast, and I’m so fortunate and honoured to have 

the privilege of being able to represent them in this great 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and it is truly an honour and one that I 

hope I can, you know, begin to live up to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, wildlife and preserving of wildlife can only be 

done when we preserve the ability for those wildlife to continue 

to thrive and to live. In order to do that, we must ensure that we 

have a pollutant-free environment. But we also must make sure 

that we have land set aside to allow mother nature to do its 

thing — allow them to reproduce, allow them the safety and the 

sanctuary so that they can continue to reproduce and continue to 

maintain a strong and vibrant herd. 

 

And I’m thinking, Mr. Speaker, of the program that we have in 

place here already. It’s called the wildlife . . . It’s a wildlife 

preservation where we’ve set land aside for . . . it’s called 

wildlife land. I don’t know exactly the name of the program, but 

I do know that in my area we have several quarters of land set 

aside as wildlife land and it’s left alone. It’s not harvested. The 

timber isn’t harvested. It’s left alone. It’s left to the wildlife. It’s 

left to the wildlife to be able to find sanctuary there. It’s left to 

them to be able to breed there. It’s left to them to be able to 

have their calves there and to be able to raise them without the 

interference of man and hunting. 

 

[19:30] 

 

And where we . . . and I say we, I mean we in government here, 

alone there. There’s private industry that also is involved in the 

same thing, particularly when it comes to elk. I’m thinking of 

the Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation which purchases large 

chunks of land set aside simply for the purpose of elk and the 

raising of elk there. They allow hunting at hunting season. 

You’re allowed to hunt there. It’s on foot only, no machines. 

You’re not allowed to go hunting on your quad or with your 

half-ton truck or anything like that. It’s on foot only and they 

allow it. And that’s one way of ensuring that there’s a balance 

kept. The population is kept down within a manageable level 

and that the wildlife has the opportunity and has a place where 

they can find refuge, I guess you would say, and be able to 

reproduce themselves and be able to ensure that we have, on an 

ongoing basis, a strong and healthy herd in this big province of 

ours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s countless, countless number of issues that 

could be discussed in this particular Bill. And it worries me just 

a little bit, Mr. Speaker. This government over here worries me 

just a little bit because, as you know, in order to ensure that we 

have a strong industry — whether it be in the hunting aspect or 

fishing or trapping — in order to ensure a strong industry, we 

must ensure that we have a strong, healthy population of 

wildlife, wildlife that will continue to thrive and do its thing 

here in this province. And yet, Mr. Speaker, we see that this 

government is not as concerned — I guess you would say, 

maybe is the word to use — not as concerned about the level of 

the environment and the level of pollutants as perhaps they 

should be if we want to ensure that we have a strong and vibrant 

wildlife population in this great province of ours. 

 

Now this government has seen fit to break its promise on a 32 

per cent reduction of greenhouse gases by 2020 in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. Well what does that mean, Mr. Speaker, when 

they don’t enforce the commitment that they made during the 

election campaign of ensuring that we would have a 

pollutant-free environment in this great province, and they 

would do so by ensuring that the greenhouse gases emissions 

would be reduced by 2020? 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, the exact opposite happens. We have 

increased pollution, increased emissions. And what does that 

do? That pollutes our skies, our lakes, and our rivers. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s only the beginning. Then it leads into the food 

chain for the wildlife, and all of a sudden you have pollutants 

right through our entire environment. And then you have a 

situation where the wildlife population is no longer the strong 

and vibrant population it once was, but rather is a weak 

population that’s finding problems being able to survive 

because of illness and problems that didn’t exist before. But 

because of the basically poisoning of the environment, you’re 

seeing that become a reality. 

 

When that happens, of course then you lose hunting. When you 

no longer have a strong and healthy and vibrant herd of 

wildlife, then you no longer have the ability to attract hunters 

from afar. As I said earlier, those from the United States who 

come up here on a regular basis going hunting or those from 

Europe who come here wanting to hunt for that trophy, that 

white-tailed deer trophy or that big moose rack or that fine bull 

elk. Those are the things that attract those hunters here. Many of 

them, they’re coming after the trophy. They’re certainly not 

after the meat, but they’re after the trophy. But more 

importantly, they’re after the experience. They’re after the 

experience of hunting that type of wildlife in a wild atmosphere 

like what we enjoy in this great province of ours, particularly in 

the North. And in doing so, they enjoy it. It’s something that’s 

not available to them in New York City or London or Zurich or 

any of these communities. So it’s certainly an experience that 

they look forward to. 

 

And like I say, that is a very important part of our economy 

here because what that does is, Mr. Speaker, it brings in money 

into this province. It brings in, not circulates the money that we 

already have, but it brings in new money, foreign money, 

money from outside of Saskatchewan. In many cases, money 

from outside of Canada is brought here, so it’s a very strong and 

very important part of our economy. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as I have said there are many, many topics 

that need to be discussed here, and I’m sure that many of my 

colleagues would like to have the opportunity to touch on some 



4200 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

of these topics. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll move 

adjournment of debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast 

has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise of course to 

enter into the debate on Bill 117, An Act respecting Hunting, 

Fishing and Trapping. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think my colleague and friend from Regina 

Northeast referred to, at one point, the thousands of people 

watching this debate — of course by television, not in the 

galleries, Mr. Speaker. And some members across the way 

suggested that he might have been exaggerating the numbers, 

and he may very well have been, Mr. Speaker. I expect the 

audience is not in the thousands, Mr. Speaker. I expect the 

audience is not insubstantial though. 

 

We sometimes jokingly call the legislative channel the mothers’ 

network because only the mothers of MLAs [Members of the 

Legislative Assembly] watch it. Not my mother because she’s a 

resident of Florida, so maybe only 57 mothers watch the 

legislative channel. But that’s unfair as well. I think both of 

those are exaggerations. 

 

The member from Regina Northeast may have slightly 

exaggerated the number of people watching this debate when he 

said it was in the thousands. And calling the legislative channel 

the mothers’ network may be a little bit unfair exaggeration the 

other way. There are, we know, a number of people who watch 

and follow the proceedings of the Legislative Assembly, and 

there are a number of people who are watching and following 

this debate. And we will know that because constituents will 

talk to us about what we have said in the legislature, and a 

surprising number of people will actually do watch it from time 

to time. I don’t know if very many people have a steady diet of 

it, Mr. Speaker. Those of us who have a steady diet of it would 

understand if others did not care to do that if they were not 

required to. 

 

But a number of people do follow this debate and the debates 

that take place in this Legislative Assembly. And the people 

who follow these debates on a fairly regular basis will note 

some interesting things about this debate, Mr. Speaker. They 

will note that unusually we are debating the same Bill that we 

debated all throughout the afternoon. We’re debating it into the 

evening. We may be debating this Bill throughout the week. 

Conceivably — I haven’t done the math, Mr. Speaker, but — 

this may be the only Bill we debate this week, if government 

members continue to refuse to allow debate to be adjourned. 

And that’s unusual, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And why is that the case now? And why is that the case for this 

Bill, An Act respecting Hunting, Fishing and Trapping? 

Well the answer to that, Mr. Speaker, is not immediately 

obvious. It would think it would be because the government has 

decided this is the most important Bill on their agenda and they 

want to make sure that this Bill passes . . . if no other Bill 

passes, at least in the month of March, that this Bill passes. But 

I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that the reason that we’re debating this 

Bill at length today, at length this week perhaps, perhaps the 

only Bill or only one of two Bills that we will get to this week, 

is because this is the least important Bill to the government. 

And I’ll explain why I believe that. 

 

This is the least important Bill to the government and that’s 

why this Bill is up for special treatment today and perhaps this 

week, that this is a Bill that the government thinks is least 

worthy of consideration, least worthy of diligence on the part of 

anybody, including members of the opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

This is the Bill that they think there’s least amount to talk about. 

 

This is the Bill . . . I won’t say that they have contempt for this 

Bill because it’s their Bill. Obviously they won’t have contempt 

for it, but they do have some disregard and disrespect for this 

Bill. I mean they had to pick a Bill, I suppose, and I’ll come to 

why, Mr. Speaker. They had to pick a Bill to treat this way, and 

I suppose there might be other Bills they treat this way as well. 

Somebody, some Bill had to lose. Some Bill had to be the Bill 

they treated this way. 

 

But it’s this one, Mr. Speaker, and I think that’s unfortunate 

because this Bill . . . I don’t think the government appreciates 

the extent to which they have drafted a Bill which touches upon 

historic issues in the province of Saskatchewan and the 

relationship, in part, the historic relationship between the First 

Nations people and Métis people who make up the Aboriginal 

people of Saskatchewan, and the settlers and immigrants to this 

province and their descendents, Mr. Speaker. And this Bill 

speaks to that. 

 

This Bill speaks to our attitudes about the environment, Mr. 

Speaker, and this Bill speaks to the importance of symbols in 

politics and in our lives. And this is not a Bill that deserves no 

consideration, Mr. Speaker. That is because the government 

believes that it’s a Bill that deserves no consideration. But it is 

the Bill we are debating at length today to the exclusion of 

everything else on the government agenda, Mr. Speaker. All the 

legislation that the government would tell the people of 

Saskatchewan is important is not as important as debating this 

Bill — not because this Bill is important, but just because of the 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now people who follow the legislature closely and the 

proceedings of this Assembly will understand that this Bill, like 

many other Bills, receives . . . Under the rules of this House, 

agreements have been made between governments and 

oppositions and when parties play different roles in this 

legislature . . . that this Bill will get 20 hours of consideration. 

Twenty hours either here or in committee, but it is entitled to 20 

hours of consideration if members of this Legislative Assembly 

deem it important enough to get those 20 hours, Mr. Speaker. 

And the government members, I don’t think, believe that the 

legislation deserves that. They don’t think the Bill deserves that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the reason that we’re having this debate, the reason it’s on 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4201 

this Bill, is because the government has realized that once again 

they have a problem with managing their own agenda, Mr. 

Speaker. They have put in more legislation — legislation that 

they don’t treat with respect — but more legislation than they 

can get through this Legislative Assembly in the time allotted 

along with their budget. 

 

So once again, as they have done before, they seek to limit the 

ability of members of the Legislative Assembly, particularly 

members of the opposition, to debate legislation. Because under 

the agreement that was entered into, promoted strongly by the 

Saskatchewan Party when they were in opposition, if more time 

is required — if more time is required — to debate legislation 

that deserves consideration and respect and diligence on the part 

of members of the Legislative Assembly, then you add more 

days onto the session. And the members of the Legislative 

Assembly on this side of the House, on this side of the House, 

have said, we would be glad to sit here further into May, into 

June, into July to provide due consideration for the legislative 

agenda put forward by the government to this Legislative 

Assembly. We would do our part. 

 

But the members opposite, the government do not want to live 

up to the agreement that they promoted. No, they do not, Mr. 

Speaker. They do not want to add more days. They are willing 

to add more time. They want to add more hours — and we’ll 

have that resolution tomorrow apparently and we’ll have that 

debate — but why? Why, Mr. Speaker, will they not comply 

with the agreement? Why will they not agree with the 

opposition to do what the rules provide to have done, to add 

days to the legislative sitting? 

 

Well they’ve been fairly forthright on why not, Mr. Speaker. 

They have been very forthright about that. They don’t want the 

additional question periods, Mr. Speaker. They do not want to 

answer questions from this side of the House about what the 

government is doing, about what the government is not doing, 

and about the consequences of its actions and its omissions, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what they do not want. They do not want one 

more question period. So they want to add hours. They want to 

add hours, but they do not want to add days. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a Legislative Assembly in Canada — and I 

guess I’ll have another opportunity to speak to this — but a 

Legislative Assembly in Canada, in the British parliamentary 

tradition has a tension. The majority has a right. A majority has 

a right to pass its legislative agenda. A majority has a right to 

pass its budget, Mr. Speaker. But the minority has the right to 

hold the majority to account, to ask questions, and to get 

answers. And the plan of this government is to shut down this 

Legislative Assembly, this session, this sitting as quickly as 

possible to avoid that accountability. 

 

And to do that, Mr. Speaker, to do that and still cram through 

their legislative agenda, they have decided — as a tactic, as a 

tactic — to extend hours or to attempt to extend the hours. And 

as part of that tactic now to test the opposition’s resolve to 

actually provide due diligence and consideration to legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member to return to 

the Bill that’s up for debate, No. 117. I think there will be 

ample time for this other debate later on in the week. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the Act respecting hunting, 

fishing, and trapping is the Bill . . . The proposed Act is the Bill 

that we are now going to debate, have debated all day, will 

debate into the evening, will probably debate till 10:30 

adjournment, and we’ll probably debate it again this week and 

on and on, Mr. Speaker, the only legislation that we will debate. 

And the reasons we will do that I have outlined briefly I think, 

and I will move on to some of the specific clauses of the Bill. 

 

One of the interesting pieces about this particular Bill — and 

it’s similar to other Sask Party government legislation — is that 

the Bill contains a preamble. And this government likes 

preambles, Mr. Speaker, and there’s a reason why the preamble 

here and a preamble in other legislation brought by this 

government. And the fundamental difference or one of the 

fundamental differences — I shouldn’t say the fundamental 

difference because I think members on both sides of the House 

could identify a number — but a fundamental difference, one of 

them, between the members opposite and the members on this 

side of the House is that while the members opposite talk about 

restraint in government spending, fiscal conservatism, balanced 

budgets, the members on this side of the House when in 

government actually practise that. 

 

But another perhaps not so fundamental difference between this 

government and the previous government is this government’s 

love for preambles, Mr. Speaker, as in the preamble in An Act 

respecting Hunting, Fishing and Trapping. And the reason, I 

think, the government likes preambles so much, and the 

preamble in this Bill in particular so much, is because of the, 

perhaps, lack of substantive policy change set out in the Bill. 

 

I know that the Ministry of Justice, and formerly when I was 

attorney general, we were not too fond of preambles. The intent 

of legislation should be clear from the legislation. And if it’s 

not, if the purpose of the legislation is not clear from legislation, 

then what’s the point of the preamble? If the intent is clear, the 

preamble is superfluous. If the intent of this Bill is clear, the 

preamble is superfluous. And if the intent of the Bill is not 

clear, then the intent should be clear. It shouldn’t need a 

preamble, Mr. Speaker. So why a preamble? 

 

And the reason for preambles, Mr. Speaker, is because it’s a 

symbolic Bill. It’s about symbolism, and I don’t mean to 

diminish that, Mr. Speaker. I will speak about the importance of 

symbolism and the importance that it plays in this Bill and that 

it plays in legislation generally because what we say does 

matter, maybe not as much as what we do matters, but what we 

say does matter. 

 

But where the government likes preambles the most, where 

you’re most likely to see preambles as in this Bill, is where the 

Bill itself perhaps doesn’t have a great amount of substance. 

But the preamble is there, Mr. Speaker, and I think that it raises 

some very important issues, some issues of longstanding in the 

province of Saskatchewan, issues going back long before the 

province of Saskatchewan even existed, Mr. Speaker. And they 

are debatable, and I think they continue to be highly relevant. 

 

I think speakers on this Bill today, and on previous days already 



4202 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

in this sitting, have highlighted the relevance of the issues that 

are raised by the Bill that I hold, that the government is treating 

as a football in their political gain, in respect to shutting down 

the opposition and trying to cram through a legislative agenda. 

If anything, I mean the Bill is, at best, you could say a test case 

for their attempt to ram legislation through the House, Mr. 

Speaker. And even if the Bill did not raise important issues, 

even if the Bill did not have the symbolic importance that it 

does on areas of the environment, on areas of relationships 

between peoples in the province of Saskatchewan, even if it did 

not, because the government has chosen to use the Bill this way, 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill would receive this kind of close attention 

and diligence from members of the Legislative Assembly, or at 

least members of Legislative Assembly on this side of the aisle, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the first clause of the Preamble states, ―WHEREAS 

hunting, fishing and trapping have played important roles in 

shaping Saskatchewan’s social, cultural and economic 

heritage.‖ Mr. Speaker, a number of speakers have spoken to 

the history of northern Saskatchewan in relation to trapping, 

and I probably will want to comment on that. But I don’t 

believe any of the speakers have talked about the fundamental 

difference in roles that hunting played in the shape of the 

southern part of our province compared to the role that trapping 

played in the northern part of our province. 

 

And to just briefly touch upon the role of trapping and the fur 

trade, and I will come back to it, but particularly the reference 

to it in the first clause of the preamble — and speakers have 

spoken to this — about the economic trade relationship really 

between equals in northern Saskatchewan, northern Canada, in 

the exploitation of the fur trade and the trading relationship, 

which became family relationships and led to the origins of the 

Métis people in northern Canada and in particular, for the 

purposes of this legislation, important to the heritage of 

trapping and of hunting and fishing in Saskatchewan. 

 

That relationship is probably the first relationship and probably 

the most admirable relationship, the one we like to talk about 

because, as I said, it was a relationship more or less amongst 

equals, trading for a commodity and an important commodity 

— or at least it was considered to be important at the time — 

the beaver pelt. It was important enough to end up on the back 

of one our coins. And of course the fashion that spurred it on, 

pushed it on, was the fashion for beaver hats in Britain. 

 

And just a little bit about the cultural consequences of that, I 

mean, they are much broader than we think, I think often. 

Today there is again in the theatres another version of Alice in 

Wonderland which has the character of the Mad Hatter played 

this time by Johnny Depp. And the Mad Hatter was based on 

the fact that there was an occupational hazard to making beaver 

pelts into hats. They used mercury, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the 

origin of the insanity of the mad hatter. So we, you know, think 

of culture as something as kind of archaic . . . you know, 

something we drag out for tourists. But the cultural legacy of 

the fur trade is in Victorian England and in literature of 

Victorian England and now in movies about a children’s story, 

perhaps. Mr. Speaker, the cultural legacy is far-reaching on 

these matters. 

 

But I wanted to talk about, a little bit about the very different 

effect, the very different legacy of hunting in southern 

Saskatchewan because although northern Saskatchewan was the 

first part of the province — not then yet a province — that was 

where Europeans travelled, traded, worked with, intermarried 

with the First Nation people that were there. And the oldest 

church in Saskatchewan is in northern Saskatchewan. It wasn’t 

as if Europeans worked their way across the Prairies and then 

ventured north. Europeans first came through the river system 

and only later came to the South. 

 

And when they came to the South, they hunted. And what did 

they hunt, Mr. Speaker? They hunted — I guess I shouldn’t use 

air quotes for Hansard — they hunted bison, Mr. Speaker. And 

they nearly decimated the herds. And when they destroyed the 

herds — not just in Saskatchewan and Manitoba and Alberta 

but throughout North America — they destroyed the food 

source of the First Nations people of the Plains. They 

eliminated that food source. And those people, fiercely 

independent people with great traditions on the Plains hunting 

the bison were deprived of the very source of their livelihood 

and forced to be dependent upon either the American 

government or the British Crown. 

 

Now I suppose to the credit of our ancestors and to the 

American government of the day — maybe to a lesser extent 

given some of the history there — it was recognized that this 

was not empty land, that there had been people there. And 

although they were now deprived of the source of their food and 

the source of their livelihood, they were people to whom the 

British Crown had an obligation. 

 

And treaties were entered into, Mr. Speaker, and there’s a 

reference to those treaties — and I think importantly — in 

legislation that talks about hunting and trapping, recognition of 

those treaties and acknowledgement of them in the Bill, An Act 

respecting Hunting, Fishing and Trapping. 

 

Now those treaties were observed as much in the breach as they 

were in the observance decade after decade after decade. And 

it’s not recognized as much by those of us who are descendents 

of immigrants, but everyone who lives here is a treaty person. 

Members of First Nations are acutely aware of being treaty 

people, but we’re not so aware of being treaty people. But we 

are. And it falls upon us, I think, today to acknowledge that 

better. And we do acknowledge that, Mr. Speaker, and it was 

acknowledged in the Constitution Act, 1982, and the references 

here in the Bill. And in a way, this Bill, in its reference to the 

rights of Aboriginal people, in its reference to treaties, in its 

reference to section 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982, in its 

reference to the social, cultural, and economic heritage of 

fishing, hunting, and trapping is really about that historic 

relationship and what has been accomplished and what remains 

to be accomplished, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Now treaties without observance on both sides are just pieces of 

paper. And section 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982, without 

recognition of its value, is just a piece of paper. And the 

government, by referring to section 35 of the Constitution Act, 

1982, by referring to the treaty rights and Aboriginal rights of 

Aboriginal people to hunt, fish, or trap, or any of their other 

rights, well that’s just a reference and piece of paper, Mr. 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4203 

Speaker. And if they don’t respect this legislation, and if this 

legislation, if this Bill is all they’re going to do, if this Bill 

exists in empty space, then as some speakers before me have 

referred to, this Bill borders on being an insult to those people 

and to that relationship, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The importance of hunting and trapping . . . I think if you think 

about the development of southern Saskatchewan, if you think 

about the development in northern Saskatchewan . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Remember the ’82 constitutional 

discussion. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Yes. And a member reminds me about the 

’82 discussion about the inclusion of section 35. And when I get 

to clause 3, if I get to it tonight, if I get to clause 3 . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — That part I find especially interesting. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — I find it interesting as well. The member says 

he finds it interesting. I have to admit I find it interesting too, 

although the member doesn’t have my excuse. I’m a lawyer and 

when people mention the constitution, it’s not like fingernails 

going down a blackboard. The member’s interest in the 

constitution, I think, is admirable, Mr. Speaker, admirable 

because the member in question isn’t a lawyer . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well my heart is warmed by members of the 

Legislative Assembly who have an interest in constitutional law 

and who are not lawyers. I’m overcome, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Anyway when the former member from Cumberland, Joan 

Beatty, came to this House — and she was elected same year as 

the Minister of Enterprise; the Minister of Justice; some other 

members of the House, the survivors of 2003, myself, the 

member from Regina Walsh Acres — when she came to this 

House, she noted the social and cultural references to the British 

Crown, to the partnership of the English and the French, the 

founding people of Canada. But she did not see in this 

Chamber, she did not see in this Chamber a recognition of the 

people who had lived, hunted, fished, trapped on this land for 

thousands of years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

John Ralston Saul calls Canada a Métis nation. And that’s a 

difficult phrase, at least for me to understand, and I’m not sure I 

can explain it. Mr. Saul is a more sophisticated thinker than I 

am by far. I don’t think he was suggesting that we’re Métis. 

There’s a very small group of people, even in the province of 

Saskatchewan, who are, proportionally. But I think he was 

talking about how this government was shaped, or how this 

country was shaped, excuse me, Mr. Speaker, how this country 

was shaped by people who hunted, fished, and trapped. 

 

And particularly in the case of trapping, Mr. Speaker, those 

people were Europeans, those people were First Nations. And 

they worked together and they were involved in a global trade, 

a trade that might start up at Cumberland House but ended up 

on the streets of London, Mr. Speaker. That’s the history of our 

country. That was the beginning of our country. And our 

country had to accommodate — it’s compelled, I think, by 

morality to accommodate — the people that were first here. 

And that partnership and that accommodation make us in Mr. 

Saul’s view a Métis nation. 

 

And I think that’s what the former member of Cumberland 

knew but could not see in this House. And it’s because of her 

. . . because I remember saying to her well I don’t know what to 

do about it. The Speaker controls the Chamber in that respect; 

she should go to the Speaker. But it’s because of her – and I 

assume that’s how she followed up; I don’t know — that there 

is a mace runner and there is a beaver pelt next to the mace, the 

symbol of parliamentary independence now combined with 

symbols of the origins of all the people of Canada, all the 

people of Saskatchewan on that Table. 

 

And that is the type of issue, that is the issue that this legislation 

addresses. That is the issue that this legislation brings up. I 

think when the government drafted this legislation, they 

thought, well we’ll throw out some nice words there — social, 

culture, and economic heritage. Nobody will debate them. 

Nobody will look behind them. Nobody will examine whether 

we’re providing any meaning or substance behind these words 

that are in the preamble. 

 

And this is a perfect Bill to use to test the opposition’s 

determination to do its job to hold the government to account. 

This is the Bill we can use because this Bill really means 

nothing to the government. It really means nothing to them. 

And that is ironic because, just in that first sentence of the 

preamble, I think this is a fundamental Bill about historic 

relationships which have not been treated properly by the 

dominant partner and we all continue to reap the whirlwind 

today. Some of us suffer more than others, Mr. Speaker, but 

that’s the nature of injustice. 

 

Now the reason that there’s a preamble to this Bill is because 

this is a government that doesn’t want to take substantive action 

if it can take symbolic action instead. And if a slogan will not 

buy off somebody, well we’ll give them a day, Mr. Speaker. 

And that’s what this legislation does. It gives a day — not a 

holiday, just a day — that might provide a photo op for the 

Premier of Saskatchewan at some point on a November 15th. 

 

But that’s all that it’s for. There’s no intent to do anything. 

There’s no intent to change any policy. There’s no intent to 

change any law. I think that will become clear as you work your 

way through the Bill. As a matter of fact, just the opposite. It’s 

a Bill that says, status quo, status quo, status quo, heritage day, 

Mr. Speaker. I mean that’s it in a nutshell — the statement of 

the current circumstance, that nothing changes in the current 

circumstance except that, amongst all the other things that 

November 15th might be on the calendar, it will also now be 

now Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Day in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That’s what the government likes to do on so many fronts, Mr. 

Speaker, and on this one, is to take symbolic action to say 

something. If they can’t do it in a slogan to escalate . . . as I say, 

to a day. And that’s the source of this legislation, and that’s the 

reason why it has a preamble. 

 

Now the second clause of the preamble — and I may have to 

return to the first clause because it’s fundamentally important 

— but the second clause of the preamble states that 

―WHEREAS hunters, fishers and trappers have made important 

contributions to the understanding, conservation, restoration 

and management of Saskatchewan’s fish and wildlife 



4204 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

resources.‖ Now I think a previous speaker from Cumberland, 

the current member from Cumberland spoke of this 

government’s true regard or lack thereof for the contribution 

made by hunters, fishers, and trappers on the issues of 

understanding, conservation, restoration, and management of 

Saskatchewan’s fish and wildlife resources. 

 

The member from Cumberland made the point quite eloquently 

earlier today that the government is acting as if they think that 

the people who hunt, fish, and trap for their livelihood know the 

least about the conservation, restoration, and management of 

Saskatchewan’s fish and wildlife resources. The preamble 

suggests otherwise, but their action, the member from 

Cumberland did say today, is the reverse. 

 

I think the statement is true. The government may not actually 

believe it. They may not demonstrate it in their actions, but the 

statement is true. Hunters, fishers, and trappers have made 

important contributions to understanding, conserving, restoring, 

and managing Saskatchewan’s fish and wildlife resources, and 

they could do so in the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the environment of Saskatchewan, as we know, is rapidly 

changing, more rapidly than a few years ago we would have 

believed possible, Mr. Speaker. I think many members of 

government continue to be in denial of that fact, but the denial 

has become very quiet. There are a number of things that 

members opposite probably still continue to believe, have 

certainly stated that they believed in the past, but are no longer 

willing to be so explicit about in their beliefs and in statements 

about their beliefs. 

 

I think the majority of people in this Legislative Assembly — 

and certainly one member on the government side, not a 

minister but the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood — do 

recognise that there is substantial change in the environment, 

substantial change in the climate both globally and locally, and 

of course locally here in Saskatchewan. And this is fundamental 

to the issues of understanding conservation, restoration, and 

management of our resources — all our resources, all our 

natural resources, all the living resources at least, dependent 

upon an environmental balance and how this is changing. 

 

I think it was the member from Regina Northeast who talked 

about the irrevocability of over hunting and the few whooping 

crane that work their way north from Texas to northern 

Saskatchewan and back again, and how their arrival and how 

many of them arrive is so closely examined every year in our 

province. And of course a population like that, that was not — 

until almost too late — treated with respect by certainly the 

dominate culture in Canada and in Saskatchewan, is very much 

at risk of environmental change. 

 

But environmental change is affecting all wildlife resources, the 

wildlife resources referred to in the preamble of An Act 

respecting Hunting, Fishing and Trapping. Stories are being 

written now about communities in northern Saskatchewan or in 

northern Canada that are now seeing polar bears very far south, 

further south than they’ve ever been seen before or at least 

recorded and remembered by the Aboriginal people who have 

occupied the area for centuries. 

 

And I misspoke myself when I said Saskatchewan in reference 

to polar bears. But I was just recalling the other day, and some 

other members may recall, the story from a few years ago about 

some people who were fishing on Lac La Ronge — I believe it 

was Lac La Ronge — and were pursued by a very skinny polar 

bear and only escaped, only escaped because they had a motor 

on the canoe. And nobody would have believed that story 

except they also had a video camera. And that bear was lost. 

But bears are moving further south, not as far south as that in 

most cases, but in that case. 

 

But I’ve noted on my drive now to Regina from Saskatoon, to 

come here to the Legislative Assembly, that the signs have 

changed. The crossing signs have changed near Dundurn. Mr. 

Speaker, I think they probably have changed in your 

constituency. 

 

There used to be a sign with a deer, a silhouette of a deer — not 

an actual deer, Mr. Speaker, but a silhouette of a deer on the 

sign — on the sign. And there’d be a number of them and 

properly so, Mr. Speaker. Because after the bison were 

decimated, almost wiped out, and farming broke the land, 

white-tailed deer found that to be a very accommodating 

environment and moved up into Saskatchewan, and there are 

still a number of deer along that highway. And unfortunately 

some of them come colliding into vehicles — or vehicles 

collide into them is perhaps more fair to put it — and at best 

there’s property damage and at worst there’s a loss of life, not 

only on the part of the deer but on the part of the driver and 

perhaps the passengers of the vehicle. 

 

[20:15] 

 

But now those signs have been replaced, Mr. Speaker, with the 

silhouette of a moose, and for good reason, Mr. Speaker. 

Because outside of Saskatoon, to the south of Saskatoon on the 

prairies, there have been, I’ve seen the carcass of a moose on 

the side of the highway. It’s been obviously hit by a vehicle and 

killed. And now on the highways, you’ll see roadkill — not just 

porcupines, an occasional muskrat or a fox, but raccoons, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t remember there being raccoons in 

Saskatchewan when I was a child. I don’t remember having to 

worry about hitting a moose south of Prince Albert when I was 

a child, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The environment in Saskatchewan is changing in ways that are 

not so subtle, perhaps not so severe as the Arctic but not so 

subtle either. And whatever experience, whatever knowledge 

anyone can bring to these issues, particularly the knowledge 

that can be brought by people who live with the resource — 

hunters, fishers, and trappers, who are not always but are often 

Aboriginal people — well that knowledge and that experience 

should be valued. And it’s only proper that the government Bill 

values that knowledge. 

 

But as the member from Cumberland pointed out, this is the 

only place that they acknowledge it, Mr. Speaker. They don’t 

acknowledge it anywhere else. They don’t acknowledge the 

importance of the environment anywhere else. And they don’t 

acknowledge the contribution that can be made by Aboriginal 

hunters, fishers, and trappers or others anywhere else. As a 

matter of fact, they contradict it in all their other actions, Mr. 

Speaker. So we get a symbolic Bill with a nice preamble that 

recognizes the importance of this understanding. But what 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4205 

environmental action do we get from this government? 

 

Forget the commitments of the previous government, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s the previous government. And as the members 

opposite are fond of reminding us, there was an election and 

they won it. We did not. The Premier of Saskatchewan has the 

confidence of this legislature for the time being, Mr. Speaker. 

So forget the commitments of the previous government. Forget 

the actions the previous government was taking on climate 

change and other environmental issues. 

 

This government, the Saskatchewan Party government, has 

broken almost every environmental promise it made — from 

green vehicles for government to greenhouse emissions — Mr. 

Speaker, their own promises. Not just the actions taken by the 

previous government, not just the commitments made by the 

previous government — their own commitments to the people 

of Saskatchewan on green vehicles and greenhouse gases. 

 

The member from Thunder Creek had something very witty to 

say about gases, so I trust he’ll be entering this debate at some 

point. 

 

The next clause of the preamble — I might actually get through 

the preamble this evening, Mr. Speaker — the next clause of the 

preamble talks about . . . Well I’ll read it, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

brief. ―WHEREAS the best traditions of hunting, fishing and 

trapping should be valued by . . .‖ [Inaudible interjection] . . . 

The member from Cypress Hills says that I’m a typical lawyer.  

 

And I know the member from Cypress Hills very well. And the 

member knows, because I’ve spoken about this, Mr. Speaker, 

the member knows I hold him in the highest regard. I think that 

we . . . I know, Mr. Speaker, that we disagree on many things, 

disagree on many things. I think the member from Cypress Hills 

and I know about as much about the practical effects or 

practical procedures in hunting, each as to the other. 

 

Anyways I digress a little bit, Mr. Speaker. But the member 

from Cypress Hills entered the debate from his desk, so I hope I 

will be accommodated a little bit. I hold him in the highest 

regard. He knows that. I’ve said that in this House before, 

although we disagree on many things. So I know when he 

makes a remark like that, that he does mean it in the nicest 

possible way. So I take no offence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now if I may proceed to be a typical lawyer, Mr. Speaker, and I 

won’t say without further interruption because I recognize the 

right of members to interject from their seats on occasion. I take 

no offence at that either, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Oh but I do forget where I was, so I might have to return to the 

first clause of the preamble and work my way back down to the 

. . . Oh no, it was the third, it was the third clause of the 

preamble: ―WHEREAS the best traditions of hunting, fishing 

and trapping should be valued by future generations,‖ Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Again another fine sounding phrase from the Government of 

Saskatchewan contained in a Bill which I think we have 

demonstrated they have very little regard, Mr. Speaker — ―. . . 

the best traditions of hunting, fishing and trapping should be 

valued by future generations,‖ Mr. Speaker. And I think that the 

government seriously thinks that well if nobody really 

addresses their mind to this Bill, that they will believe that the 

declaration of a Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Day, 

as they declare in section 4 of the Bill, will ensure that the best 

traditions of hunting, fishing, and trapping will be valued by 

future generations. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that won’t do that. We know that’s 

not enough. Tradition, if it’s going to be a living tradition, Mr. 

Speaker, has to have a basis to survive. No one’s going to 

remember or care or learn from or value or understand, even, 

the best traditions of fishing if you can’t fish in Saskatchewan. 

And a day won’t do it, Mr. Speaker. And no one is going to 

remember the best traditions of hunting or care about them or 

be able to learn from them if no one can engage in them, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I appreciate that the vast majority of people of 

Saskatchewan, particularly as the province becomes more 

urban, may not ever — like the member from Cypress Hills or I 

— hunt or trap. Maybe they’ll rarely fish, although that’s hard 

to believe. As one of the speakers, I think the member from 

Regina Northeast, commented, that the province is blessed with 

thousands of lakes, as is our neighbouring province of 

Manitoba. And it’s a major part of the recreational life of so 

many Saskatchewan people to go to the lake and often to fish 

there. 

 

An American comic once asked the question to a Canadian 

audience, when you Canadians go to the lake, is it the same 

lake? I guess that’s just not an American expression, Mr. 

Speaker — going to the lake. But it’s a Canadian expression, 

and I think it’s a Canadian expression for a reason. It’s because 

we live, most of us, very close to the American border, along a 

thin line along the American border. Most of us never see the 

most northern part of our country. But we live along another 

border — a border with the forest, a border with the North, a 

border with the lakeland. And that is, I think, a living part of a 

much broader tradition for a much broader group of people in 

the province than perhaps hunting and certainly trapping is. 

 

But these traditions will only survive if they’re practiced. If we 

stop practicing a tradition, if we give up a tradition, if we don’t 

pass it on to our children or if we cannot pass it on to our 

children, then the tradition dies. The tradition, like a language 

that’s never spoken, that no one can learn how to speak because 

they never hear it spoken, the tradition dies. The culture that 

goes with the tradition dies. The language, the words around the 

tradition die. 

 

And you don’t save them by declaring a day, Mr. Speaker. You 

save them by preserving the basis for them. And the basis for 

much of our traditions of hunting, fishing, and trapping, and the 

best of our traditions as different peoples coming together, are 

in the environment of northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

And where is this government’s commitment to that 

environment without which those traditions cannot carry on, 

Mr. Speaker? Where is it? There is no issue that this 

government is more silent on. And they are silent on a number 

of issues, but there is no issue that they are more silent on than 

the threats to our northern environment, to its air and to its 

water from activities to the west, Mr. Speaker. 

 



4206 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

Now this government doesn’t even know, what are the 

consequences of the oil sands on northern Saskatchewan? This 

government doesn’t know what affects on the air. This 

government doesn’t know what affects on the water because 

this government doesn’t want to know, Mr. Speaker. The 

government doesn’t want to know. Because if it did know and 

the people of Saskatchewan knew, then the government would 

have to take some action. The government would have to take a 

position. The government would have to admit what balances 

they struck, what trade-offs they made, and what trade-offs, 

benefits go to people outside of the province of Saskatchewan, 

and what costs are paid to people inside Saskatchewan, and the 

cost particularly paid to the people of northern Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can’t talk about the devastation that might be being cost, and I 

wouldn’t want to be hysterical or exaggerated, Mr. Speaker, but 

the government doesn’t monitor water quality. The government 

doesn’t monitor air quality because the government doesn’t 

want to know, Mr. Speaker. What the government wants to do, 

because it costs them nothing, is say that we respect the best 

traditions of hunting, fishing, and trapping, and we will go this 

far. We won’t just repeat a slogan, and duty to consult is a 

slogan to this government, Mr. Speaker. I’ll come to that. 

 

We’ll give a day. And if this day isn’t good enough, I expect 

we’ll get a day for northern Saskatchewan, heritage day for 

northern Saskatchewan. But that is not going to preserve 

anything for future generations, Mr. Speaker. And the context 

of this Bill — what my high school art teacher would’ve called 

the negative space in which this object exists — the context for 

this Bill is inaction and what lawyers call, for the benefit of the 

member from Cypress Hills, wilful blindness. Mr. Speaker, 

wilful blindness. 

 

The government doesn’t want to know. And what the member 

from Cypress Hills may also know, as well as the term and what 

the term means, is that it’s not a defence. As a matter of fact, 

it’s not negligence, Mr. Speaker; it’s above negligence because 

you choose to be wilfully blind. And wilful blindness actually 

can be the basis of criminal responsibility, Mr. Speaker. I’m not 

suggesting that the omissions here are criminal, except in the 

broad or rhetorical sense, Mr. Speaker — not technically 

criminal, although some people might wish that they were. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, to the extent that there’s meat . . . Not 

finally on the Bill, not finally on the Bill, but finally on the 

preamble, Mr. Speaker, the last clause of the preamble which 

comes to, I suppose, to what meat there is in this Bill. ―AND 

WHEREAS, it is desirable to observe a day to celebrate 

hunting, fishing and trapping as an integral part of 

Saskatchewan’s heritage.‖ 

 

[20:30] 

 

This is, Mr. Speaker, where all the well-sounding phrases, they 

finally come to the grand culmination in more than just a mere 

slogan, Mr. Speaker, but an actual day. An actual heritage day, 

Mr. Speaker, to celebrate hunting, fishing, and trapping as an 

integral part of Saskatchewan’s heritage. 

 

Well we certainly don’t disagree that it’s an integral part of 

Saskatchewan’s heritage. I think speaker after speaker on this 

side of the House talked about the fundamental role that these 

activities, these industries played in the making of our province, 

the making of our current economy, the making of our current 

society, partnerships, and to a certain extent failed relationships 

that currently exist in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so for all that deserves a day in the view of the 

government, it doesn’t deserve substantial environmental 

legislation. It doesn’t deserve the government keeping its 

promises on environmental legislation or environmental action, 

doesn’t deserve a monitoring and close watch and due diligence 

on the state of the northern environment, Mr. Speaker. In the 

view of the government, it doesn’t deserve any of those things. 

What it deserves is a day. It’s a rhetorical statement. And again, 

Mr. Speaker, I said I didn’t wish to diminish the importance of 

symbols, symbolic action, and words. And it may sound like 

that because I seem dismissive of what’s in this legislation. 

 

I think symbolism is important. Symbolic actions are important. 

I think words are important. I think other symbols are important 

as well, and that’s why I commented on the new symbols that 

were brought into the House since I have been here that reflect 

the heritage more accurately of the people of Saskatchewan in 

this Chamber, in this Legislative Assembly. I think symbols are 

important and statements of principle are important that are said 

on this Bill. I think they are important. I think they’re important 

to politics, Mr. Speaker. I would say to a well-balanced political 

diet, Mr. Speaker, they are important. But without substantial 

policy, alone, Mr. Speaker, symbols are thin gruel. As part of a 

balanced political diet, I think they are important, Mr. Speaker. 

For without substantial policy . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

The member from Indian Head-Wolseley wants to enter the 

debate as well. 

 

They are important, but on their own, Mr. Speaker — and the 

Minister of Health might appreciate this — on their own, 

they’re an insufficient diet. And the government I think is at 

risk of suffering from political rickets, Mr. Speaker. Political 

rickets, because they are trying to survive on so many issues — 

on statements of principle, on slogans, on symbols — with so 

little substantial sustenance behind them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now once one gets past the preamble, Mr. Speaker, and the 

government invites debate on preamble by putting it here. And 

government members may wish that they hadn’t had to listen to 

the last hour of discussion, but it’s their Bill, Mr. Speaker. They 

thought that, well they could make it look like something 

substantial, a whole page by making half a page of preamble 

that set out some nice-sounding phrases about principles, about 

symbols, about things that the government cares about enough 

to declare a day — enough to recognize that they are important, 

but not enough to do anything about in a substantial way in 

areas of responsibility of the government such as the 

environment. But that’s the government’s decision, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s the government’s decision to use this Bill to 

test the resolve of this opposition to examine the legislative 

agenda of this government, which is not just our right but our 

duty and our responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But once one gets past a preamble, what everyone might think 

of that, and moves on to what would have to be called, because 

everything is relative, substantive parts of the Bill. Moving on 

to numbered clause 2, section 2, proposed section 2(1): ―A 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4207 

person has the right to hunt, fish and trap in accordance with the 

law as it exists from time to time.‖ 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I perhaps unfairly sum this Bill up as 

statement of sentiment — status quo, status quo, status quo, 

declare a day. This clause, the person has a right to hunt, fish, 

and trap in accordance with law as it exists from time to time, is 

the first status quo clause. This provides no new right. This 

changes no law. This has no effect whatsoever; like the 

preamble, exists perhaps to make the Bill a page long, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

―A person has the right to hunt, fish and trap in accordance with 

the law as it exists from time to time.‖ So a ―person has the 

right to hunt, fish and trap in accordance with the law as it 

exists from time to time.‖ And there, Mr. Speaker, is a 

statement that a person’s right to hunt, fish, and trap is whatever 

their right is under the law. Doesn’t change the law. Doesn’t 

change the right. Doesn’t do anything, Mr. Speaker. Why is it 

there, Mr. Speaker? Why is it there? 

 

Well really, Mr. Speaker, the Legislative Assembly and 

legislation and the people of Saskatchewan and the law do not 

deserve to be treated to legislation that is superfluous and 

redundant, legislation that does nothing, that is brought in solely 

for the purpose of bringing in legislation, solely for the purpose 

of making a political statement on the part of the government. 

The whole Bill cannot be criticized on that basis because the 

Bill declares a heritage day, but this clause exists for no reason. 

That’s not good enough for the government. 

 

Perhaps it’s not long enough for the government, Mr. Speaker, 

because then there’s a subsection that follows that: ―The 

reference to the law in subsection (1) includes . . .‖ Now this 

isn’t the complete list of the laws because I don’t think anybody 

in the government wanted to sit down and figure out what laws 

touch upon the rights of the wildlife of hunting, fishing, and 

trapping in province of Saskatchewan. I don’t think they wanted 

to do that. 

 

But they highlighted a few, Mr. Speaker, but it’s not an 

exclusive list, I don’t imagine. I think I could probably add 

some other legislation that touches upon those rights that’s not 

listed here. The government decided to list, and again perhaps 

just to lengthen the length of the Bill: The Wildlife Act, 1998; 

The Fisheries Act, Saskatchewan, 1994; the Fisheries Act, 

Canada; the Migratory Birds Convention Act, 1994, Canada. 

Now some of these Acts are provincial Acts, Mr. Speaker. 

These Acts are in reference to matters that can be under 

provincial jurisdiction or federal jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker. The 

Wildlife Act, provincial legislation. The Fisheries Act, 

Saskatchewan provincial legislation because fish within the 

province, particularly freshwater fish in our lakes, may live 

their entire lives within the province. Other fish may be 

interprovincial, and because of the salt water fishery, it’s a 

shared jurisdiction with the federal government. And so we get 

federal legislation, the Fisheries Act, Canada. 

 

Now how the Fisheries Act of Canada could possibly impinge 

upon any of the concerns, the principles, the sentiments set out 

in the preamble, I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. How they could 

possibly have impinged upon the heritage day proposed by the 

Bill, I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. 

So why this list of legislation, Mr. Speaker? Again, just to make 

the legislation look more substantive, make it look more 

important. Ironically, Mr. Speaker, because as I have said this is 

legislation that the government is treating with complete 

disregard and disrespect, the only reason this legislation is 

brought forward in this manner — being debated throughout 

this day, into this evening, perhaps for the balance of the week, 

perhaps to the exclusion of any other legislation, Mr. Speaker 

— is as part of a tactic of the government to test the resolve of 

the opposition to live up to our right, our duty, to examine 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. That’s the only reason. 

 

And the reference to these other pieces of legislation within the 

Bill, the reference to people’s right to hunt, fish, and trap in 

accordance with the law, it’s just here as mere words . . . 

[inaudible] . . . just words to make the Bill longer, Mr. Speaker, 

to suggest there’s some substance with it. 

 

There is no statement, Mr. Speaker, that would be more 

superfluous than one can imagine than that statement in 

legislation that says that a person’s rights exist in accordance 

with the law as it exists from time to time. Well of course, Mr. 

Speaker, of course they exist in accordance with the law from 

time to time. How else would they exist? What law that doesn’t 

exist would they be in accordance with, Mr. Speaker? It’s a 

sentence that I suppose is true, I suppose is maybe even 

marginally relevant to the issue of hunting, fishing, and trapping 

since it refers to that right, but it’s completely unnecessary, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Then of course the reference to various, various laws. And the 

Migratory Birds Convention Act, 1994, Canada, is somewhat 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, and I feel that I can discuss it briefly 

because it’s referred to in the Bill that’s before us. The 

Migratory Birds Convention Act is Canadian legislation about a 

matter — that’s wildlife — in Saskatchewan, ducks and geese, 

for example, that would fall under provincial jurisdiction, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And why do they fall under federal jurisdiction? Well a 

question that people who are interested in constitutional law . . . 

And I was quite happy to learn that there are members of the 

Legislative Assembly who are interested in constitutional law. 

It’s because of the treaty making power of the federal 

government. 

 

I’ve spoken briefly about the treaties between the British Crown 

and First Nations in Canada and of course in the province of 

Saskatchewan, while I was on my feet, but this treaty is with the 

United States in regard to migratory birds, Mr. Speaker. And if 

the federal government makes a treaty, then the matter that’s 

governed by the treaty, even though it falls under provincial 

jurisdiction, because it’s governed by the treaty, the federal 

treaty making power trumps the provincial legislation. 

 

The Migratory Birds Convention Act which existed before 1994 

— I mean this is the most recent form of it — was the 

legislation that established the federal government’s ability to 

affect provincial jurisdiction in free trade agreements, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think it was firmly established by their ability to 

move forward with legislation affecting wildlife, and no dispute 

that that legislation governs the rights of people in 

Saskatchewan. 



4208 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

The rights might vary depending on whether those Aboriginal 

rights or rights that otherwise accord with law as set out in this 

Bill . . . The Migratory Birds Convention Act does remind one 

of a story that I think sort of elucidates the discussions that took 

place about constitutional law in the country before the 

Constitution Act in 1982, when the big concern and debates 

around constitutional law were about provincial and federal 

jurisdiction, as this legislation was, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:45] 

 

And it was about international students who were asked to write 

an essay about the elephant. And the British student wrote an 

essay called, if I remember, ―The Elephant and the British 

Empire‖; the French student about the love life of elephants; the 

American student about raising elephants for profit. And a 

Canadian student, his essay was entitled ―Elephants, a Federal 

or Provincial Responsibility.‖ And that was the typical 

Canadian debate and still continues on to be the typical 

Canadian debate. 

 

Whose jurisdiction is this? Is it federal? Is it provincial? This 

legislation of course when it talks about this Bill, the Act 

respecting hunting, fishing, and trapping, when it talks about 

the rights that people have to hunt, fish, and trap that exist in 

accordance with the law, Mr. Speaker, has to refer to provincial 

and federal legislation because of that concurrent overlapping 

jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker. But really, how is the Migratory 

Birds Convention Act, 1994 or in any of its other forms since it 

was first created or the regulations made pursuant to that Act, 

how did they affect the Bill in respect to Hunting, Fishing and 

Trapping Heritage Day in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? It is a 

mystery and I think the answer can only be that they don’t, that 

there was no need. 

 

There was no need to set out in this legislation, in this Bill, the 

right to hunt, fish, and trap. It’s not created by this legislation. 

The heading that’s in front of or above section 2, clause 2, 

―Right to hunt, fish and trap‖ is misleading, Mr. Speaker, quite 

frankly. It’s misleading and I think highlights the inappropriate 

way that legislation — this legislation, other legislation — and 

this Legislative Assembly is used by this government to put 

before us legislation that in part, that in part, Mr. Speaker, is 

completely superfluous. 

 

And I say misleading to this extent, to the extent that the title 

would suggest that the Bill declares a right to hunt, fish, and 

trap. And a less than careful reading of the sections that follow 

that heading would suggest that the Bill provides a limited, 

conditional right to hunt, fish, and trap. But it doesn’t, Mr. 

Speaker, because that right already existed. 

 

That right already existed, existed at common law, Mr. Speaker, 

existed at common law. It is set out, modified, provided with 

conditions in legislation, some of which is mentioned in the 

Bill: The Wildlife Act, 1998, The Fisheries Act (Saskatchewan), 

1994, the Fisheries Act (Canada), the Migratory Birds 

Convention Act, 1994. The right is modified there. The 

conditions on that right are set out there. The various dos and 

don’ts of hunting in Saskatchewan and in Canada, which I may 

have occasion to come to, are all set out there. 

 

The implication that, particularly from the title and from the 

beginning of the section, that a person has a right to hunt, fish, 

and trap seems to suggest the Bill has a substantive purpose. 

And a substantive purpose is to create a right to hunt, fish, and 

trap. But we all know that’s not the case. In fact, it’s just a 

statement of fact, Mr. Speaker. It’s not even a statement of 

value. It doesn’t even say that the government believes that 

there should be a right to hunt, fish, and trap. I think the 

government does believe that, Mr. Speaker. I don’t want to 

suggest that the government doesn’t believe that. But it doesn’t 

say that the government values that right, wants to celebrate that 

right — although that may be somewhere else in the Bill. It just 

states that people have a right to hunt, fish, and trap, you know. 

 

What’s next, Mr. Speaker? Legislation advising us that we have 

the right to walk down the street in accordance with the law as 

it exists from time to time, Mr. Speaker? I don’t think that we 

need . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Right. Drive the speed limit. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Yes, that’s right, Mr. Speaker. Are we going 

to get legislation that says that a person has the right to garden 

in accordance with the law as it exists from time to time, Mr. 

Speaker? Are we going to get legislation that says a person has 

the right to shop in accordance with the law as it exists from 

time to time, Mr. Speaker? I mean is the government reduced to 

legislation that advises people of rights that they have taken for 

granted for centuries in the province of Saskatchewan? Is that 

what the government is reduced to doing, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And is the declaration that a person has the right to hunt and 

fish and trap in accordance with the laws that exist from time to 

time so important, Mr. Speaker, that it . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I’d ask members of the Assembly while 

there’s conversation going on between members, if there’s 

conversation you’d like to have, that you could gather behind 

the bar rather than shouting across the floor. That would be 

appreciated, to allow the member from Saskatoon Meewasin to 

be heard in his remarks tonight. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve got — well depending on how you want to cut it, Mr. 

Speaker — 40 per cent into, 40 per cent into the Bill, 40 per 

cent into the Bill. And what do we have, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. There are a number of members on my 

left behind the bar who continue to draw other members into 

conversation, and they’re making it very difficult for their 

colleague to make his remarks. I’d ask the members to come to 

order and allow the member from Saskatoon Meewasin to 

proceed. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Well thank you again, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

40 per cent into the Bill and probably, maybe a little bit more 

than 40 per cent through my remarks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re 40 per cent into the Bill and what has the government 

proposed? Now that’s if you exclude the preamble, Mr. 

Speaker. But into what the government would I think call a 

substantive part of the Bill, beyond the expression of sentiment, 

Mr. Speaker, and what do we have? What we have, Mr. 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4209 

Speaker, is a declaration of a centuries-old right, both in the old 

world and the new world, that a person has the right to hunt, 

fish, and trap — not the absolute right, not the unconditional 

right — but the right to do so in accordance with the law as it 

exists from time to time. A person has the right to carry on 

common activities of their lives and their community in 

accordance with the law as it exists from time to time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a way it’s a profound statement, but it’s not a 

necessary one. It’s certainly not necessary to put it in 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, not at all. Now I suppose it could be 

worse, Mr. Speaker. In light of the disregard for the 

environment, in light of the disregard for the duty to consult the 

Aboriginal people of Saskatchewan on that part of this 

government, I guess it could be worse. The government could 

explicitly be further limiting the right to hunt, fish, and trap, but 

they’re not. At least they’re not doing it by legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I have suggested, I continually suggest in my remarks that by 

their inaction, their wilful blindness in respect to matters of the 

environment and matters of relationships between 

Saskatchewan peoples, that they are in effect limiting those 

rights to hunt, fish, and trap, perhaps putting at risk the 

preservation of active, meaningful traditions in those areas, Mr. 

Speaker. But they’re not doing it by legislation, no. In the 

legislation they’re just making expression, a statement of fact, 

perhaps a statement of value to the government, at least 

theoretically, that people have a right to do the things that they 

do in accordance with the law as it exists from time to time, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Clause 3 goes on to do something very similar. And it reads: 

 

Nothing in this Act abrogates or derogates from any 

existing Aboriginal and treaty rights to hunt, fish or trap 

of the Aboriginal peoples of Canada that are recognized 

and affirmed by section 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again a very specific example of the very general 

statement in clause 2. The government does not need to state, as 

they have stated in this Bill and as they’ve stated in other 

legislation, that this legislation does not affect any Aboriginal 

treaty rights of the Aboriginal peoples of Canada that are 

recognized and affirmed by section 35 of the Constitution Act, 

1982. The reason they don’t have to, they don’t have to say that, 

Mr. Speaker, is because they can’t do that. They can’t abrogate 

or derogate from those rights, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They couldn’t do it if they wanted to, Mr. Speaker. They can’t 

because those are constitutional rights. Those are constitutional 

rights of people, of citizens of this country, and they can’t be 

affected by the government. And for the government to say in 

this legislation, well we can’t affect, we don’t affect in this Bill 

rights of these people, is really no more necessary, no less 

superfluous than the statement in clause 2 that all people of 

Saskatchewan have rights to hunt, fish, and trap in accordance 

with the law. It’s an unnecessary statement; of course they can’t 

affect the rights of those people. They can’t affect them because 

they are, as the Bill points out, recognized and affirmed by a 

section of the Constitution Act, 1982. 

 

They can’t do it, Mr. Speaker. They can’t do it. It’s like putting 

in the Bill, nothing in this Act will make the sun rise in the 

west. Well yes, that’s right. Nothing in the Act will, Mr. 

Speaker, because that’s not within the jurisdiction of the 

provincial government of Saskatchewan. It’s not within the 

jurisdiction of this Assembly to affect Aboriginal rights of any 

sort, including the rights to hunt, fish, or trap. It doesn’t exist. 

 

Now again it looks like to a casual observer, and it’s our duty in 

the opposition not to be casual observers, that the Bill seeks to 

preserve and protect Aboriginal rights, just as it seemed that the 

Bill by the heading of clause 2 acted to create a right to hunt, 

fish, and trap, which it did not do. That’s the way it’s made to 

appear. 

 

And as previous speakers have pointed out, the entire 

suggestion of the Bill, looked at at its face, if not examined, if 

not scrutinized, not given proper attention which I think the 

government thought the opposition wouldn’t do. I think that’s 

why we have this Bill. This Bill — because any Bill could have 

served the government’s purpose of testing our resolve to insist 

on the agreed amount of examination of a Bill, any Bill could 

have done that — the reason we have this Bill I think is because 

this Bill contains very little from the government, very little 

that’s important to the government except expressions of 

sentiment and statements of fact. 

 

But the impression that might be given by a recognition of 

Aboriginal rights is that we have a government that’s concerned 

about section 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982. Now in 1982 the 

prime minister of the day, Pierre Elliott Trudeau wanted to 

patriate the constitution, I think an act that most Canadians 

agreed with. He wanted to bring in a charter of rights that had 

constitutional effect, unlike the Bill of rights that John 

Diefenbaker had brought in, but which turned out not to have 

any effect on any other legislation, much like this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, perhaps unfortunately in that case. And that’s about all 

he wanted to do. 

 

[21:00] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think Canadians have learned that you don’t 

start talking about the constitution without addressing many, 

many issues. And Aboriginal people stepped forward and said, 

the treaties have not been observed. They have not been 

followed, and we desire, we require, we deserve . . . and I think 

Canadians agreed that recognition of those Aboriginal treaty 

rights, including the Aboriginal treaty right to hunt, fish, or trap 

to be entrenched in the constitution. And that was done and 

that’s set out in section 35 of the Constitution Act. 

 

Now following those debates and those decisions that were 

made in 1982, some sense has been given to what those rights 

are and what they mean, Mr. Speaker, you know, I think 

approximately five years ago, it may have been a little bit 

longer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Supreme Court of Canada talked about the 

duty to consult and that there was a duty to consult — whatever 

that might grow to mean, be developed to mean, be negotiated 

to mean, or determined by courts to mean. There was a duty to 

consult with Aboriginal people in respect to activities, 

economic activities or otherwise, that might affect Aboriginal 

rights, including the Aboriginal right to hunt, fish, or trap. 



4210 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

And that’s a phrase, duty to consult, that like its commitment on 

the environment, the Saskatchewan Party leaped to grasp when 

they were in opposition. They were all about the duty to 

consult, Mr. Speaker. They were all about greenhouse gas 

emissions decreasing; they were all about green vehicles in 

government — both promises that they broke — and they were 

all about the duty to consult. Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s become 

apparent that to the government, that is only a slogan. To the 

government, that is only a phrase. The government recognizes 

no duty to consult, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the development of the understanding of Aboriginal rights 

and of that right to a duty to consult, that can be developed one 

of two ways, Mr. Speaker. It can be developed in a very 

adversarial way where every interpretation, every nuance is 

litigated and decided in a court. Or it can develop as reasoned 

discussions between governments, First Nation governments 

and other governments, Mr. Speaker, as to what that means. 

 

Now duty to consult, for the New Democratic Party government 

as set out by the Supreme Court, was a floor upon which to 

build a better relationship with First Nations and other 

Aboriginal people, Mr. Speaker. That’s what it was. To this 

government, it’s a slogan, Mr. Speaker. And on Bill after Bill 

after Bill, members of this House have risen — particularly 

members from the North, but not only members from the North 

— have risen and said, in what way has the government, in 

respect of this legislation or in respect of this action, in what 

way has this government sought out to respect, to negotiate, to 

co-operatively define a duty to consult, Mr. Speaker? And the 

answer from across the way, the silence, Mr. Speaker, because 

they haven’t and they don’t.  

 

Now the question was asked, who asked for this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker? Who asked for this Bill? I don’t think that the 

sentiments in the preamble are objectionable. I just don’t think 

the government really, really cares about them. I don’t think the 

heritage day is objectionable, I just think that it’s a sop from a 

government that’s not willing to do anything else, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don’t think there was demand from the community, from the 

North, from the community of hunters, fishers, and trappers in 

this province for a heritage day, Mr. Speaker. I think they want 

protection of the environment on which they rely, Mr. Speaker. 

I think that’s what they want. I think they want a government 

that really believes in the duty to consult, that sincerely believes 

in the duty to consult on projects that affect hunting, fishing, 

and trapping. I think that’s what’s asked for. I think what’s 

received instead is a Bill that says, we believe, we care, and 

we’re going to give you a day. That’s the response of this 

government. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, that takes us to clause 4. Clause 2, a 

statement of fact, status quo. Clause 3, statement of fact; clause 

3, status quo. Clause 4, the action of this government — the 

action of a government that broke its promise on greenhouse 

gas emissions, broke its promise on green vehicles, broken all 

its environmental promises — the action of a government that 

can mouth the words, duty to consult, but can’t follow through 

on them. 

 

The action of that government after preamble that talk about our 

history, mutual history of the peoples of Saskatchewan, the 

important contributions the government recognizes in words, 

but not in actions. Understanding conservation and restoration 

of management of those resources. Preamble that talks about 

traditions, but doesn’t provide legislation to preserve the 

environment in which those traditions can continue to exist. The 

end of all this and some statements, a fact about the law, which 

are superfluous, and an abuse of the power to legislate, this 

Legislative Assembly, and of the law, after all that, Mr. 

Speaker, and still not really a page — the declaration of the 

Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that is the Bill. And why, people might wonder, people 

who were not watching at 7:30 when I took my feet, they might 

wonder why this Bill, why this Bill was debated this afternoon, 

why this Bill is debated this evening, why this Bill’s going to 

probably be debated until adjournment tonight? I dare say this 

Bill may be the only Bill that we debate this week. 

 

Why? This Bill, this Bill that’s half preamble, half statement of 

facts, and one line of substance as far as it goes, Mr. Speaker, 

why does this Bill get this treatment, Mr. Speaker? Because it’s 

the Bill that the government thinks that, of all its legislation, is 

the least important, the least substantial, the least deserving of 

debate and support despite the issues that it raises about 

relationships between Saskatchewan people, historic 

relationships between Saskatchewan people and the 

environment in Saskatchewan. 

 

This Bill has been treated by the government that brought it 

forward with such disrespect and such disregard because — and 

I know it’s a convoluted path, Mr. Speaker — but because this 

government doesn’t want to answer questions in this House, 

Mr. Speaker, because the government does not want to conform 

with an agreement that they in opposition proposed and 

advocated for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The government — it’s a majority government, Mr. Speaker — 

has a right to pass its budget, has a right to pass its legislation. 

The rules that were agreed upon between the parties that are in 

this House, and actively promoted and advocated by the 

Saskatchewan Party when they were opposition, provided that if 

the 20 hours of debate consideration on a Bill such as An Act 

respecting Hunting, Fishing and Trapping was not sufficient, 

then we would add additional days to the sitting of the 

legislature. 

 

For the second time, the second time in two years the 

government is breaking that agreement. For the second time in 

two years the government is breaking that agreement and 

extending hours because they do not want to extend days 

because they do not want to be answerable to the opposition. 

 

In the British parliamentary tradition and pursuant to the 

agreements that we have reached between parties in this 

Legislative Assembly, the government has a right, this majority 

government has a right to pass its budget, pass its legislation. 

But that is balanced with the right of this opposition to question 

the government about its actions, about its omissions, about the 

consequences to the people of Saskatchewan of the way it’s 

conducting itself, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s that balance, and it’s that balance that the government 

will not respect. It is that balance that the government seeks to 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4211 

overturn, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll see that tomorrow when we 

get the motion, but today what we see is a test by the 

government as to whether this opposition intends to speak and 

debate and consider the legislation that the government has put 

forward by it. 

 

And I don’t think it’s any surprise that the government puts 

forward a Bill that the government thinks is insubstantial and 

unworthy of debate and consideration, a five-clause Bill with a 

preamble of sentiments, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s why we’re 

debating An Act respecting Hunting, Fishing and Trapping, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Because I think the government knows, the government knows 

that a substantive Bill, a substantive Bill increasing perhaps the 

ability of a Crown corporation to borrow money which the 

government can then draw on to address its financial 

mismanagement, or a Bill to allow the municipalities to borrow 

money in replacement for the government’s broken promise on 

revenue sharing, that a Bill like that would easily get, easily get 

20 hours of consideration at least — the 20 hours that we’re 

allowed, Mr. Speaker, from the opposition — and debate. 

 

The government wonders about whether we have the resolve to 

speak from 8 in the morning to midnight — if that’s what the 

motion says and if the motion carries — if we have the resolve 

to do that on all their legislation, even the legislation that they 

don’t care about at all such as this Bill, Mr. Speaker, whether 

we have that resolve. So that’s why we are on our feet, Mr. 

Speaker, I guess, is how much does the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin care about the rights of the opposition? 

How much does the member from Saskatoon Meewasin care 

about his duty to the people of Saskatchewan to hold the 

government accountable? How much does the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin care about his duty and responsibility to 

provide due diligence in examination of Bills, Mr. Speaker? 

 

That’s why we’re debating this Bill. This is, I suppose, a test. I 

don’t know how many Bills the government’s going to want to 

do, one after the other, to test this resolve, Mr. Speaker, but I 

want to advise the government that the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin and other members on this side of the House can find 

a lot to say about hunting, fishing, and trapping. And the 

member from Saskatoon Meewasin doesn’t have a lot of 

personal experience with hunting, fishing, or trapping, some 

with fishing, but none I’d want to talk about in the House. 

 

And quite frankly I’m not sure it would be relevant. I’m not 

sure it would be relevant for me to talk about my fishing 

experiences anyways, Mr. Speaker, but . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well I don’t think the member from Rosemont 

can talk about my fishing experiences because he fortunately 

wasn’t there to observe any of them. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot to talk about in this Bill. And the 

history of the province, the current relationships between 

peoples of this province, they are all tied up with these 

traditions — this history of hunting, fishing, and trapping; the 

social life of our province, the cultural life of our province, as 

the Bill acknowledges, all tied up with hunting, fishing, and 

trapping. 

 

[21:15] 

The environment of Saskatchewan, the physical environment, 

particularly of northern Saskatchewan but of the entire 

province, all can be seen through the prism of wildlife and 

therefore hunting, fishing, and trapping. The traditions that 

come out of that history, all seen through the prism of hunting, 

fishing, and trapping, a great deal to talk about that’s in this 

Bill. And issues of the environment and actual concern for the 

environment beyond the sentiments expressed in legislation that 

creates a heritage day, and issues about Aboriginal rights and 

duty to consult and giving living meaning to those terms and 

those phrases beyond the declaration of a heritage day — Mr. 

Speaker, they are all touched upon by this Bill. 

 

And there may be other pieces of legislation that don’t raise as 

many sweeping issues, as many questions about why this and 

not more, Mr. Speaker. There may be, but I don’t think the 

government picked the right one. I don’t think they picked the 

right one because this Bill cries out, why this and not more? If 

you are going to talk about the right of Aboriginal people to 

hunt, fish, or trap as set out in the Constitution Act, 1982, then 

why this and not more? A provincial government could have a 

lot to say about the duty to consult. A provincial government 

could have a lot to say about these rights and about how they 

have to be conditional upon environmental concerns or they 

have to be conditional upon balancing other rights and other 

interests, and what those balances are and what those interests 

are, Mr. Speaker. Provincial governments have a great deal 

potentially to say about those things. 

 

And the Bill recognizes that. The Bill recognizes that when the 

Bill refers to our rights to hunt, fish, and trap in accordance 

with the law. The Bill recognizes that when the Bill refers to the 

rights of Aboriginal people by treaty and otherwise to hunt, 

fish, or trap and refers to those rights being recognized and 

affirmed by section 35 of the Constitutional Act, 1982. 

 

The Bill recognizes that there’s a lot that this government could 

say about the duty to consult. There’s a lot it could say about 

Aboriginal rights. There’s a lot it could say about this provincial 

government’s role in developing that duty, giving living 

meaning to those rights, clarifying by negotiation, by 

co-operation, by consultation, meaning of those rights, the 

meaning of that duty and of our joint and collective interest as 

citizens of Saskatchewan and protection and preservation of the 

environment. 

 

There’s a lot the government could say. The government is 

silent, Mr. Speaker. They’re not entirely silent, Mr. Speaker, 

because there’s the sections in this Bill. But the Bill highlights 

that silence. The Bill draws attention to the silence, underlines 

the silence on those issues, Mr. Speaker. This government on so 

many fronts — and this Bill does highlight it, this Bill on so 

many fronts — this government recognizes that people are 

concerned about fundamental issues, the relationships of people 

in the province of Saskatchewan, the relationships between 

Aboriginal people and immigrants and the descendents of 

immigrants to this province. 

 

The care for our environment, the concern about our 

environment — the urban environment, the rural environment, 

the northern environment — the government recognizes these 

concerns. It recognizes how important these are to the people of 

Saskatchewan. So the government isn’t entirely silent. The 



4212 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

government has some symbolic action to take, and the symbolic 

action is contained in part — in large part unfortunately, Mr. 

Speaker — in An Act respecting Hunting, Fishing and 

Trapping. 

 

Now to be clear, in case it’s not clear — I think every speaker 

has probably made it clear, and I certainly want to make it clear 

— the opposition doesn’t oppose the day. It doesn’t oppose the 

heritage day. Why would we oppose it, Mr. Speaker? We don’t 

oppose it. But the Bill, again, highlights the silence of the 

government about meaningful action and respect to the issues 

that the Bill raises — issues of conservation, protection of the 

environment, issues of Aboriginal rights and the duty to consult 

— because this government has said, this government has said 

if you will not be happy with a slogan, if a slogan does not 

address your concerns, then we will give you a day. But that is 

where we stop, Mr. Speaker. That is where this government 

stops. It stops with this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And here we are with a government trying to show the 

opposition, the people of Saskatchewan I suppose, how serious 

it is about its legislative agenda. They want to show the people 

of Saskatchewan how serious they are about their legislative 

agenda — not serious enough to risk one more question period, 

Mr. Speaker, not that serious, but serious enough to make 

backbenchers sit from 8 in the morning to midnight. They’re 

that serious about their legislative agenda. 

 

And to highlight that, Mr. Speaker, to highlight that seriousness, 

Mr. Speaker, what do they bring forward for debate to show 

how vital their legislative agenda is, to show what their 

priorities are? Well, Mr. Speaker, they have Bills about 

municipal borrowing. They have Bills about Crown corporation 

borrowing. I’d be very surprised if, Mr. Speaker, we’re not 

going to get another anti-crime Bill from the government. They 

have, I mean, they have legislation that I think we would all 

agree is important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the government gets to pick its priorities. The government 

picks its priorities. And so in an action meant to demonstrate to 

the people of the province and certainly to the opposition about 

who’s boss in this Chamber, the government, to show how 

serious it is about its legislative agenda, brings forward first and 

insists upon the passage of, in the next few days . . . Because 

they won’t let us adjourn debate on this Bill. They don’t want to 

move to any other Bill. We’re willing to move on to Bills that 

they think are important, but this is the Bill, this is the Bill that 

is important to the government, not because of its substance, not 

because of its substance, but because of the point that is being 

made, Mr. Speaker, the point that’s being made. 

 

They want to make the opposition prove that we are willing to 

debate for 20 hours straight, if necessary, An Act respecting 

Hunting, Fishing and Trapping, which actually has very little to 

do with hunting, fishing, and trapping and a lot to do about the 

declaration of a day, a day which I suppose, as I said, might 

become a photo op for a premier on a November 15th but 

provides no new rights, makes no change in the law. It’s just 

entirely symbolic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what this debate is about, Mr. Speaker — and I know that 

there’s a Bill — and what this debate is about is whether the 

government is willing to respect the rules that they negotiated 

and advocated and argued for when they were in opposition, 

whether this government is willing to respect the balance 

between the majority passing its legislative agenda and its 

budget and the minority right, the opposition’s right and duty to 

hold the government to account. 

 

That’s what this debate is really about, Mr. Speaker. It’s about 

symbolism instead of action in respect to the environment and 

in respect to the rights of Saskatchewan people, and it’s in 

respect to relationship in this legislature and the rights of the 

opposition to hold the party in government to account. That’s 

what this debate is about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s a significant debate. It’s an important debate. The 

issues touched upon in the Bill, whether the government 

intended it or not, are important issues, and they will continue 

to be important issues. The strained relationship because of the 

disregard that is held for Aboriginal and treaty rights mentioned 

in this Bill, those strained relationships and all the 

consequences of the disenfranchisement of significant 

proportion to the Saskatchewan population for decade after 

decade after decade, these things will not be resolved soon. I 

hope they’re resolved within our children’s lifetimes. I’m not 

confident about that necessarily, Mr. Speaker. I wish I was. 

These are not unimportant issues. 

 

And issues of the environment, Mr. Speaker, those are not 

unimportant issues either. And the fact that the government will 

in respect to those issues . . . and you can look at the legislative 

agenda of the government and the Bills that are before this 

House and on those issues that are touched upon in this Bill, 

there is no legislation of substance. There is no action of 

substance on the part of the government. The government’s 

intent is to, as sometimes we say in politics, Mr. Speaker, touch 

and go. Touch the environment and get out of there. Touch duty 

to consult Aboriginal rights and get out of there. Just get out of 

there. And this is a touch and go, Mr. Speaker. And the 

government thought the opposition would treat this Bill as a 

touch-and-go Bill, Mr. Speaker, but we’re not, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re not. 

 

This Bill is getting the attention that every piece of legislation 

that the government has seen fit to bring before this Legislative 

Assembly will receive. We will give these Bills, Mr. Speaker, 

including this Bill, An Act respecting Hunting, Fishing and 

Trapping, we will give these Bills the respect that the 

government that drafted and put them forward does not, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ll treat them with the respect that we believe all 

legislation brought before this Legislative Assembly should 

deserve, whether all the legislation brought before this 

Legislative Assembly by this government deserves it or not, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And this government will not, by bringing forward superfluous, 

redundant, meaningless legislation, cause this opposition to 

neglect its responsibility of due diligence, for due consideration, 

for examination, for consultation, and for debate. We will not 

do it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to do it at 8 in the morning, 

we’ll do it at 8 in the morning. If we’re going to do it at 3 in the 

morning, Mr. Speaker, we’ll do it at 3 in the morning. And if a 

Bill has not received its due consideration, if a Bill has not 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4213 

received the consideration pursuant to the agreement that we 

stand by — even if the other partner to the agreement will not 

— then we will make sure it does receive that consideration 

before we are done with it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now as I say, for the second time, the second time in this 

government’s history, two years, this government has decided 

that, well we had a purpose. We had a reason why we wanted a 

Bill respecting . . . An Act respecting Hunting, Fishing and 

Trapping. We wanted this legislation. We thought it was 

important. Now it may just be, it may just be . . . And it sure 

looks like, when you go through it clause by clause as I have, I 

mean only briefly, I understand that, only superficially, but 

when you go through the Bill and you examine it, it appears to 

be merely puffery, Mr. Speaker, mostly superfluous, mostly 

superfluous, an abuse of the Legislative Assembly for the most 

part, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Not the fourth clause. Not the declaration of the day. But, Mr. 

Speaker, it could have been, it could have been a three-clause 

Act. It could have been a three-clause Act. That would have 

been the honest thing to do, Mr. Speaker, but they wanted to 

dress it up. They wanted to fluff it up with some statements of 

fact, some statements of value. But they wanted to bring this in 

for political reasons. 

 

 They can’t say anything else in the North about the 

environment. They can’t say anything else in the North about 

duty to consult. They can say, well we have a day. We have a 

day where we recognize hunting, fishing, and trapping is 

important to our heritage. If we can’t do anything of substance, 

if we can’t do anything of substance, we will do this. 

 

[21:30] 

 

So this Bill, this Bill to declare a day and not do anything of 

substance, was important to the government — important 

enough to become legislation and important enough to take its 

lineup in all the other legislation, Mr. Speaker. And we in the 

opposition believe that the government, with or without our 

support, have a right to pass every single Bill, including this 

one, Mr. Speaker, a right to pass every single Bill and they have 

a right to pass their budget. 

 

But they don’t have that right, they don’t have that right — they 

can force this, Mr. Speaker, and they will again; they have 

before and it sounds like they’re willing to do it again — they 

can force this but they don’t have the right, they don’t have the 

right to force the Legislative Assembly, force the Legislative 

Assembly to pass their legislation, pass their budget without the 

corresponding ability to question the government, to hold the 

government accountable, to do what the opposition was brought 

here to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes, the government is very fond of reminding the 

opposition that they won the election on November 7, 2007, 

very fond of that. Members there are quite excited about it still, 

even at this time of night, very fond of that, Mr. Speaker. But 

you know, I think once or twice in . . . once maybe in Canadian 

history has a party won every seat in the legislature. It happened 

in New Brunswick. It’s never happened in Saskatchewan and it 

didn’t happen in 2007. 

 

And people in Saskatchewan elected an opposition to hold the 

government to account, Mr. Speaker. They elected a 

government to govern. They elected a government to make 

choices, Mr. Speaker, and this government’s inability to make 

choices has resulted in a $1 billion deficit. The government is 

not doing what it was elected to do, Mr. Speaker. But we will 

do, and in examination of this Bill — and every other Bill, but 

particularly in examination of this Bill, An Act respecting 

Hunting, Fishing and Trapping — we will do what we were 

elected to do, whether the government does what it was elected 

to do. 

 

And we were elected to examine the actions of this government, 

both in legislation and in execution by its executive, and to hold 

this government to account. And the parties in this House 

agreed about we were going to do that. And this party, the New 

Democratic Party, has always lived up to that agreement, Mr. 

Speaker. And when we were in government I can tell you, and a 

number of members on this side of the House that were in 

government can tell you that it wasn’t always comfortable 

living up to that agreement because of the power it gave the 

opposition in this House. But we always lived up to that 

agreement, always. Twice, twice now this government has 

failed to live up this agreement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And for those wondering, those who follow the sitting of the 

session of the Legislative Assembly, wondering why we’re 

debating at length not just one speaker today, but two, three, 

four, and maybe more to follow after me if I run out of steam 

soon, Mr. Speaker, why we’re debating the same Bill hour after 

hour after hour, it’s part of the government’s tactic. Part of the 

government’s tactic to justify breaking the agreement that the 

Saskatchewan Party entered into for the second time, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what it’s about. That’s what it’s about, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I know, and I think I’ve probably said pretty explicitly that 

there are members on this side of the House, other than me and 

the other ones that have spoken, who want to address the issue 

raised in this Bill. And I know some of the speakers who 

haven’t spoken yet or are yet to be speakers on this Bill, and I 

know how eloquent and articulate they are. I know how much 

many of them have thought about these issues of the 

environment, duty to consult, the relationship between the First 

People of this country and those that followed. 

 

And there will be many more eloquent and articulate things to 

be said than I’ve been able to say tonight. And I know some of 

the members opposite have pointed out that perhaps somebody 

more articulate could maybe speak better to the Bill. And so to 

allow those voices to be heard, Mr. Speaker, and knowing that 

this Bill is going to receive full consideration by members of 

the Legislative Assembly, at least by the opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Meewasin has 

moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 



4214 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

The Speaker: — Those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. I recognize the 

member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to weigh in on a topic that’s very important to both our 

province and to myself and my family. But as a hunter, Mr. 

Speaker, for many years and a family of hunters, we have a bit 

of a motto. And that’s that you don’t shoot rabbits when you’re 

hunting big game, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what we’re doing here tonight is exactly just that. We have 

a government that’s put forward a Bill of little substance. Little 

substance. One that in many ways, as the member from 

Meewasin has so articulately placed, basically reaffirms 

statements of facts and has a one-line clause of some substance. 

But what we see here is the all too common theme and trend of 

the Sask Party government, and that’s that they grab the 

low-hanging fruit that’s available to them. They use it for their 

own believed political good; put a balloon in the air, a pompom 

in the air, do a photo op. 

 

And that’s really all this Bill in substance will provide — a day 

on November 15th for the Premier to pretend maybe that he’s a 

fisher, maybe that he’s a hunter, maybe that he’s a trapper, and 

to go get a picture taken with some of the fine individuals and 

families who have built their lives on those very, very activities, 

Mr. Speaker. So some political grandstanding by the Premier to 

once again go out and pretend, pretend that he’s something that 

he’s not. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, certainly it is disappointing, as someone who 

recognizes the place that hunting, trapping, and fishing has 

played within Saskatchewan and as someone who values it both 

within my own life and within our family’s history, part of our 

own story here in Saskatchewan, to see the little regard, the 

disregard, the disrespect, and to see legislation as it relates to 

hunting, fishing, and trapping being treated in this manner, 

being dismissed and disrespected. Because I tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, when you look at our province’s history and you look 

out beyond, you know, thousands of years past, our story is one 

of hunting, fishing, trapping, and gathering. That’s the basis for 

which Saskatchewan was formed. 

 

Our First Nations people who lived here for thousands of years 

and in harmonious ways, with systems of justice and health and 

education, with unique skills and knowledge that were lent and 

borrowed and taught through generations, their own processes 

of spirituality and hunting, trapping, fishing, and gathering at 

that point in time provided those people the very substance and 

sustainability within their life. 

 

And as we move forward into our somewhat more modern 

history, we have the fur trade, Mr. Speaker, that we talked about 

already with the movement of Europeans in through Western 

Canada, through our waterways in the North. And this goes 

back 150 years or so before we became a province, Mr. 

Speaker, 250, 300 years ago, a story that is a rich part of our 

history, the story that basically brought about the Métis people, 

Mr. Speaker, for which we’ll also be addressing in here and 

looking at the oversight for those individuals, for those people 

that make up such an important part of Saskatchewan’s history, 

present and future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then hunting of course plays an important role — fishing 

and trapping — into our homesteading nation, and a mixture of 

the fur trade being operated into the North, the development 

down in the South where homesteads began and sport hunting 

as well, Mr. Speaker, that plays a very important role within our 

cultural fabric, within our social fabric, within our economic 

fabric as well, Mr. Speaker. And I’m going to get to all of these 

points. 

 

And we get to this point here today from thousands of years, 

Mr. Speaker, where hunting, fishing, and trapping have played 

such a significant part of our province’s history. And we get to 

our modern Saskatchewan. And it should play no less important 

of a role at this point in time in our history and into the future, 

at the present as it has into the past. I know for certain that it’ll 

be a different role that it plays. That’s the evolution of life, Mr. 

Speaker. But what we do need to recognize and always ensure 

is that the ability to hunt, fish, and trap in Saskatchewan is 

preserved, enhanced, and maintained. 

 

So we see a government that put forward this piece of 

legislation with disrespect and with contempt for it, Mr. 

Speaker, with contempt for hunters, fishers, and trappers, Mr. 

Speaker. And shamefully so, Mr. Speaker. The reason we’re 

dealing with this piece of legislation today and the reason — for 

the many, many people tuning in at home here right now — the 

reason that the opposition is speaking to it with many speakers 

repeatedly is the fact that the government has tried to overrun 

the rules of this legislature once again, tried to overturn 

democracy within these very chambers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And of course this isn’t something new to this government. This 

isn’t something new to this government. This is the second time 

in their short two and a half year history as government in 

embarking on this sort of a fashion, ramrodding through a 

process. And it is the direct result, Mr. Speaker, the direct result 

of their own mismanagement, mismanagement of legislation 

within this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think that that mismanagement is certainly reflective and 

endemic within all activities and functions within this 

government, certainly from the very basic functions as it relates 

to the financial management of this government that individuals 

are weighing in on from around this province, that are so 

disgusted by the lack of a plan, by the creation of a deficit that 

this government has created. And it is directly that kind of 

mismanagement that gets us here today — mismanagement as it 

relates to the House. 

 

And so here we are speaking to Bill No. 117 here today, Mr. 

Speaker. And the reason this is put forward is because the 

government put forward something that they thought, they 

thought that people wouldn’t mind being disrespected. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to tell you this right now is that this 

member, this caucus, the New Democrats, the opposition are 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4215 

certainly not going to disrespect the role of hunters, fishers, and 

trappers in Saskatchewan. Not thousands of years ago, not 150 

and 200 years ago in the fur trade, not 100 years ago in our 

homesteading nation, and certainly not now, Mr. Speaker. 

Because the ability and the opportunity to hunt, fish, and trap in 

Saskatchewan is something that is precious, Mr. Speaker, that 

in many ways binds our communities, binds generations, binds 

families, and is a way of life for many, many people. 

 

It is to different people and different families different things, 

Mr. Speaker, without a doubt. For some it’s a way of life. For 

some it’s a matter of subsistence and sustainability and making 

sure that there’s the product and the meat for their families and 

for their communities. 

 

For others it’s part of the social fabric of a family, much as the 

story within my family, Mr. Speaker. Born into a family of 

hunters and in many ways, Mr. Speaker . . . I know the family 

that I was born into and the story of our family of course 

coming to Saskatchewan in that homesteading time, basically 

the story within the Wotherspoon family was to attend church, 

to farm and work, and to hunt and fish, Mr. Speaker. And those 

were . . . And to care for family. And that was sort of I think an 

unwritten creed of our family and something that’s instilled into 

my generation and certainly into my family. 

 

[21:45] 

 

So it’s important that we recognize the important different roles 

that hunting, fishing, and trapping has played within 

Saskatchewan. It’s important as well that we should be looking 

right now at much broader legislation that has some substance 

to it. Because if we really, really, really want to do something 

special as it relates to hunting, fishing, and trapping, Mr. 

Speaker, we should be looking at the environment, and we 

should be looking at conservation. We should be looking at 

protection of the lands. We should be looking at programs to 

work with landowners, Mr. Speaker. We should be looking at 

programs that educate our young people and engage young 

people into best practices of hunting. 

 

We should be doing all of those things, Mr. Speaker, and, never 

to be overridden by something that’s completely being 

dismissed here, and that we should be respecting the duty to 

consult with Aboriginal peoples. We should be looking directly 

at Aboriginal rights and how we can enhance our province, our 

legislation, and our landscape moving forward, not simply 

create some sort of a photo opportunity which is simply what 

this legislation provides. 

 

And hunting and fishing and trapping plays important, 

important roles within our economy. We can speak specifically 

even just to hunting for a moment here. The economic impact, 

Mr. Speaker, is one that’s significant. When we think of the 

basic activity of going about hunting, we’re dealing with 

certainly a purchase of fuel and some commerce that they’re 

flowing in many of our rural centres. We’re talking about filling 

up hotels in rural centres that certainly appreciate some of that 

activity and those dollars that flow. We talk about the groceries 

and the restaurants that go about typically on a hunting trip, Mr. 

Speaker. And these are all meaningful, meaningful 

contributions in dollars that flow within our economy, 

something that should never be minimized or disrespected as 

they are by this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We should recognize, further to that, the role of outfitters within 

Saskatchewan and their association and their organization that 

represents outfitters because it’s not particularly a strong time 

for the outfitting industry right now in this province, one that 

represents Saskatchewan very well and very proudly. In fact 

many, many people may only meet Saskatchewan or come to 

Saskatchewan on a trip where they would be having an 

exchange with outfitters and with our natural environment. And 

for that, Mr. Speaker, they play a very valuable role from a 

perspective of exposing individuals from around the world, 

from many, many nations across the ocean and across North 

America who come to Saskatchewan and are exposed to our 

beautiful landscape — something we should be preserving, 

protecting, and enhancing — and to our wonderful people, 

many of those individuals whom they come in contact with 

through the outfitters of Saskatchewan. 

 

But this Bill, Mr. Speaker, disrespects all of that. It disrespects 

the economic impact of this Bill. It disrespects the contributions 

of Saskatchewan outfitters. It disrespects looking at ways to 

enhance and drive some of that economic activity, Mr. Speaker. 

And it’s frustrating to the opposition to see such 

short-sightedness by a government on this front, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we talk about the economic impact that is provided through 

hunting . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I hear one of the 

members opposite suggesting someone’s far-sighted. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I guess what we’re looking for is a government with 

good vision, 20/20 vision, Mr. Speaker, that’s able to peer into 

the future and plan for it and that’s able to see the immediate 

challenges here as well. But the Deputy Premier is looking . . . 

hoping that the government is perceived to be far-sighted. Well 

that’s not what we would aspire to be, Mr. Speaker. We would 

aspire to be able to have a very clear lens on what we’re dealing 

with and the challenges that exist at a given time. 

 

So we talk about the economic impact that certainly hasn’t 

provided any weight within this legislation. There’s no 

discussion of that. There’s nothing that enhances that. And 

something that plays a fundamental role in many of our rural 

communities, Mr. Speaker, we don’t see anything that develops 

further relationships and partnerships with landowners, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In many ways landowners of course in this province are the best 

stewards of our land and very, very vital individuals in 

preserving our natural landscape, Mr. Speaker. And I believe 

that because of the close connectivity to the land they are 

equipped both with will and with knowledge to do so, Mr. 

Speaker. But sometimes we need to have a government that’s 

going to partner at this point in time. We don’t see that. We see 

a government that’s more willing to dismiss and disrespect and 

disregard the role of hunting, fishing, and trapping in 

Saskatchewan. And that’s a real shame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it’s not simply just the social fabric, Mr. Speaker, that 

hunting affects. It’s also has such a social story within our 

province and a social impact within our province. Of course, as 

I say, hunters, fishers, trappers, and gatherers are First Nations 

people who have lived here for thousands of years. That is, has 

been their story, and the wealth of knowledge that resides 



4216 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

within that population, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to these very 

topics in our natural landscape is profound and something that 

is yet to be appreciated in a significant fashion by government. 

 

But this legislation doesn’t do any of that. It doesn’t do any of 

that, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t enhance the duty to consult. In fact 

it disregards it. It doesn’t reflect or enhance Aboriginal rights or 

reflect that. In fact it disregards that. It does the exact opposite, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the government basically trying to again, as we’ve talked 

about, overthrow democracy in this very Chamber, trying to 

override the rules that they were a full partner in creating, are 

now putting forward a Bill which in the end disrespects hunting, 

fishing, and trapping and the contribution of hunters, fishers, 

and trappers, and those industries within our province. 

 

And I say that’s shameful. Because as we read in our 

newspaper, Mr. Speaker, and we know the reasons that have 

been expressed by the government, Mr. Speaker, the reason that 

the Sask Party is trying to overthrow democracy once again, 

Mr. Speaker, in these very chambers are unprecedented, twice 

in their short two-year history, because they’ve mismanaged the 

House and because they’re afraid of accountability and 

transparency. 

 

Specifically, and very specifically, the House Leader of the 

Sask Party stated that what they don’t want is any more 

question periods where the people of Saskatchewan can ask 

them questions about the programs within their purview that 

their ministers have responsibility for. It’s that very House 

Leader, and I suspect speaking on behalf of that Premier, that is 

stifling that opportunity, is afraid of that opportunity. 

 

And we say that that’s a shame because Saskatchewan people 

have questions, Mr. Speaker. And if it’s a matter that this 

government has mismanaged their Bills, their legislation, and 

what we get into is a circumstance where we need to extend 

sitting hours which would be . . . or sitting days, which would 

be by rule of the legislature, by agreement of both parties which 

has been the history here, then there’s going to be a couple of 

extra question periods, or many more question periods 

depending on how much legislation we need to work through. 

Certainly we’re committed to going through that task, but this 

government, this House Leader, this Premier are afraid and are 

not willing to allow the people of Saskatchewan, vis-à-vis 

through the opposition, to ask these very questions. 

 

And that’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. So they’re more willing to 

overthrow and upset democracy in the province that they 

represent than to answer to the people that have elected them. 

And maybe that’s what’s such a frustrating fact for this 

government, is that they know full well that it’s the people that 

elected them, many that had voted for them, that are now asking 

the opposition to represent their concerns as it relates to this 

legislature, to bring those forward. 

 

And I see the Speaker referencing to keep the focus on the Bill, 

and I agree, Mr. Speaker. That’s where the focus will maintain, 

but I needed to describe and need to describe very clearly why 

we’re debating this Bill today. 

 

We’re not debating this Bill because the Sask Party thinks that 

we should be debating hunting, fishing, and trapping for 20 

hours. They’re doing it because they think that they can 

disrespect hunting, fishing, and trapping and because they want 

to overthrow democracy once again. Because they don’t want to 

follow the rules of this legislature that they agreed to, and 

because at the very core of this whole concern, Mr. Speaker, is 

their fear, their great, great fear of facing questions from the 

public through question period. 

 

Now this isn’t an activity that any government should hide 

from, Mr. Speaker. It’s an opportunity for ministers and for the 

Premier to explain back to the people of Saskatchewan the 

efforts, the programs, the work, the initiatives that they are 

undertaking to address the questions of the people.  

 

But not this government, Mr. Speaker. Not this government. 

They hide from that. They hide from shedding light on issues. 

They hide from making information available, and they hide 

from answering the questions, sometimes tough questions, Mr. 

Speaker, when you’re talking about billion dollar deficits, 

massive issues in rural health care — Mr. Speaker, the list goes 

on — the cost of living that’s hammering the quality of life for 

many Saskatchewan people. But this government hides from it. 

 

And that’s the exact opposite thing that a government that’s 

planning to govern for a period of time with a plan should be 

doing. And the whole thought that they have that they can 

simply overturn the rules, overturn the democratic process as 

we know it, as they know it, as decided by partners, is 

shameful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so here we are on a Monday evening at 9:56 in the evening 

with many speakers to the hunting, fishing, and trapping Act. 

And we’re pleased to speak to these matters. Don’t get me 

wrong, Mr. Speaker. It’s the very disrespect that the Sask Party 

shows to these very industries and to these matters that concern 

us because in many ways this is talking about something that’s 

the crux of a way of life in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the crux 

of a way of life. 

 

So we see legislation that’s put forward that’s basically going 

after low-hanging fruit, that has very little substance — that has 

a preamble that was highlighted so eloquently by the member 

from Meewasin that is in great length but would have no 

substance — which has three clauses that simply are a 

statement of fact, Mr. Speaker: clause no. 1, clause no. 2, and 

clause no. 3, statement of fact, statement of fact. 

 

Clause no. 4, a bit of substance there, they’re going to mark a 

day, November 15th, to celebrate hunting, fishing, and trapping, 

a day, a photo opportunity for the Premier to go on and maybe 

put on some sort of a hunting cap or something and meet with 

some hunters and have some sort of a photo opportunity. But I 

think the hunters, trappers, and fishers would be looking for 

more. I think they’d say there’s an opportunity here to do 

something with our land and with our habitat and with our 

environment. I think that there’s an opportunity for us as treaty 

people, all of us being treaty people, to be able to look at 

Aboriginal rights and the duty to consult in a way that’s 

consistent with the Supreme Court, not in a way that this 

government goes about — basically just providing lip service, 

spin, and gamesmanship to all that they touch, Mr. Speaker. 

 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4217 

Now they spend a lot on communications. We know that. But 

basically that’s all this legislation accounts to, is a 

communications exercise, Mr. Speaker, for matters that run 

deep in this province and something that profoundly affects the 

people’s lives in this province, whether that be culturally, 

socially, or economically, Mr. Speaker. And I’d say it’s a 

shame. And it’s a recognition that a government is completely 

out of touch with both the people of their province, but of their 

history as well, a shared history that we should be rightfully 

very proud of, Mr. Speaker, and opportunities to move forward 

in meaningful ways that we could enhance some of these 

opportunities. 

 

So we do have questions as we talk about this legislation. And 

we know that consultation that needs to go on rightfully — 

should go on for every bit of legislation — doesn’t go on when 

the Sask Party’s in power. What they do is they ram through 

legislation without consulting. We’ve seen this with school 

boards in education. We’ve seen this with finance. We’ve seen 

this with labour. We’ve seen this with health care. The fine 

elements that are appreciated by the Sask Party certainly aren’t 

consultation. They fail on this front all of the time and to the 

detriment, the great detriment of Saskatchewan people, to the 

great detriment. 

 

[22:00] 

 

So the question would be and the questions that we’ll certainly 

be soliciting and looking for answers in response to . . . and 

time in committee will provide that as well. However the Sask 

Party seems to not want to allow us to move that Bill along as 

well as it relates to questions that need to be asked to the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, to the many, many, many 

wildlife federations within local communities that are 

fundamental, Mr. Speaker, in the organization and the vibrancy 

of communities, both from a social aspect and an economic 

aspect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I tell you — you know it, Mr. Speaker — there’s nothing I 

enjoy more and something I look forward to . . . and anyone 

who’s watching tonight, I invite your invitations to attend your 

wild game dinners and your Wildlife Federation branch 

meetings. These are the best gatherings in this province because 

you bring together people with a great passion for their 

community, a great passion for their environment, their 

landscape, and for hunting, fishing, and trapping or elements of 

those. There’s nothing I enjoy more, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

something that I regularly undertake to go out and meet and 

wonderful opportunities. We need to meet with these groups. 

We need to understand what this legislation means for them. 

And we need to understand, you know . . . Certainly as far as 

having a day that recognizes, we support that principle but the 

bigger fact is, is there more we could be doing? 

 

And I know that answer without even asking it, time and time 

again. The question will be how many, how many good ideas 

are we going to get? And I know we’ll get many, Mr. Speaker. 

But that would require a little bit of hard work on the Sask 

Party’s behalf. It would require more than just a light lifting and 

snagging of low-hanging fruit. It would require some due 

diligence, some work, some resources, and some planning — 

all things that this Sask Party is deficit of, Mr. Speaker. So very 

interesting aspects. 

We need to go out and meet with the outfitters and the 

association that represents them to understand how this affects 

them. We need to understand if there’s other aspects of this 

legislation that would be able to reflect some of their needs 

because we know there’s challenge and turmoil within the 

outfitters industry. And these are of the finest entrepreneurs and 

individuals within this province. And as I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, 

these are individuals who many people new to Saskatchewan or 

visiting for the first time are their first points of contact, their 

only points of contact, and economic drivers within their own 

communities, within our province as a whole . . . something that 

we should enable to flourish, not something that we should 

stifle. What else could we doing on that front, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I think it’s worthwhile to look at the contributions in local 

communities, many of these from the Wildlife Federation 

branches, programs such as archery programs, Mr. Speaker, in 

local schools, or hunter safety type programs, teaching best 

practice, but specifically some of the archery programs and then 

some of the elite competition on the provincial and national 

level. It’s something that has been to the great benefit of many, 

many young people in our province and to the great benefit of 

our community and to the great benefit of our province as a 

whole, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m a great, great believer that when young people, Mr. 

Speaker, are able and provided the opportunity to connect with 

their natural environment through hunting, that that individual 

develops a greater appreciation for the natural environment, for 

habitat, for wildlife, for conservation, and that we’re better off 

with having more individuals connected with hunting, fishing, 

and trapping — not less, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This gets to a very vital role that hunters, fishers, and trappers 

play within our society. I believe it, as an activity as a whole, 

creates a good, strong, whole society. I’d promote more of it. 

But further I think that it plays a very, very fundamental role in 

the management of stock, of habitat numbers and make sure 

that we maintain and control diseases and sickness, 

overpopulation. And there’s a very fundamental role for 

government to be partnering with Saskatchewan people on that 

front, to be partnering with our local wildlife branches, to be 

partnering with landowners, to be partnering with and 

respecting First Nations duty to consult and Aboriginal rights, 

Mr. Speaker, of which none of this legislation sets out. 

 

And I think of some of those great archery programs across this 

province, many within our fine city here of Regina. Some 

phenomenal ones up in, I know up through Canora-Pelly area. 

The Stecyks run some great programs up through there — 

really, really good programs. I know some very good programs 

that are run across this province, specifically a newer one in 

Raymore High School, Mr. Speaker, that’s had great uptake and 

response from within the community, great leadership from the 

vice-principal there in that school to deliver that program in the 

community as a whole and the great support that’s received to 

those kind of programs that are funded by wildlife branches, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this is important legislation, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

profoundly disappointed, disheartened, surprised. I shouldn’t 

say surprised because with this government nothing seems to 

surprise me anymore, though, that they would disrespect, 



4218 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

disregard, and discount the role of hunters, fishers, and trappers 

in this province, in our present, in our history, and into our 

future. And the way they’re going about this here today is 

disappointing. I expect more. I expect more of the government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know that many, many, many, many, if not all people 

within this province would share that concern because hunting, 

fishing, and trapping is not some fleeting exercise or some new 

activity, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve said, this is the history of our 

province going back thousands and thousands of years to our 

First Nations people who lived fishing, hunting, trapping, 

gathering across our great province — southern Saskatchewan, 

northern Saskatchewan — and lived off of the land, lived off of 

the land. 

 

But the story doesn’t end there, as we go then many . . . few 

hundred years ago, 150 years or so prior to the province 

becoming a province, the fur trade and the Europeans that used 

these waterways as systems to connect with Saskatchewan, 

ways to connect for commerce, ways to connect for trade, and 

valuable partnerships that were formed, but beyond that, the 

development of the Métis people, Mr. Speaker, who play a 

fundamentally important role in our province’s history, very 

proud role, and certainly need to into the future and will, Mr. 

Speaker, and will. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that this legislation has failed to achieve 

some of the meaningful work that partners and stakeholders 

with hunting, fishing, and trapping would like to achieve. I 

think that this Bill provided an opportunity to enhance and 

enrich those opportunities, and none of that has been provided 

by this legislation. 

 

There’s opportunities to engage landowners, Mr. Speaker, who 

I’ve said before, farmers and landowners, producers in touch 

with our land, are our greatest allies and the best stewards, Mr. 

Speaker, of our land. And it’s their connection to the land, Mr. 

Speaker, in many ways. And where was that consultation with 

landowners, Mr. Speaker? Where was that discussion around 

conservation or partnerships and programs to ensure that natural 

environments are enabled to flourish and prosper, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I know recently of course, we were meeting with SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], the 

association for rural municipalities in Saskatchewan and the 

conversation with many individuals as we spent much time 

there — and spoke about really relevant issues for them as 

related to health care and finance and education and cost of 

living and housing and various programs and services that are 

required — another common thread was a discussion of hunting 

and fishing. This is a topic, an activity that binds our province. 

 

I recall talking with one individual about the goose shoot that 

their RM [rural municipality] holds and the clay pigeon 

competition that they have, and talked about what this means to 

their community in bringing together generations and 

individuals who have dispersed across Saskatchewan in various 

parts to come back to the community for that weekend. And an 

incredibly important social activity for that weekend, for that 

community, for those families, for the community as a whole. 

But as well, an incredibly important economic activity for that 

community, Mr. Speaker, for many communities around this, 

across this province and just, I guess, speaks to how important 

hunting, fishing, and trapping is within this province, even in 

our proud new Saskatchewan embarking on all sorts of new 

opportunities. 

 

We need to ensure that it plays the important role that it has in 

its past. It might be a different role certainly than it was 

thousands of years ago, where the bison were providing First 

Nations their sustainability — and play a very different role 

probably than the fur trade when we go back 300 years ago, as 

Europeans started to find their way into our province and to 

trade and to partner with First Nations individuals — but yet no 

less important role from a cultural and from an economic and 

from a social perspective, a different role. And for this 

government to put forward legislation as it relates to something 

that’s so core to Saskatchewan’s heart, so important to our 

history, and to basically put forward legislation of very little 

substance, basically symbolism instead of action or symbolism 

instead of substance, Mr. Speaker, we’d say is shameful. 

 

And the member from Meewasin highlighted so many of these 

points so articulately, but basically this legislation simply is a 

declaration to carry on with common activities or a common 

activity that’s centuries old in fact in this province and in 

accordance with the laws. Well really, Mr. Speaker, does that 

really say anything, Mr. Speaker? Does that really have any 

impact or any importance, Mr. Speaker? Certainly not. 

 

And the member from Meewasin highlighted the numerous 

other activities that people embark on, on a day-to-day basis, 

within their daily lives and within their . . . and certainly 

through our history, Mr. Speaker, as governed by the laws. And 

are we now just going to see new pieces of legislation that just 

touch the surface and provide a photo opportunity on that front, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

And I wouldn’t be surprised, Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t be 

surprised because we know with this Sask Party government 

that they’d rather just touch the surface, just grab the 

low-hanging fruit, just spend the money on communication and 

spin and gamesmanship but not get into the substance of the 

real issues that challenge our province. They don’t want to 

address the health care challenges in this province that are 

wreaking great havoc in communities across this province, that 

are becoming larger problems under the Sask Party. 

 

We look at the 50 per cent increase in vacancies for doctors 

across this province, Mr. Speaker, and I know communities 

across this province are looking for remedy of this. And I know 

they’re saying when we meet with them, they’re saying, well 

this Sask Party, they made promises and we bought it, they say. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? There’s nothing more 

disheartening, more frustrating, or that makes someone more 

angry than to realize that they’ve been tricked, that they’ve been 

had, that they’ve been sold a hill of beans that a government 

couldn’t deliver on. Because this Sask Party had gone across 

Saskatchewan and made all sorts of promises for which it had 

no ability — and we’re realizing now not even the will or desire 

— to actually follow through with. And that’s hugely 

disappointing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we see, we see this here at this point in time, this certainly 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4219 

isn’t a government, the Sask Party, that manages things well. 

The reason that we’re here tonight is the mismanagement of the 

legislature here, Mr. Speaker. And this I guess is paralleled, Mr. 

Speaker, if we look at finances. 

 

[22:15] 

 

The financial mismanagement of this province by the Sask 

Party is something that the rest of Canada is looking at, looking 

at with shame, with disappointment to see Saskatchewan that 

was provided the great opportunity that it had economically 

where we have revenues flowing in, economic drivers that are 

functioning well and we see a government that’s mismanaging 

the province and racking up debt at this point in time, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think there’s nothing that drives people more 

upset in this province than to recognize that we have a 

government with a healthy balance sheet as it relates to 

revenues but then we look at their expenditures that are far too 

high, Mr. Speaker, and they are creating and have created a 

massive $1 billion deficit. It’s not getting any better. 

 

And we see the growth in debt, Mr. Speaker. Growth in debt. 

And it’s a question, Mr. Speaker, of when the billboards that the 

Sask Party has up around this province right now — you’ll see 

them on many of the main drags, Mr. Speaker — that basically 

say something that isn’t true, Mr. Speaker. The billboards say 

something that’s not true. The billboards rightfully . . . And 

we’re looking and waiting for the right time, Mr. Speaker, but 

we’re surprised that the government wouldn’t choose to be 

forthright on this. Those billboards, Mr. Speaker, rightfully 

should be saying that they have a deficit, the debt is going up, 

and that taxes as a result will be forced to increase for everyone. 

Now their billboards say the exact opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it just speaks again to the mismanagement of this 

government. We see it as it relates to health care and the 

worsening circumstances that are affecting the lives of 

communities. We see it as it relates to education. We see it as it 

relates to cost of living. And people in this province are 

expecting some answers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know that as individuals who value hunting, fishing, and 

trapping in this province, as they regard these proceedings, their 

disappointment in the Sask Party for grabbing simply 

low-hanging fruit and not doing something more as it relates to 

enhancing those activities will be of great disappointment. But 

further to that I think they’re going to be very disappointed to 

understand how they’ve been disrespected, dismissed, and 

disregarded by the Sask Party. 

 

The fact that you take something as core to our society as 

hunting, fishing, and trapping, put it up in debate in a 

disrespectful fashion with the government’s attempt to 

overthrow the democratic rules, democratic system that we 

have, is a big disappointment, Mr. Speaker, for Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

The fact that the Sask Party had an opportunity to do something 

meaningful on these fronts, many other fronts, and all they put 

forward is a piece of legislation that provides a bit of 

symbolism, a bit of symbolism but no action, a bit of 

symbolism but no substance, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a 

disappointment. It’s a disappointment when you thumb through 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, and you read through a preamble that 

basically doesn’t need to exist because you have the clauses 

following here that basically elaborate on the Bill. 

 

And as you go through those clauses, you recognize that the 

first clause, well that’s just a statement of fact, doesn’t change 

anything. You look at no. 2, ―. . . the right to hunt, fish and trap 

in accordance with the law as it exists from time to time.‖ 

Statement of fact, Mr. Speaker. I mean this is one of the most 

ridiculous statements that I’ve ever heard, Mr. Speaker. I mean 

if there’s ever been legislation with less teeth, it’s this Bill right 

. . . I wouldn’t know what that Bill would be than this Bill right 

here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’re simply looking at statements of fact, the current 

landscape that exists. We look at the clause no. 3 as it relates to 

Aboriginal and treaty rights, Mr. Speaker. And again we have a 

statement of fact, Mr. Speaker, because of course, Mr. Speaker, 

they make a statement about the rights affirmed in section 35 of 

the Constitution Act in 1982. Well of course, Mr. Speaker, no 

legislation in this legislature can override that, Mr. Speaker. So 

to have that statement in is completely unnecessary, poorly 

planned, poor oversight, and just simply a statement of fact, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think a failed opportunity to make a broader 

statement as it relates to Aboriginal rights, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you get to clause 4 and this is the great substance, the great 

substance of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and that’s that we designate 

November 15th as Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Day 

in Saskatchewan. That’s the great substance. Now we don’t 

oppose that, Mr. Speaker, but it’s the kind of gamesmanship 

and communications stunt that the Sask Party is all about. It’s 

simply touching the surface. 

 

Now I support in principle the establishment of a day in this 

nature. I’ll certainly get out and either partake in hunting that 

day or fishing, probably hunting that day, November 15th. We 

are getting close to white-tailed deer season there, Mr. Speaker. 

And if I’m not able to do that, Mr. Speaker, I at least will make 

contact with those that are at that point in time. 

 

So we have a Bill of little substance that’s a big disappointment 

to a province, to a province that has a rich history, rich history 

of hunting, fishing, and trapping, Mr. Speaker. And trapping of 

course has had some challenges in recent years with respect to 

fur prices that are significantly low. This Bill does nothing to 

address that, Mr. Speaker, nothing. 

 

And we look at trapping, a exercise that serves a social, 

cultural, and economic purpose. We see trapping as something 

that may be lost as we move forward. This is something that we 

need to make sure isn’t lost. We need to preserve and protect 

and enhance that activity because the skill transfer and the 

knowledge transfer and the values transfer that occurs through 

the trapping industry, through the families that have embraced 

trapping for years and years and years in our province, is not 

something, Mr. Speaker, that we should be dismissing. 

 

So it’s dismissive of trapping and the real challenges that exist. 

It’s dismissive of Aboriginal rights and not doing something 

more. It’s dismissive of hunting and hunters’ and fishers’ needs 

and opportunities as it relates to protection of land, 

enhancement of habitat, and of course better stock management. 



4220 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

And I talked a bit about trapping, Mr. Speaker, and the different 

roles it’s played in different communities. And you know, as a 

more modern-day example, Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t think of a 

better one than Robertson Trading Post in La Ronge. I’m going 

to say this is a modern-day store because trapping is certainly 

something through the North West Company and through the 

Hudson Bay Company that has existed in our province for 

many, many years, going back 150 years before us becoming a 

province. So we’re talking 2 and 300 years ago. 

 

But we have a modern story, Mr. Speaker, in this last century, 

in La Ronge, Mr. Speaker. And if you’re in La Ronge, Mr. 

Speaker, I’d recommend that you stop in at the Robertson 

Trading Post. And I hear my colleagues weighing in, and I think 

it’s appropriate at this point in time for us to recognize Alex 

Robertson from Robertson Trading Post who has passed away 

just recently. And Alex Robertson has developed a business in 

La Ronge that’s become a fixture. It’s become a conduit of 

trade and economic opportunity for many families — 

Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If you ever go in there, just from a very sort of face value kind 

of a perspective, it’s a very worthwhile place to go into and to 

see some of the incredibly beautiful leatherwork and beadwork 

and the very fine meats and goods from the region, Mr. 

Speaker. And a region that’s rich with those mammals, with 

those animals, with those fish, with those goods, and rich with 

the resources and skills and talents of those people, and 

certainly in Alex Robertson’s store in La Ronge, Saskatchewan 

that is all highlighted, and you see still the coming together of 

the North and the fur trade, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know that Alex Robertson will be missed greatly in La 

Ronge, Mr. Speaker, and that he will be remembered fondly. 

And I know that his son Scott will be offering huge leadership 

and has offered huge leadership for many years to their 

operation, and that that operation will be hugely viable into the 

future, but not with dismissive, disrespectful treatment as we 

see by the Sask Party as it relates to hunting, fishing, and 

trapping, Mr. Speaker. What they require is a thoughtful 

government that consults. A thoughtful government that goes 

about some of the challenges that affect their industry, Mr. 

Speaker; their region, Mr. Speaker; and something that’s 

important to their viability, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s disappointing that we arrive at this point here today to 

talk about hunting, fishing, and trapping — a topic that I’m 

proud to speak about at length, Mr. Speaker, with a proud 

history within our own family, as a proud hunter, fisher myself, 

and because of the important role it’s played in many different 

functions through the thousands of years in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But it’s a shame that we’re not looking at something of 

substance, Mr. Speaker. It’s a shame that we see more 

communications and spin and gamesmanship from the Sask 

Party instead of going about and doing what a government 

should be doing: consulting with the people of the province, 

recognizing some of the needs and challenges, and putting 

forward legislation that reflects that, Mr. Speaker. We see 

nothing in this legislation as it relates to the environment and 

the protection of that environment that’s fundamental — 

fundamental to the healthy fish stocks in this province, the 

healthy habitat, the healthy wildlife within this province, Mr. 

Speaker. Hunting, fishing, and trapping is absolutely dependent, 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask the opposition 

members not to drown out their own member. Order. I 

recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to hear 

my colleagues weigh in because I know they are as frustrated as 

I am to see a government disrespect hunters, fishers, and 

trappers, Mr. Speaker, because it’s something that shouldn’t be 

going on. It’s disappointing to see a government that wants to, 

for their own good and as a result of their own mismanagement, 

override legislative rules that serve this Assembly well, rules 

that they were a full part of putting together, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s the only reason we have this Bill before us, Mr. Speaker, 

this Bill that unfortunately is of little substance; low-hanging 

fruit within this Bill, Mr. Speaker, providing simply another 

little communication stunt for that Premier, Mr. Speaker, who 

has difficultly going beyond just that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But as you go and you meet with the wildlife branches across 

this province, when you go up and you chat with Scott 

Robertson up in La Ronge, when you chat with the trappers, 

when you chat with the outfitters association, they’ll let you 

know something different, Mr. Speaker. What they’ll let you 

know is that there’s all sorts of different needs, different 

challenges, different opportunities that exist as it relates to 

hunting, fishing, and trapping. 

 

What they’ll say is they’d be hugely disappointed to see a 

government go about opening up a Bill as it relates to those 

very activities that are so fundamental to our province and to do 

so little, Mr. Speaker; to disregard the Supreme Court, Mr. 

Speaker, as it relates to duty to consult and Aboriginal rights; to 

disrespect doing anything meaningful as it relates to the 

environment, enhancement of land, of habitat, and of stocks of 

wildlife and fish, Mr. Speaker. What a failed opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a disappointment for the people of this province. 

 

And they need to recognize why we’re here, Mr. Speaker. We 

have a government that mismanages everything it touches. It 

mismanages its finances. It inherits $2.3 billion in surplus, it 

inherits a booming economy, and where are we today, Mr. 

Speaker, in two short years? Well we’re $1 billion in deficit, 

Mr. Speaker, running unmitigated throughout this year, Mr. 

Speaker, without a plan. We sit and we question that Premier, 

that Minister of Finance regularly, and not a day goes by where 

any sort of a plan is presented, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We expect more, Mr. Speaker. And it’s this kind of 

mismanagement as it relates to health care, as it relates to cost 

of living, financial mismanagement that’s endemic within this 

government and reflected here today, the very reason that we’re 

now dealing with hunting, fishing, and trapping for many, many 

hours in a fashion where the Sask Party is actually being 

disrespectful of those very activities and the place of those 

individuals within our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, hunting, fishing, and trapping plays an incredibly 

important role socially, economically, and culturally. It’s played 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4221 

an incredibly important role through our history, Mr. Speaker. It 

needs to play an incredibly important role into our future. 

Providing anything less is a shame to Saskatchewan people and 

reflective of a government that just can’t get its priorities 

straight, isn’t willing to do the hard work, and wants to 

overthrow democracy at every opportunity that it has. We’re 

going to push this Sask Party government to do more on all of 

these fronts, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I think this is a 

lesson for the government here tonight. 

 

At this point in time it’s been my pleasure to weigh in on 

debate, and I will adjourn debate at this point in time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to speak 

on this Bill and go after the government for their . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Reaching of the time of adjournment, 

this House now stands adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow 

afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 117 — The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act 

  Harper ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 4195 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4200 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4214 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4221 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 




