




















































Hansard: March 08, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 26A  MONDAY, MARCH 8, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3973 

 March 8, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Introduction of Page 

 

The Speaker: — Before introduction of guests, I wish to 

inform the members of the Assembly that Megan Fraser will be 

returning as a Page for the spring session. I’d like to invite the 

members to welcome Megan. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour for me to be able to introduce to you and through you to 

all of the members of the Legislative Assembly a friend of 

Saskatchewan. Laura Lochman is the consul general for the 

United States to our country, based in Calgary. She’s joined 

today by Kim Klassen who has also been in service for some 

time at the consulate in Calgary and is also a good friend of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Ms. Lochman has been in the province on 

numerous occasions. And I’ve had the pleasure of being able to 

meet with her and discuss specific projects and just the general 

relationship between the province of Saskatchewan and the 

United States with whom we depend, on whom we depend on 

for 62 per cent of our exports in terms of market share, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I would also say that Ms. Lochman was of particular assistance 

when the province of Saskatchewan hosted, I believe, its first 

ever CODEL, congressional delegation, when Senator Lindsey 

Graham, Republican, of South Carolina; Senator Hagan, 

Democrat, of North Carolina; and White House official Jessica 

Maher were here this fall to look at carbon capture and 

sequestration leadership that the province is demonstrating and 

to talk a little bit about clean coal. And Laura was particularly 

helpful with that meeting, in addition to the other relationship 

that we have ongoing with the consul general in Calgary. 

 

And so I would just invite all members to welcome her to the 

Legislative Assembly today and thank her for her continued 

work to make sure the relationship between Saskatchewan and 

the United States continues as healthy as it is today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, through you and to you I’d 

like to join with the Premier in welcoming Laura Lochman to 

the Legislative Assembly and just say that we appreciate the 

close relationship that we have had with the consulate over the 

years. And I know Laura Lochman is replacing Tom Huffaker 

who had a great relationship with Saskatchewan. I know that 

will continue. 

 

And we had a great meeting in Calgary not that long ago to 

discuss relationships between Saskatchewan and the US [United 

States]. And I might add, Mr. Speaker, because I’m sure you 

know, the U.S. Consulate throws the best July 4th party 

anywhere in Canada. I’m not hinting about an invitation, but I 

do want to say that we appreciate that close relationship. 

 

I want to as well introduce Kim Klassen. Kim I’ve known for a 

number of years and does an excellent job in that position. She 

had a tour to the office in Iraq, and I know did great work for 

the country there and also has roots, family roots in the Eastend 

area of Saskatchewan. So I just want to include that and say we 

look forward to working closely with the office and wish you 

all the best here in the Assembly today. Thanks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While I was on 

my feet, I was going to also introduce some people sitting just 

behind Ms. Lochman and Ms. Klassen in the Assembly today, 

close friends of our family, of myself and of a number of 

members in the Legislative Assembly. And they’re here for the 

condolence motions that will be happening after question 

period, Mr. Speaker. We’re joined by Isabel Taylor, the wife of 

the late Graham Taylor, and Katherine Gagne, one of his kids, 

one of his daughters. And there’s another gentleman from Mr. 

Taylor’s old constituency that I think the Minister of Health 

wants to introduce a little bit later on. But I want to welcome 

them as well to their Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to the rest of the Legislative Assembly, we 

have a number of healthcare providers sitting in our galleries 

today. They’re here to watch the proceedings, and they’re here 

because of their struggles with the collective agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in your gallery we have Bonnie Erickson who is 

the vice-president of the health component and president of the 

healthcare bargaining committee for SGEU [Saskatchewan 

Government and General Employees’ Union]. We also have 

Barb Cape, president of SEIU [Service Employees International 

Union] West and Gord Campbell, president of CUPE [Canadian 

Union of Public Employees] healthcare council. And a good 

friend of all of us here, Gunnar Passmore from the Sask. 

Building Trades is also here. 

 

I ask all members of the Assembly to welcome these people to 

our Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health, the 

member from Indian Head-Milestone. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d 

like to join with the member opposite first of all, for a couple of 

introductions. 

 

First of all, welcome all the health care workers to the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure we may hear a little bit more 



3974 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

regarding health care as the day moves forward. At least I 

would anticipate that. 

 

I also would like to, while I’m on my feet, introduce Ken 

McCabe, as the Premier had referred to him earlier, from Indian 

Head. Actually I would probably more refer to him as Mr. 

Indian Head. He’s been in the community pretty much all his 

life and has the Indian Head-Wolseley News, owns the paper 

there and has supplied the community with great information 

for many years, for decades. 

 

But I think the one piece that I . . . When I first met Ken, we 

talked a little bit of politics, but we soon gravitated to probably 

the passion we both have more than politics, would be the 

sports hall of fame that he has in Indian Head and the 

memorabilia that he has in that facility. 

 

The first couple visits that I had with Ken in the office of the 

newspaper, the sports hall of fame was right in that area. So I 

didn’t mind if I got there a little early and Ken was busy that I 

couldn’t meet with him because there’s more than enough to 

see, memorabilia from around the area. And I would just say, 

and invite on behalf of Ken, for anybody that’s in the Indian 

Head area — or for as a matter of fact, anywhere from 

Saskatchewan — to go. And you’ll find artifacts in there that 

you won’t find in any other sports hall of fame. So 

congratulations, Ken, on the great work that you do and 

welcome to your Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 

the opposition, I’d also like to recognize in your Chamber, Ms. 

Katherine Gagne who also serves in another capacity, being the 

school board here in Regina with Regina Public Schools and 

serves our community in that capacity. I’d like to have all 

members welcome Ms. Katherine Gagne and thank her for her 

service. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While on my feet, 

I would also like to welcome the Taylors to their legislature and 

wish them my deepest sympathy. Graham Taylor was a great 

part of my hometown, Montmartre, and a good friend of my 

father’s as well. 

 

As for the introduction, I’d like to introduce a constituent by the 

name of Brad Bent. He’s a constituent of Sutherland, which by 

the way is named for the first Speaker ever of this Legislature. 

And Mr. Bent is from CLAC [Christian Labour Association of 

Canada]. I’d like to through you and to this House introduce 

him and thank him for coming and also welcome him. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake, 

the Minister Responsible for Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s my pleasure today to introduce a friend of mine 

sitting in the west gallery, Mr. Ezra Levant. Ezra is the author 

of four books, a lawyer, a political commentator, a political 

activist, founder of the Western Standard newsmagazine, and 

also sold me my very first political membership at the 

University of Alberta. So I’d ask, Mr. Speaker, all members to 

join me in welcoming Mr. Levant to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to this Assembly I’d like to introduce to 

you in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Mike and Karen Longworth 

from Harris. Folks, if you’d just give everybody a wave. 

 

Mike and Karen are great friends, great supporters. Mike also 

was a long-time employer of mine, having been a long-term 

councillor with the RM [rural municipality] of Marriott, my 

former employer in Rosetown. They were here for an excellent 

convention this weekend, and they’re staying through for the 

SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 

convention this upcoming week. I’d ask all members to please 

give them a warm welcome to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I would like to introduce to the members of this House, 

Karl Breker and his daughter Aime. We will be dealing with the 

condolence motions, and Karl is the son of former MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] Matt Breker. So 

welcome to your House. It’s a pleasure to see you here. Thank 

you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens 

who are concerned about the safety of our highway, particularly 

Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and junction of No. 

1. And we know, Mr. Speaker, that this particular portion of 

highway is a year-round traffic route to tourist destinations. So, 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and 

the junction of No. 1 in order to improve the safety for 

Saskatchewan’s motoring public. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the good 

folks from Regina, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour today to 

present a petition on behalf of the Saskatchewan Student 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 3975 

Coalition. The petition is in support of the implementation of a 

Saskatchewan scholarship fund which was in the Sask Party 

government election platform in 2007. The petition prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement the promised Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to present this petition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a petition in 

support of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. There’s a 

growing wait list for long-term care beds in and around La 

Ronge and an increase in the aging population of the 

Mamawetan Churchill Health Region. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures are from La Ronge, Air Ronge and Potato Lake. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this is a petition in support of 

withdrawal of Bill 80. And it’s signed by hundreds of citizens 

from across the province. In the petition it indicates that The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Act, 1992 has provided 

a stable environment for labour relations in the construction 

industry. It also has resulted in quality work and safe 

construction worksites, and that the existing building trades 

support apprenticeship in our province which does lead to 

highly skilled workforce. And the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in repair of Highway No. 123 that goes to the community of 

Cumberland House. This petition is signed by the leadership 

and community members of the village of Cumberland House 

and Cumberland House First Nation. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to stop denying the money that 

was allocated to this highway and commit to immediately 

provide the repairs to this highway that the people of 

northern Saskatchewan deserve and were promised. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Cumberland House and 

Cumberland House First Nation. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand today to present a petition that has been circulated by the 

Saskatchewan Student Coalition. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average of 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Regina and Moose Jaw. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 

petition in support of reducing the interest on fixed rate student 

loans to prime. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately reduce the interest on 

fixed rate student loans to the prime rate of borrowing so 

that students can accumulate less debt and focus their 

finances on building their lives here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has most recently been circulated by 

the Saskatchewan Student Coalition. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents 

of Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government 

is leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water and who have yet not had any commitment of 

assistance from the Sask Party government. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 



3976 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

These petitions are signed, Mr. Speaker, by the good residents 

of Prince Albert and Duck Lake. I so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present petitions in support of maintaining quality health care 

services in our province. And the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to negotiating a fair and just 

collective agreement with health care providers in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The petition is signed by people from Melville, Cudworth, 

Aberdeen, Martensville, Hafford, Duff, Esterhazy, Gerald, 

Kamsack, Weyburn, Kinistino, Weldon, Rabbit Lake, Leoville, 

Prince Albert, Wakaw, Big River, Leask, Radville, Birch Hills, 

Spiritwood, Glaslyn, Medstead, Albertville, Crystal Springs, 

Marcelin, Hagen, Veregin, Calder, Norquay, Canora, Pelly, 

Preeceville, Sturgis, Yorkton, Foam Lake, Regina, Estevan, 

Oxbow, Fillmore, Stoughton, Yellow Grass, Midale, Lampman, 

Coronach, Beechy, Rosthern, Prud’homme, Debden, Battleford, 

Meota, Turtleford, Cut Knife, Gallivan, Baldwinton, Unity, 

Neilburg, Kindersley, Wynyard, Shaunavon, Nokomis, Govan, 

Duval, Silton, Earl Grey, Dinsmore, Birsey, Duck Lake, Tway, 

Canwood, Edam, Vawn, St. Walburg, Rockhaven, Paynton, 

North Battleford, Marsden, Saskatoon, Dalmeny, Quill Lake, 

Admiral, Watrous, Strasbourg, Craven, Southey, Bulyea, 

Wiseton, Lucky Lake, Meadow Lake, St. Benedict, LeRoy, 

Success, Liebenthal, Rockglen, Langham, Gull Lake, Frontier, 

Wiseton, Eston, Milden, Zealandia, Macklin, Togo, Vanscoy, 

Waseca, Loon Lake, Brightsand, Paradise Hill, Marshall, 

Annaheim, Aylesbury, Lancer, Leader, Maple Creek, Verwood, 

Warman, Hazlet, Climax, Lacadena, Madison, Conquest, 

Rosetown, Primate, Wilkie, Kyle, Goodsoil, Makwa, Spruce 

Lake, Kitscoty, Englefeld, Congress, Craik, Cabri, Mendham, 

Rush Lake, Asquith, Perdue, Eastend, Elrose, Fiske, Outlook, 

Delisle, Hanley, Kerrobert, Denzil, Maidstone, Meadow Lake, 

Mervin, Livelong, Lloydminster, Watson, Lisieux, Griffin, 

Springside, Fenwood, Churchbridge, Wroxton, Hyas, Ebenezer, 

Spy Hill, Bredenbury, Rhein, Redvers, Goodeve, Langenburg, 

Theodore, Willowbrook and Dubuc. Mr. Speaker, I so humbly 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’d just like to remind our guests that 

while you’re welcome to sit and observe the proceedings in the 

Chamber, you’re not to participate in any form of any kind. And 

we’d really appreciate if you would respect the rules of the 

Assembly. 

 

I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to rise and present a petition in support of 

affordable rents and housing for The Battlefords. The 

petitioners note that rent increases of about 40 per cent that 

have been provided to residents of The Battlefords are 

outrageous. And the petitioners pray: 

 

That the honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased 

to call upon the Government of Saskatchewan to develop 

an affordable housing program that will result in a greater 

number of quality and affordable rental units to be made 

available to a greater number of people throughout The 

Battlefords, and that will implement a process of rent 

review or rent control to better protect tenants in a 

non-competitive housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of the 

constituency of The Battlefords. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents of 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented financial 

mismanagement by the Sask Party. They allude to the shameful 

billion-dollar deficit that’s been created. And what they’re 

concerned is that things are getting worse, not getting any 

better, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by many, many residents of Yorkton. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of expansion of the graduate retention program. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 3977 

Eastview. 

 

International Women’s Day 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, March 8th, 

marks International Women’s Day. This year’s theme, as 

chosen by the Status of Women of Canada — Equal Rights, 

Equal Opportunities: Progress for All. 

 

This theme reflects the federal government’s stated desire to 

encourage women and girls to participate in leadership roles, 

thereby realizing female potential, fulfilling female dreams, and 

building a more prosperous Canada. It would be wonderful to 

actualize every woman’s potential and fulfill every girl’s dream, 

especially if doing so meant making Canada more prosperous. 

But unfortunately women still struggle to reach leadership 

positions, to achieve wage parity, or even to receive basic 

human rights. We still have a long way to go. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year was the 20th anniversary of the Montreal 

massacre, marking the death of innocent women murdered 

simply because they were striving in a traditionally male 

discipline. Twenty years later, we haven’t made enough 

progress in eradicating violence towards women. In fact both 

federal and provincial governments no longer fund a Status of 

Women’s office. Why not? 

 

Today we must also remember that sisterhood goes beyond 

race, class, or nationality. And so internationally I would like to 

honour the lives of feminist Haitian leaders who died in the 

massive earthquake on January 12th of this year. Myriam 

Merlet, Magali Marcelin, and Anne Marie Coriolan organized 

shelters for battered women and girls, published a feminist 

newspaper, and worked tirelessly to get the Haitian judiciary to 

take rape seriously. 

 

They will be missed, but they will not be forgotten. Let their 

death be a reminder that struggle for equality and rights and 

opportunities will continue around the world and right here at 

home. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 

 

34th Annual Kinsmen Telemiracle 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise in the Assembly today to tell the story of a baby boy named 

Alexander. Alex was diagnosed with a congenital heart 

condition called hypoplastic left heart syndrome. This basically 

meant that the left side of his heart did not develop enough to 

fully function. 

 

In order to save his life, he needed to go Edmonton for a series 

of surgeries. Unfortunately his parents could not bear the cost of 

the travel. That is where Telemiracle stepped in and ensured 

that their costs, accommodations, meals, and transportation 

were covered so this family could be with their boy. Thankfully 

Alex has exceeded all expectations and is growing quite 

quickly. 

 

With the conclusion of the 34th annual Kinsmen Telemiracle 

telethon this Sunday, the people of Saskatchewan have once 

again shown the tremendous spirit of generosity that exists in 

our province. This weekend the people of Saskatchewan raised 

an incredible sum of $4,010,314 to assist people with special 

needs. These funds are also extremely beneficial for those that 

require special assistance accessing medical treatment. These 

initiatives are making it possible for people to live at home and 

still receive the care they need. 

 

The Telemiracle foundation ensures that all money raised by the 

people of Saskatchewan is helping the people of Saskatchewan. 

And it truly makes me proud to be a Kinsmen member from 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

International Women’s Day 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is so 

important that our Assembly acknowledge today is International 

Women’s Day. This day is significant in the promotion of 

equality of women in all aspects of society. Today I urge every 

individual here to take some time and think of all the women 

that have made a positive impact on their life. 

 

In particular, this day is a wonderful opportunity to express our 

heartfelt appreciation for Saskatchewan women. These women 

have made great contributions to all aspects of life here in 

Saskatchewan. These contributions range from the growing 

number of female physicians to homemakers who are the 

cornerstone of our respective communities and families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, International Women’s Day was proclaimed by 

the United Nations in 1975, but it originates with women’s 

activities in the early 1900s. 

 

The theme of this year’s event is Equal Rights, Equal 

Opportunities: Progress For All. In Canada our theme for this 

year is strong leadership, strong women, strong world, strong 

economy. This theme should not be limited solely for today. 

With this message as our foundation, we can continue to move 

forward with equality and make Saskatchewan women strong 

leaders. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

34th Annual Kinsmen Telemiracle 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this weekend marked the 34th 

annual Kinsmen Telemiracle. This year, Telemiracle raised over 

$4 million, surpassing last year’s total of 3.8 million, an 

absolutely amazing feat for a telethon that lasts only 20 hours. 

As always, Saskatchewan people gave generously, making the 

event a huge success. 

 

Telemiracle first began in 1977 in Centennial Auditorium in 

Saskatoon, and certainly no one would have dreamed 34 years 

ago that the momentum would carry this event on for three 

decades, raising more than $85 million. This money has helped 

thousands of people throughout the years, both individually and 

through the organizations that Telemiracle supports. 

 

Financial support from the Telemiracle Foundation helps to 



3978 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

provide special needs equipment and access to medical 

assistance to Saskatchewan residents, groups, and health 

foundations. The independence and improvement in quality of 

life that this provides is invaluable. 

 

This year Telemiracle committee was kind enough to offer 

MLAs a behind-the-scenes tour, giving us a sneak peak at how 

much work is put into making this event happen. It’s a hive of 

activity backstage, especially processing the thousands of 

donations that came in. Every year it takes approximately 1,200 

Kinsmen and Kinettes to run the Telemiracle, not to mention 

the 120 production volunteers. 

 

Thank you to Charlene Duckworth, Chair of the Kinsmen 

Foundation; Heather McInnis, Chair of Telemiracle 34; and 

Executive Director Joan Steckhan for offering us a chance to 

see their hard work. Congratulations on another successful 

Telemiracle. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Impaired Driving Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is hard 

to believe, but some people still make the choice to get behind 

the wheel and drive after drinking. To help everyone remember 

the dangers of drinking and driving, March 7th to 13th has been 

declared Impaired Driving Awareness Week. In honour of this 

week, initiatives have been made to promote awareness for this 

serious matter. 

 

Students against drunk driving has just been provided with 

$200,000 in support of their efforts to combat impaired driving. 

This sum is evenly comprised of two $100,000 donations from 

both the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority and SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance]. 

 

Drinking and driving devastates the family and friends of those 

injured or killed in alcohol-related crashes. Each accident is a 

tragedy in itself, but more and more people are beginning to 

realize that drinking and driving is a terrible decision. It is 

through the educational initiatives of hard-working groups like 

SADD [Students Against Drinking and Driving] and MADD 

[Mothers Against Drunk Driving] that these people are 

beginning to make the right decisions in regards to planning a 

safe ride home. 

 

[14:00] 

 

However work still needs to be done to ensure that there are 

fewer and fewer lives lost on Saskatchewan roads. It is 

something that is as preventable as impaired driving. So in 

honour of Impaired Driving Awareness Week, I encourage 

everyone in this province to plan a safe ride home every time 

you plan on drinking. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Public Finance and Potato Chips 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago, the Premier was 

speaking to a group of business owners in Saskatoon and gave 

us a glimpse into his understanding of public finance. Here’s 

what the Premier said: “Deficits are like potato chips . . . they’re 

not very good for your long-term health, and bet you can’t stop 

at just one.” And then he chuckled. 

 

The Premier might be able to deliver a good one-liner every 

now and then, Mr. Speaker, but can he run a province? 

Absolutely not. Perhaps it’s not surprising that he can joke and 

chuckle about his financial mismanagement. After all, he was 

schooled at the Devine school of economics where squandering 

prosperity and leaving behind a legacy of deficits is common 

practice when it comes to public finance. 

 

But for the business owners he was talking to and for the rest of 

the people in Saskatchewan, squandering prosperity and 

running deficits is not acceptable. And the Premier joking and 

chuckling about his financial mismanagement is also 

unacceptable, especially when it’s Saskatchewan people that are 

paying the price for the utter incompetence of his Saskatchewan 

Party government. The NDP [New Democratic Party] left 

behind a massive surplus. The Sask Party turned that into a 

massive deficit in two short years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the terms of right wing governments are actually a 

lot like potato chips — they’re horrible for the province’s 

long-term health. But unlike potato chips, I bet you we can stop 

at just one. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

2010 Vancouver Olympic Games 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we can begin this 

session without remarking on the most extraordinary event to 

have occurred in our country in decades — the 2010 Vancouver 

Olympic Games. 

 

We took a record number of gold medals for Canada — 14 of 

them — as well as seven silver and five bronze. Our own 

Saskatchewan athletes made us extremely proud, earning 11 

medals in total. Leading the charge were the four 

representatives of women’s hockey and three from the men’s 

team. 

 

However medals do not tell the whole Olympic story. 

Canadians became united in Vancouver in a way that has never 

been seen before. There was an outpouring of patriotism and 

pride that was unheard of. We sang O Canada with more 

feeling than we ever have. We waved our flag with pride. 

 

And our Saskatchewan pavilion was the centre of it — 120,000 

people came through the doors. People from across the world 

enjoyed the Saskatchewan experience. They responded to our 

renowned hospitality, and they loved our food and our 

atmosphere. Even The Wall Street Journal thought our pavilion 

was the very best. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will talk more at another time about the 

material legacies such as the 2010 Legacy Fund that will flow 

from this event, but the igniting of our national and the 

provincial pride is a legacy that is timeless. 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 3979 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Potash Royalties and the Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my question is 

to the Premier. And, Mr. Speaker, last fall when we had the 

mid-year report, we thought we’d seen everything when it came 

to financial mismanagement in the province. But last week we 

saw even worse and even more unprecedented incompetence. 

 

Let me just review the situation around potash. Last spring the 

Premier told us we would get 1.9 billion from potash; and his 

sidekick, the member from Kindersley, said no, it’s probably 

going to be $3 billion. Then in the mid-term report they said, 

oops, a mistake: it’s only 100 million. Now they’re saying, last 

week, we didn’t even stop at zero. We’re now at 204 million we 

owe to the potash companies. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: when did you get it so 

wrong? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the situation that 

the Leader of the Opposition is referring to is a result of a 

change made in how potash royalties are collected in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2003 under the New Democratic Party, in 2003 

they made the change in policy wherein potash companies — 

much like citizens of the country and citizens of the province — 

pay in advance, Mr. Speaker. The situation has never occurred, 

obviously, where a refund was required, as is the case with 

people’s income tax. That was the case this year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But also in the third quarter report, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting 

to note that as a result of actions taken by the government, 

expenditures are down from what was budgeted. And as a result 

of a growing economy, revenues are up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the 

Premier. Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to work in many 

countries around the world and I’ve seen countries where the 

people didn’t get as much as they should for their resources, but 

this is the first ever anyone has seen where the people have to 

pay the resource company to take the resource. That’s the first 

time. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: how much are we owing to 

the potash corporations? Is 204 million the final amount or is it 

in fact greater than that? How big is his mistake? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite will 

know, the Leader of the Opposition will know that royalties for 

potash and other resources of the province are collected by the 

province when the, in this case, in the case of potash, when it is 

mined and then when it is sold. Mr. Speaker, the anomaly of 

having to pay back potash companies is a direct result of a 

change in the collection of those royalties instituted by 

members opposite when they were the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s some other things that have happened 

since we last met, since the third quarter report. Other things, 

Mr. Speaker, like Saskatchewan has continued to lead the 

country with the lowest unemployment rate, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve broken our own record for capital investment in 

the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Premier may complete his 

response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, other changes that have 

happened since the third quarter report is that Saskatchewan’s 

population hit an all-time high. And CIBC [Canadian Imperial 

Bank of Commerce], RBC [Royal Bank of Canada], and 

Laurentian Bank are all saying the province will lead the 

country in economic growth this year. As of the third quarter, 

Mr. Speaker, our revenues are moving up. We’ve reduced 

expenses, Mr. Speaker, and we look forward to tabling the 

strongest financial balance sheets in the country later this 

month. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, again to the Premier. Let’s 

just go through this one more time. We started at 3 billion. That 

was according to the member from Kindersley. Then the 

Premier said, 1.9. Then it was 100 million. And again, not even 

stopping at zero, at three-quarter time we were at . . . We owed 

the potash corporations 204 million. A friend of mine said, stop 

the game; by the end of the game, if you keep this up with that 

team on the field, the potash corporations are going to own the 

province. 

 

The question to the Premier is: why did you keep it a secret? 

Why did you keep that number a secret when the mid-term 

report came out? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — This member, you know, I remember a day 

when this member would not make a mistake like asking a 

question like that. He said . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the member asked why did we 

keep it a secret, this anomaly, this method of collecting taxes in 

the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it’s an NDP secret. 

It’s their plan. They instituted it in 2003 and we have tried very 

hard, we have tried very hard, Mr. Speaker, to divulge all the 

list of things that the NDP did. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we didn’t get around to this 



3980 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

particular anomaly in how the NDP decided to tax the potash 

situation. The hon. members are shouting from their seat, why 

did you hide it? Again it was implemented by the NDP in 2003, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s now clear that the 

numbers the Premier is using as it relates to potash simply can’t 

be believed. That’s obvious after a year of changes going from 

3 billion to 1.9 to 100 million to zero, now to minus 204 

million. And while the potash corporations here will get a 

cheque, there are a number of people who’ll be getting NSF 

[not sufficient funds] cheques — the children’s hospital, 

municipalities, education, long-term care homes, the surgical 

care centres, and employment and skills training. They’ll all be 

getting NSF. And everybody else is being told to tighten up, 

including the workers who are here today. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: when will you realize that 

you should leave the financing to the people in the Department 

of Finance, and when will the Premier understand that his fiscal 

management is not that good? And when will he stand and 

apologize to the people of the province for creating this mess? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, when we inherited 

government from members opposite, there was $6.8 billion in 

General Revenue Fund debt in the province of Saskatchewan. 

There was $1.2 billion in the savings account that was left 

behind by the previous government. 6.8 billion in debt; $1.2 

billion cash in the savings account. 

 

In the two years since the Saskatchewan Party’s been elected, 

the debt’s been reduced to 4.2 and there is $700 million in the 

bank account. That’s a net improvement of $2 billion, even 

after record infrastructure investment, record debt repayment, 

record tax cuts, and record investment in those who are most 

vulnerable — in housing, Mr. Speaker, in those who have 

disabilities, Mr. Speaker, in health care in terms of recruiting 

and retention. This government has done more in two years than 

that outfit did in 16, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Contract Negotiations for Health Care Workers 

 

Ms. Junor: — The Sask Party government has presented 

Saskatchewan’s 25,000 health care workers with a 

take-it-or-leave-it deal which health care workers have 

described as insulting and disrespectful. Health care workers 

have asked the government to come back to the bargaining table 

and the government has refused. 

 

To the minister: why is the government refusing to negotiate 

with Saskatchewan’s 25,000 health care workers, 80 per cent of 

which are women? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say from the outset that, you know, 

every day in Saskatchewan there are $8 million spent on health 

care wages throughout the province, Mr. Speaker, from corner 

to corner. It doesn’t matter whether it’s in long-term care, 

whether it’s in home care, acute care. Mr. Speaker, it’s a very 

complex system with very valuable people working in it from 

corner to corner, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I want to tell the Assembly that this government respects 

those workers, Mr. Speaker; we absolutely do. But I will also 

say that it’s very interesting the question coming from that 

member. Is she saying that we should step into the middle of 

negotiations? Is that what the former government did all the 

time? 

 

We have a negotiator, SAHO [Saskatchewan Association of 

Health Organizations], and we have the service provider unions 

that settle on a contract, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, any time 

those negotiations start heating up, I think we get close to a 

final agreement, Mr. Speaker. I would ask those two parties — 

employer, employee — to eventually reach an agreement. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is too little 

respect, too late. And I think to the minister: training days are 

over. Put your big boy pants on and get to work. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Just a reminder that it’s 

a privilege to be allowed to sit as guests in the gallery. Been 

asked to refrain from any involvement in the debate. The 

member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 

Party promised to shorten wait times and fix the health care 

problems in the province. To date the government has done 

nothing but break their promises. Wait times are higher now 

than they were two years ago. The front-line health workers 

who provide care and support to patients and contribute to 

reducing wait times have been without a contract for over two 

years. 

 

To the minister: how does refusing to negotiate with health care 

workers who are on the front lines every day reduce wait times? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in the opening 

question, that we value the work that all health care providers 

do, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s in dietary, whether it’s in laundry, 

whether it’s an LPN [licensed practical nurse], a lab tech, an 

RN [registered nurse], a doctor, Mr. Speaker. It’s a very 

complex system and we want to make sure that they’re all 

working in conjunction to provide the best care that is possible, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, but I would challenge that member to compare 

any two years out of that former NDP government’s record to 

the two years that we’ve put in as government, Mr. Speaker. 

We have recruited more nurses in this province than that 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 3981 

government ever imagined on doing. In fact, Mr. Speaker, that 

government literally turned the back on health care workers. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s simply not true. The 

Saskatchewan Party spent $1.5 million on the Patient First 

Review because they said they’re going to put patient care first. 

Nobody, nobody believes that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 25,000 health care workers that have been two 

years without a contract are people that provide the care. These 

are the special care aides, the licensed practical nurses, 

emergency medical personnel, diagnostic technologists, to 

name but a few who work every day caring for our parents, our 

grandparents, our children, and our partners. 

 

To the minister: the 25,000 health care providers view this final 

offer as insulting and disrespectful. How can ramming this offer 

through improve employee morale and patient care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, these employees are 

extremely valuable to the health care system. Mr. Speaker, the 

contract . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — The employees and the employer 

have been . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland will come to order and allow the minister to 

respond. I recognize . . . Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the employees and the 

employers have been negotiating for a long time. This contract 

has . . . Some of them have expired for certainly a lot longer 

than we would like to see as a government, Mr. Speaker. But 

that is contract negotiations that happen through SAHO, the 

employer, and through the employee unions, Mr. Speaker. And 

I don’t think it would be appropriate for any government to step 

inside. 

 

I think from the line of questioning, Mr. Speaker, that if they 

ever got a chance to form government again — which I can’t 

see for quite a long time — they would probably be injecting 

themselves directly into the negotiations. Is that how they 

would have negotiations conducted, Mr. Speaker? Because that 

isn’t the way our government is working, Mr. Speaker. We 

allow the employer and the employee to come to a final 

agreement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And absolutely there are always times where there’s going to be 

disagreements. I’ve had the opportunity to go through a few of 

these negotiations from the seat of the Minister of Health. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it is very tense at times, but, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe an agreement can be reached and I believe it will be a 

fair agreement for not only the health care workers but the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. My apologies to the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. It was the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview I was . . . [inaudible] . . . I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, this business about standing 

behind SAHO . . . The minister is the puppet master. Pull the 

strings. You know how it works. SAHO’s merely the puppet of 

the government. 

 

It’s no secret, Mr. Speaker, that recruitment and retention of 

health care workers is a big issue. On the one hand, the 

government says they are working to recruit more health care 

professionals and retain the ones we have. On the other hand, 

the Sask Party has brought in essential services legislation, left 

front-line health providers without a contract for over two 

years, and forced a final offer on with them which health care 

workers feel is insulting and devalues their work. 

 

To the minister: how does the Premier’s take-it-or-leave-it 

agenda that is disrespectful and insulting and devalues the work 

of health care employees encourage new health care workers to 

come to Saskatchewan or those that are here to stay? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to provide a highlight and an update on essential 

services. As far as people coming to Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, the Premier’s already highlighted, we’ve broken our 

population growth record ever, Mr. Speaker. And certainly we 

assume and anticipate that’s going to continue. 

 

But regarding essential services, Mr. Speaker, we made sure 

that essential services were put in place. We came to power in 

the midst of strikes at the University of Regina and the 

University of Saskatchewan when 400 people per day were 

being turned away from medical care. 

 

We’ve said that when it comes to plowing highways, when it 

comes to medical care, we want to make sure that the people of 

this province are protected, Mr. Speaker. We’ve done that with 

moderate legislation, Mr. Speaker. We stand beside and behind 

our essential service legislation, Mr. Speaker. And we’re not 

alone, Mr. Speaker. In Melville, in Swift Current, at the 

University of Saskatchewan, in Moose Jaw, for SGI, and ISC 

[Information Services Corporation], we said that agreements 

have already been signed. Essential services are part of . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can talk all he wants 

but essential services is not a sell for people who are sitting 

without a contract for two years basically because this 

government cannot seem to get their head around how you 



3982 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

bargain, how you bargain fairly, and that essential services has 

done nothing to move that forward or help it. 

 

And because of the fiscal mismanagement of this government, 

the Premier has said now to the health district, no more than 3 

per cent in health care spending in the next year. The 

government is wasting hundreds of thousands of dollars on an 

advertising campaign, trying to force health care workers to 

accept a final offer by in essence bargaining in the media. 

 

Instead of using this money in a propaganda campaign, these 

resources could be used to negotiate an agreement. Mr. Speaker, 

how can the minister justify that this is money well spent? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said from the outset, 

any time that there is a bargained contract, there are people on 

each side and certainly the emotions will start increasing and 

certainly some concern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I think it’s extremely important that you’ll see both sides 

get their information out. SAHO has decided to take out some 

information ads as to their side of the agreement, Mr. Speaker, 

and the unions, representative unions, have done the same. 

They’ve taken out advertising to certainly get their message out 

to their members, Mr. Speaker. The employer, SAHO, is taking 

out information messages to try and . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I’d ask the opposition members 

to allow the minister to respond. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — The employer, through SAHO, is 

certainly doing the same — getting the message out that they 

feel that this is a fair agreement to both the service providers 

and the employers, Mr. Speaker. Ultimately it is the employer’s 

decision as to whether they want to agree to that contract or not, 

Mr. Speaker. It is a system that has been in place for many, 

many years, Mr. Speaker, and a system that I think has served 

the province quite well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Support for Victims of Domestic Abuse 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, today is International Women’s 

Day, and many of us in Saskatoon are asking a very simple 

question. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why did the government 

cut the domestic abuse outreach program? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the services that are 

provided in this program were transferred from the Ministry of 

Social Services to the Ministry of Justice. Mr. Speaker, I can 

advise the member opposite and advise the members of this 

House that it is the intention of this government and the 

intention of this ministry to ensure that services will be 

provided. They’ll be provided by a variety of different social 

workers. 

 

And I want to assure the members opposite that we value the 

work that is being done in that area. And it is of primary 

importance that the people that need this assistance are given 

this assistance, Mr. Speaker. And this government will ensure 

that that takes place. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this government cut this 

program without making sure that there were services in the 

community to replace them. The money for Family Service 

Saskatoon came after the fact and so far is just an interim 

measure. 

 

A letter from 14 community-based organizations to the minister 

received in December states, “None of us at the table had been 

aware . . . [of] this decision . . . pending.” Mr. Speaker, no one 

asked the agencies in Saskatoon whether or not they could 

handle this work. 

 

To the minister: how could you possibly cut a program for 

abused women and their children without even checking with 

the community to see if the services could be provided 

elsewhere? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have in fact increased 

the amount of money that has gone to sexual assault centres. 

We have made sure that we have provided appropriate service 

wherever it is necessary. Mr. Speaker, this is part of an intended 

plan where we will ensure that services are provided uniformly 

across the province. 

 

There was an anomaly in the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 

We will ensure that services continue to be provided. Services 

are being provided now, and there will be no disruption in the 

services that are provided, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to assure the member opposite and the people that are 

using those facilities that they ought not be subject to political 

vagaries or political accusations. The imperative, Mr. Speaker, 

is that the services are being provided and will in fact continue 

to be provided. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — The domestic abuse outreach program 

provided some very practical services to abused women and 

their children. It helped women find emergency shelter. It 

helped women when they had to go back to their home to 

retrieve their belongings. It helped them in the courts. It helped 

them go to the hospital or to go to the police station. 

 

These services are not being provided by any other 

organization, and the government has only offered funding for 

one full-time interim position at Family Service Saskatoon 

when there used to be four people that assisted women who 

were fleeing abusive situations. 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 3983 

To the minister: what are these women supposed to do now? 

Why did the government cut this program when there’s nothing 

in the community to replace it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite will 

be well aware that February 1st, 2010, services were provided 

by Family Service Saskatoon under a contractual basis. Those 

services will be continued. Services will be provided by other 

sources, Mr. Speaker. We will ensure that those services are 

provided and will continue to be provided, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The imperative is that the people that need those services — 

and some of those people, Mr. Speaker, are some of the most 

needy people in this province — this government will ensure 

that we provide services for those people through transition 

houses, through sexual assault centres, and through whatever 

sources that they need because those people need it. And we 

will ensure that, Mr. Speaker, that those services will continue 

to be provided, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, on December the 18th, a group 

of organizations representing the violence against women 

interagency committee and other service providers wrote the 

government. And, Mr. Speaker, here’s what they said. They 

said that they came together in 2005 to ensure that the 

Saskatoon domestic violence court was put in place in order to 

support other initiatives. And this court began in September of 

2005. This is what they say to the government: 

 

Had the community known these workers would be 

withdrawn in 4 years time, they may not have put their 

support behind this very valuable initiative or could have, 

at least adapted their operations. It is unconscionable to 

provide services and programming for largely male 

offenders without corresponding services and programs to 

support the very victims of those offences. 

 

There is one person working at Family Service Bureau . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we recognize and 

appreciate the work that has been done by service providers 

through domestic violence court, through the variety of 

agencies that provide service. We also recognize, thank, and 

appreciate the people that work in transition houses. And Mr. 

Speaker, we have worked with a variety of different agencies to 

ensure that the necessary services are provided and will in fact 

continue to be provided. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could also advise you, and I can advise the 

members opposite, that there is a consultation process under 

way to determine what services will continue to be necessary to 

be provided and will also, Mr. Speaker, that consultation will 

continue to ensure how best those services can, should, and 

ought to be provided, Mr. Speaker. It is not appropriate, Mr. 

Speaker, to make an assumption that because one program is 

cancelled . . . 

The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. The member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this service had been in place in 

our province for over 20 years. This service provided 

on-the-ground support to women and their children fleeing 

domestic abuse. This service provided very practical services 

for women: going to the hospital, going to the police station, 

going through the court system, going to their home to retrieve 

their articles and clothing, and then going to emergency 

shelters. 

 

Now there’s one position — one position only — and I ask the 

minister very simply, will his government heed the call of 

hundreds of women in Saskatoon and reinstate this program so 

that women that are victims of domestic violence simply aren’t 

the latest victims of this government’s . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to advise the 

members opposite and I want to reassure the people that use this 

service, services will continue to be provided. They will in fact 

be provided by a variety of different sources, Mr. Speaker. We 

will ensure that they are appropriately provided and 

appropriately . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, some of these services will 

be provided through victims services through the Ministry of 

Justice. Some of them will be provided through the Ministry of 

Social Services. The consultation process is under way. There is 

an interim plan through Family Service of Saskatoon. We will 

work with those agencies, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the 

necessary services are provided. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely unfair that the members opposite 

are attempting to use this matter . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the opposition members 

to allow the minister to complete his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we will continue to ensure 

and we will work with these services to ensure that there is not 

a gap for any of the people that need these services, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 611 — The Autism Spectrum Disorder Strategy Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 611, The Autism 

Spectrum Disorder Strategy Act be now introduced and read a 



3984 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Eastview has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 611, The Autism Spectrum 

Disorder Strategy Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When will the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Ms. Junor: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

MESSAGE FROM 

HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

 

The Speaker: — Members, I have a statement from Her 

Majesty for Commonwealth Day, and if you’ll just bear with us 

for a second until people leave the galleries, and then I’ll ask 

you to rise. 

 

I’d ask the members and the visitors in the galleries to please 

rise for the message from Her Majesty. 

 

Today’s societies are constantly seeking ways to improve 

their quality of life, and science and technology play a 

vital part in that search. 

 

Experimentation, research and innovation, mean that 

more opportunities for improving people’s lives exist 

today than ever before. Take long distance 

communication, where the obstacles of time and 

geography have been dramatically reduced: people can 

now use mobile phones to be in instant contact virtually 

anywhere in the world, be it with a medical centre in the 

Himalayan mountains in Asia, a Pacific island school, a 

research facility at the South Pole, or even the 

International Space Station, beyond this planet altogether. 

 

Advances in modern telecommunications are also having 

a marked economic effect on people from developing 

nations in the Commonwealth, helping to transform small 

to medium-sized businesses. The internet is playing an 

important part in helping to nurture these fledgling 

markets but, as yet, it still remains an unaffordable option 

for too many of our Commonwealth citizens. 

 

Progress in the fields of healthcare, manufacturing, and 

education have, for the most part, helped improved 

people’s lives throughout the world. In the health sector, 

the Commonwealth has shown how collaborative 

schemes can successfully assist member states fight 

pandemics and diseases. 

 

In making these advances the Commonwealth recognizes 

that the best forms of innovation are those that unite, and 

help build resilient partnerships and better societies as a 

whole. 

 

This is particularly important for the more than half of the 

Commonwealth citizens who are under 25 years of age. It 

is vital that their potential to build on the exceptional 

scientific expertise that exists in the member states is also 

fully supported through education and social 

development. The Commonwealth understands this, and 

should continue to aid and encourage our young people to 

participate in the exciting new opportunities that lie 

ahead, in the knowledge that progress is something which 

must be sustained and shared by all. 

 

Signed by Her Majesty, Elizabeth R 

8 March 2010 

 

Thank you, members. 

 

Before orders of the day, we have some condolence motions to 

move. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure, based on that 

introduction, that I should seek leave or not. So I’ll do that. I’ll 

seek leave of the Assembly to move a motion of condolence, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Premier. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Mathieu Theodore Breker 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I, at the end of my remarks, 

and there are three separate motions of condolence today for 

members to consider, and I will move, request leave and move a 

separate motion for each of those that we honour today. I would 

advise the Assembly that at the conclusion of my remarks I’ll 

be moving the formal notice of motion, I believe seconded by 

the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first individual that we wish to honour today 

was a member of this Assembly from 1964 to 1971. He served 

in the Ross Thatcher government. Mathieu Theodore Breker is 

his name. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all understand in this Assembly that whether 

we’re on that side of the House or this side of the House, 

whatever our partisan beliefs may or may not be, we understand 

we stand on the shoulders of those who went before us. We 

understand that not only the traditions of this Assembly, but the 

history and the building of the province of Saskatchewan are 

owed not only to those who’ve served in this Assembly prior to 

all of us, but in large ways, Mr. Speaker, in many ways our 

proud history and what we’ve accomplished is owed to those 

who were in this Chamber and who made decisions on behalf of 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 3985 

I know that from my read of history, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government, the Thatcher government, 1964 to 1971, undertook 

very many important initiatives — initiatives not limited to 

economic development, but I think certainly that would have 

been a focus of that government. I think it would be fair to say 

that the Thatcher government was focused on the economy of 

the province and trying to foster within Saskatchewan a 

stronger private sector, a stronger . . . well in fostering, really 

bringing together all of the sectors of the economy. But I know 

their focus in those eight years was on ways to make sure that 

small-business women and men could flourish in the province, 

that agriculture also could flourish. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that caucus, that government was aided by 

people like Mr. Breker who contributed much both to the 

government itself and to this Assembly and to his constituency 

of Humboldt. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, by leave of this Assembly I would move: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Mathieu Theodore Breker, who passed away on 

November 20, 2008, and was a member of this 

Legislative Assembly from 1964 to 1971 representing the 

constituency of Humboldt for the Liberals during the 

Ross Thatcher government. 

 

Mr. Breker was born February 15, 1928. He grew up in 

Englefeld. He graduated from Humboldt high school, then 

attended the University of Saskatchewan where he 

attained a Bachelor of Arts and a Bachelor of Science in 

pharmacy. 

 

Mr. Breker married the love of his life, Elvira, and 

together they raised six children. He farmed his land and 

worked as a pharmacist. And in 1973 Mr. Breker became 

the mayor of Humboldt and served in that capacity for 13 

years, Mr. Speaker. And so his public service was not 

limited to this Assembly, but also to the council chambers 

in what would have been then the town of Humboldt. He 

served many boards and committees and was known for 

his sense of servant leadership. 

 

Matt is survived and sadly missed by his wife of 55 years, 

Elvira, and six children — Kurt, Kevin, Karl, Kris, Eric, 

and Joanne. In recording its own deep sense of loss and 

bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 

sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 

 

So moved, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to stand 

today and join the Premier in offering condolences and 

sympathy to the family of Mathieu Breker. 

 

I wasn’t in the Assembly, obviously, at the time that Mr. Breker 

was an MLA, but I want to say that we had several things in 

common. I grew up in a Liberal household, my mother being 

Irish Catholic. It sort of came with your baptism at that time 

that you would be Liberal. And some of my colleagues will 

understand and some other members will understand how that 

worked in large families that were Catholic, especially when 

you were . . . family had immigrated from the United States. In 

the United States, they were Democrat, big Kennedy fans, and 

we had many discussions around that. 

 

But we came by our politics very much by being part of an Irish 

Catholic family and I remember very much going to Liberal 

meetings early in my life, going along with mom and dad. And 

I also remember the first time I became involved in politics — 

it was as a student on the Regina campus — and the first time I 

came home and told my parents that I was going to be 

supporting Allan Blakeney and the New Democratic Party. And 

it was a very cool reception for a long time after that. 

 

But I just want to say that when it comes to politics, what 

becomes obvious — and Mathieu Breker obviously had many 

of these strong beliefs in being committed to this community 

and being an activist for over 20 years — that whether you’re a 

Sask Party member or a Liberal or Conservative or New 

Democrat, people become involved in politics with the best 

interest in mind. And I know that Mathieu Breker and his team 

of that day did everything that they believed was in the best 

interest of the province. 

 

When I look at the life of Mathieu Breker, I’m struck by the 

fact that we share two things in common: one is the love of 

politics, the other is the love of farming. And while Mathieu 

Breker was a Liberal member from the constituency of 

Humboldt from ’64 to ’71, and then he was defeated by another 

distinguished member, that is our dear departed friend, Ed 

Tchorzewski, who was a teacher in that area. 

 

Now the fact that he was defeated doesn’t necessarily speak to 

his popularity because he was one of the most popular MLAs, 

as was the member I defeated, Sonny Anderson, a Liberal in 

southwest Saskatchewan. He was a very, very popular 

individual. And I think in many ways his legacy in politics will 

be well remembered as being an honest, outstanding member of 

this Assembly. 

 

And I just want to say that he also served as mayor for a 

number of years. And as many of us know who have served in 

this Assembly, there is life beyond. And we all have had 

experiences that tell us that when we complete our task here, 

there’ll be many callings that Mathieu took up — that of 

farming and working with his dad near Muenster and then 

working with his son as he helped him get established on the 

farm. 

 

So it’s with emotion and a feeling of nostalgia for the period of 



3986 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

time that he would have represented that I want to join with the 

Premier and other members of the Assembly in extending to the 

family of Mathieu Breker our most serious and sincere 

sympathy and condolence. And I would second the motion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank 

the House for the opportunity to speak on the condolence 

motion for Matt Breker. 

 

When I was a young boy, Matt Breker was my family’s MLA. I 

remember being along with my father and stopping at the 

Humboldt drugstore and my dad talking with Matt about 

politics. Matt, being a great politician, always included me in 

the greeting. In later years, I in turn would stop at the drugstore 

and talk politics with Matt Breker. 

 

Matt loved people. He was a very warm and genuine person 

with a great sense of humour. When you met him, you felt the 

very warm and genuine greeting. He made you feel good. 

 

Matt was a farmer born in Englefeld and his roots never left the 

land. He was a great voice for agriculture. But his biggest 

legacy might be a simple quote that bears for all of us. And the 

quote is from his maiden speech in this legislature. And he said, 

“The province’s welfare comes first and foremost. Our political 

lives are only incidental.” 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mathieu’s political career was not only in the legislature, but he 

was the mayor of Humboldt for more years than most mayors 

can manage. He was an outstanding person, a great people 

person, and a tribute to our province and communities. I would 

like to thank Matt and especially his family for what they 

endured because we know the pressure on political families. So 

we thank you, and we are all better off for having known him. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the one by 

the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I request again leave to make 

a motion of condolence. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Michael Alfred Hopfner 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

you to members of the Assembly for leave to make another 

motion of condolence. I will be moving it more formally at the 

end of my remarks, and then I believe again the Leader of the 

Opposition will be seconding the motion. And I think others 

may also wish to speak on the motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this second motion of condolence we honour 

former member Michael Hopfner who was the member for Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster from 1982 until 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I did know Mr. Hopfner personally. I knew him as 

someone who worked in this building, and after about 1988 or 

so and prior to that, someone who was involved in youth 

politics. And met him, I think, for the very first time at a 

convention, at a political convention not unlike we just had in 

our own party here over the weekend. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think this is probably a trait of successful 

politicians — as has been alluded to very eloquently by the 

member for Batoche in honouring Mr. Breker — and that is that 

those members who are able to get elected to this place and who 

are able to get re-elected to this place are first of all very 

genuinely committed to the province, as has been noted. 

 

And secondly they are, they just easily relate to people of all 

ages. And that was the case with Mr. Hopfner. He sought us out 

as young people at a convention, perhaps intimidated a little bit 

about being at an early political convention. I remember he was 

one who actually sought out the young people that attended and 

would sit down with us at tables and encourage us to be 

involved in the debate. 

 

He would be one, I recall, who would specifically get up to 

support youth resolutions that came before the convention. 

Sometimes he may even had some questions about all of the 

detail that would have been put forward by the youth wing of 

the party in those resolutions, but I think he thought it important 

to support and encourage that kind of involvement. 

 

And then I got to know him a little bit more later on when I had 

the privilege of working in this building, in ministers’ offices, 

and found him to be an assiduous and articulate advocate for 

not just his constituency, not just the people of Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster, but for the industry that he left and then 

returned to after politics. And you will know, Mr. Speaker, very 

well — I wasn’t at any caucus meetings in those years, but I 

expect — when matters, when issues related to the hotel 

industry were brought forward before the government of the 

day, I expect he was as articulate and as, at times, fiery on those 

issues on behalf of that important industry as he was when he 

worked directly with ministers responsible and he advocated for 

important changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, like other MLAs, I’m also aware that he worked 

very hard for a number of important projects in Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster, be they education or be they health care. 

And so when we remember Mr. Hopfner today, we remember 

someone who served the Legislative Assembly and who was 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 3987 

also dedicated to his constituents, but also dedicated to a very 

important industry in the province. We remember someone who 

always had time for people who were interested in politics 

regardless of their age. And for that I will always be grateful. 

 

And it’s an honour therefore for me to move, with leave of the 

Assembly: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Michael Alfred Hopfner, who passed away on April 19, 

2009, was a member of the Legislative Assembly from 

1982 to 1991, representing the Cut Knife-Lloydminster 

constituency for the Progressive Conservative Party. 

 

Mr. Hopfner was born in Humboldt, Saskatchewan, on 

January 25, 1947. He grew up and attended school in 

Lake Lenore before moving to Saskatoon where he 

studied to become a journeyman electrician. After leaving 

Saskatoon, Mr. Hopfner was involved in several 

small-town Saskatchewan communities. 

 

He and his wife Lori eventually settled in Lashburn and 

raised their family there. Mr. Hopfner is survived by his 

wife and two sons. Once established in Lashburn, Mr. 

Hopfner became very involved in municipal politics and 

was soon elected mayor. After provincial politics, he 

returned to his hotel business in Lashburn. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

honour to so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of the former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 

to say a few words on the passing of former MLA Michael 

Hopfner who was the PC [Progressive Conservative] MLA for 

Cut Knife-Lloydminster from ’82 to ’91. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, one of the things that I 

think a lot of people who are not members of the Legislative 

Assembly don’t know, and can’t know because they’re not here, 

is the friendship that often builds up and camaraderie between 

members of a caucus. But in many cases, across the floor with 

members of the opposing party as well and there are many 

examples of that. 

 

And during the years that Michael was a member, of course 

winning election in 1982 . . . I remember very clearly coming to 

the Assembly with Michael when he came for the first time. 

And if you can imagine, we had gone from government with a 

majority to eight seats in opposition. And our scraggly little 

crew sat right in this area here. There were 15 members of 

Premier Grant Devine’s caucus on this side of the House and 

the House was full on the other side with Conservative 

members. And, Mr. Speaker, you will remember that because it 

was a very exciting time for the newly elected government, and 

I might add, not very exciting for the eight members of the NDP 

who were returned to the Assembly. 

 

And I remember sitting where my colleague from Moose Jaw is 

sitting. And Mike sat right near the back and we struck up a 

friendship. And he was one of the people, even in those heady 

days of the Conservative government, who would always stop 

in the hall and not console, he wouldn’t quite go that far, but 

say positive words about the role of opposition. And I quite 

liked his style and what he did. And he became a good friend to 

the point where several times . . . And the Premier has 

mentioned his interest in the hotel business, that we talked long 

and hard about the role of the hotel system across the province 

and how it was key to the economic development. 

 

And when towns and communities in this province lose their 

hotel, it really is the beginning of the end in many cases. And he 

taught me a lot about — not the tipping of the glasses in the bar 

— but the importance of the role that a hotel plays in a 

community because it’s much more than a place where people 

go to imbibe. It’s a place to meet, greet, join friends, celebrate 

events. And without the hotel system in rural Saskatchewan, it 

simply wouldn’t be the same. 

 

So I wanted to rise today to join with the Premier in saying a 

few of these things. And I also with your approval, Mr. 

Speaker, would like to just add a comment from one of his other 

friends, Violet Stanger who replaced Mike as the member for 

Cut Knife-Lloydminster. And in chatting with her the other day, 

she remembers him too. And she described him as a small town 

guy from Lashburn who everybody in the area liked. And she 

remembers him as an avid hockey player and that he loved to be 

involved in community events. 

 

And I just wanted to add that to my comments. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I too want to join and say on behalf of the caucus I 

represent and lead, our very, very, deep sympathy and 

condolences to the Michael Hopfner family. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like 

to add some remarks in the remembrance of the former member 

Michael Hopfner from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. I think it is 

most appropriate that I first mention a couple of the notable 

things that happened in our constituency when Michael was the 

member. 

 

Michael believed in Saskatchewan, and he believed that our 

area of the province was going to be a major part of its future 

and of its growth. And Michael I think must have been a leader 

within his caucus for some of the projects that took place in our 

area. And I’d like to mention a few of those. 

 



3988 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

I look around my community now and many schools were built 

when he was the MLA. And I would expect that it was his 

advocation that we are growing and that this infrastructure is 

needed. Some of them are the new school in Hillmond, the 

Paradise Hill School. Lashburn High School was built in those 

years, and just a few years after it was built, the Lashburn High 

School expansion and gymnasium was built. And that’s where I 

went to school and where I played my sports, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The hospitals, the Lloydminster Hospital was built in the years 

that Michael was MLA as was the Maidstone Hospital and the 

Paradise Hill Hospital. And I think it’s a real testament to 

Michael that he was advocating for his constituents at that time 

and that we were seeing the growth in our area that required this 

sort of infrastructure. 

 

One thing that I was thinking about is if someone in our area 

was to point a finger at what is maybe the instrumental piece in 

the Lloydminster area that has driven a lot of its success, that 

people would look to as a fundamental of the growth that we’ve 

seen in the last 25 years, and I think almost everyone would say 

the upgrader has had a real crucial role. 

 

And I was a young, young person at that time, but I remember 

how big it was that that project would come into our community 

and it would really allow the oilfield to flourish as a whole. It 

was more than just the unit itself, it meant a lot to everything 

and everyone. And that has been an unmitigated success for our 

constituency and I would argue, for our province. The upgrader 

has been expanded many times and is currently running at 

capacity, and I think financially was quite a success for the 

province as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I got to . . . I shouldn’t say I got to know Michael. 

I was a young, young kid and Michael was a major part of our 

community. I can say that Michael was never boastful. He 

always handled himself with utmost of respect and class. I think 

I was eight years old when he was first elected and I was very 

proud that I knew him. His oldest son, Cole, was in my class, 

and I knew him from kindergarten to this very day. And his 

oldest son Bart was one year younger. We played sports 

together and travelled together. And I think a lot of their family, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

At that young age, it made a large impression on me that I knew 

someone that had this very public role. And I thought that it was 

very important that this job he had was to represent me and all 

of our common neighbours. I never thought of his time in 

Regina back then. It was probably too abstract for me, but I 

knew that people were very proud that the premier had asked 

him to be Deputy Whip and have a leadership role within his 

caucus. 

 

It is only now that I hear stories from some of my colleagues on 

both sides of the House of what Michael’s roles were here in 

Regina and how he handled himself. And I’ve heard stories that 

he was an aggressive . . . He argued the points very aggressively 

and articulately. It doesn’t surprise me that he was articulate, 

but the spirit that he brought to this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, it 

impresses me when I hear those stories. 

 

It is also now that I realize while growing up with his sons that 

their family were making many sacrifices, and the amount of 

time that he would have had to spend away from home. 

 

[15:00] 

 

As a kid, you don’t realize about your friends’ families and 

parents, but I know that, through personal experience of what 

I’m living now, that Lori, Michael’s wife, would have been 

picking up a lot of the slack at home with their two sons and 

with their business, the Lashburn Hotel. 

 

On weekends playing hockey with his sons, you know, Mike 

was a mainstay. He’d drive home like we do for the weekends, 

and he’d be in the box or running the score clock, opening the 

gate. He was there and part of our community. I think it’s a 

testament to the Hopfners, Mr. Speaker, the commitment that 

Mike made to our community and his family continues to. Both 

Michael’s sons still call Lashburn home. In fact Mike’s 

grandchildren are in preschool with my oldest daughter. 

 

And Bart, he has travelled extensively. He lived in Japan. He 

married a girl who was born and raised in Japan, and they 

decided that they wanted to move back to Saskatchewan, back 

to Lashburn, to raise their family. And I think that’s a testament 

to the work that his father did — and to the community — that 

everyone in this Chamber at that time and currently have added 

to this province. 

 

The Hopfners are business people, Mr. Speaker — Michael in 

the hotel industry. Cole and a couple of partners started a very 

successful oil field service company, and they’ve based it out of 

Lashburn, hiring dozens and dozens of people in Lashburn, 

running trucks, pressure trucks in the oil industry. And I know 

it’s a very well-respected business. 

 

In closing I would like to make a couple of comments that . . . 

I’d like to thank Michael Hopfner for his service to our 

community, his service to this Chamber. And I know that I will 

long remember that, as will the members of my community. I 

was proud to know Michael, and I’m glad that his legacy lives 

on through the great works that we see around us in our 

community every day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my — I don’t 

know whether to say duty or pleasure — we’ll call it a pleasure, 

to join in this condolence statement today for Michael Hopfner. 

First off, I want to express my condolences to Lori and her two 

sons and all of the Hopfner family and Mike’s friends and 

colleagues. 

 

I actually first met Mike Hopfner in 1975, and he was working 

at the time for an irrigation company. I believe it was Tofin 

Irrigation in Outlook. Mike was working there, and I was 

working for Sask Wheat Pool at the farm service centre. These 

many years later it seems like an entirely different lifetime and 

in many ways it was. But I can say this about it clearly: Mike 

and I both were significantly younger than I am today and he 

was at his passing. The Premier mentioned that Mike Hopfner 

related well to people and indeed he did. He related very well. 

 

I had just moved into Outlook and decided it was a great 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 3989 

community to live in and was looking forward to a long future 

there. That lasted just over a year. And then they ran me out of 

town, and I wound up in Regina with a promotion with the 

Wheat Pool is actually what happened. 

 

I didn’t get run out of town, but Mike and I had many 

discussions in the early time. We’d have significant discussions. 

And I know that the member for Lloydminster said that Mike 

could be quite aggressive and strident, and I can simply say that 

we were both aggressive and strident. And I don’t think — I’m 

actually feeling generous enough — I don’t think it’s a case of 

either of us being wrong. We just had our divergent beliefs, and 

we shared those divergent beliefs quite aggressively and 

stridently with each other. 

 

And this is where we came together as happens in communities 

all across Saskatchewan. The senior men’s hockey team was 

having trouble that year, 1975, getting organized. I was new to 

town so I don’t know whether the old manager, the previous 

manager just quit or what. I don’t know the history, never did 

find it out, but Mike Hopfner stepped up to the plate. Mike 

organized the team that year. 

 

And so we played senior hockey together and he was the 

defenceman. And I’d love to tell you I was the star forward, but 

let’s just leave it that I was a forward, one of many. And we had 

a good year. It was fun playing on the same team as Mike. It 

was fun playing hockey with Mike. And I am always grateful 

that he made that happen because it was part of the community, 

and it really enabled me to fit into Outlook a whole lot better. 

 

To my chagrin — well to my joy — we came to Regina, and 

then shortly after that I think Mike and Lori moved to Lashburn 

where he took up the hotel business. And I thought things were 

going pretty good for Mr. Hopfner and the Hopfners right up 

until he wound up being here on the then government side of 

the bench in 1982. And Michael served the Chamber, I would 

argue, quite well. 

 

Mike took his job seriously. I remember many, many evenings 

being here and sitting . . . Well in the years that Mike and I sat 

together, I was in opposition and he was in the Grant Devine 

government. But at the end of the day, many’s the evening 

when it was Mike Hopfner’s duty to say, Mr. Speaker, I move 

this House do now adjourn. And the rules were somewhat 

different in those days than they are now because we adjourn 

for committee, but that effectively shut the House down in those 

days. 

 

And I know Mike was . . . You could always count on him to be 

around, and you could count on him to enter into debates. You 

could count on him to say exactly what he really felt. He didn’t 

pull a whole lot of punches, but for my part I always respected 

that at least he believed what he was saying. And I know he did. 

I know he did. And he usually said it fairly well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m grateful for Michael Hopfner’s service to his 

communities, and I say that with an “s” because it was multiple 

communities. I knew him from Outlook, as opposed to his 

Lashburn days. But I’m grateful for Mike’s service, and I want 

to thank the Hopfner family for supporting Mike’s service to 

the public. I think the world is in many ways a little bit better 

for Michael Hopfner’s having lived his life with us and done the 

things he did. 

 

So thank you for this opportunity to participate in the 

condolence motion. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Vermette: — To ask for leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to introduce 

some guests from my home community of La Ronge. They’re 

with the Lac La Ronge Indian Band. There are 16 students. 

They’re here to, I guess, take part and see how some of the 

provincial politics work. And we’ll get a chance . . . I wish you 

guys could have been here earlier. You could have seen some of 

the conversation that goes back and forth and a process that’s 

very important. 

 

But at this time, I would like to acknowledge Roger Ratt, Faye 

Charles, Judy Ratt, Gregg Charles, and Sally Ross. I would just 

like to welcome the students as well. You’re getting an 

opportunity to see how the provincial politics work and some of 

the processes that happen here. I hope you have an interesting 

time. You ask some questions later on when we get together. 

 

It is an honour to have you here from my home community, to 

have you here. And I want to say this with all my colleagues, 

members: I would like to welcome you to your legislative on 

behalf of my colleagues anyway. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

(continued) 

 

Michael Alfred Hopfner 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf of the residents of Lashburn and surrounding area, I 

welcome the opportunity to say a few words and to offer 

condolences in light of the recent passing of a former member 

of this legislature, Michael Hopfner. 

 

As has been mentioned, Michael and his wife Lori moved to the 

Lashburn area in 1979. He served as a councillor and mayor 

and in 1982 was elected to this Legislative Assembly. Lashburn 

was very much a community that benefited and continues to 

benefit from the enthusiasm and community spirit brought forth 

by Michael, Lori, and their two boys Cole and Bart. 

 

Small town rivalries between Lashburn and surrounding areas, 

and in particular Maidstone, were much more prevalent in the 

’70s and ’80s than they are now. But Michael and his family 



3990 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

played, in my mind, a key role in promoting these fun-filled 

activities, but continuing the rivalry. My family’s association 

with Michael and Lori was at the rinks and the gyms, where it 

wasn’t cool for us to be too friendly in case our sons saw us 

talking. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, as we matured — Mike and I — I had 

the opportunity to play old-timer hockey and golf, both with 

and against Mike. His zest for life, for his community, his 

province, and his country was always evidenced in his 

welcoming smile and sportsmanship. After retirement his tool 

belt was always within reach for those with nagging electrical 

situations that required attention, for his neighbours and his 

friends. 

 

To his wife Lori, his sons Cole and Bart, their families, and 

their many, many friends, I offer our heartfelt condolences for 

the passing of a loving husband, father, grandfather, friend, and 

public servant. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I place the question, I would ask 

members if I could have leave to make a few comments in 

regards to Mr. Hopfner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When I was elected in 1986 and first came to 

the Chamber, Michael was one of those who was one of the first 

to come and welcome me as a, first of all — actually in ’85 — 

as a member of, as a candidate for the party and then in ’86 as 

an elected member. 

 

And as the Premier has said and a number of others have said, 

one thing I observed about Michael, he could be very dramatic 

in ensuring that his voice was heard not only in the caucus room 

but also in this Chamber, something we’re trying to address. 

But he really, he had a firm love for public life, for politics — 

and I understood, even as we’ve heard from other members — 

his community, and his devotion to his community. And I really 

appreciated Michael’s work. 

 

But one thing that stood out in my mind about Michael, he was 

one of those MLAs who didn’t just hang around with a couple, 

sometimes . . . but he was really part of the team. And he really 

went beyond, above and beyond to make sure that everyone felt 

a member of the team, especially in his role as Deputy Whip 

and then as Whip. And I truly enjoyed getting to know Michael 

and to appreciate him. 

 

And one thing about Michael, for those of us especially newly 

elected, there was a little reluctance to stand in the Chamber and 

speak at any specific time. And I remember the first speech I 

actually gave in this Chamber. And as I was speaking, all of a 

sudden, someone poked me in the ribs and said, keep talking. 

And I thought, man I run out of notes. But then I’d recall that 

just a few days earlier when we were in debate and Michael had 

been on his feet, and he had been asked to carry the clock for 

the next hour and a half and to make sure we got through the 

House, to not allow any other member into the debate at the 

time. 

 

And I don’t know if we do that any more these days, but that 

was a period where MLAs took their responsibilities, as they do 

today, very seriously. And if they were asked by the party 

leader or caucus Whip to just speak a few extra minutes, 

Michael was one you could always call upon. Really, I enjoyed 

Michael for his vibrant nature, his knowledge, and love for the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

But there’s one thing that really stood out in my mind as we got 

to the later part of his life. I remember meeting Michael after a 

number of years — I’d stopped by to see him but kind of lost 

contact — at Joe Saxinger’s funeral. And we were chatting with 

Michael and Michael informed me that he had just sold his 

hotel and they were now looking to retire. But he also informed 

me that in a week he was going to be seeing his doctor because 

he hadn’t been feeling well. While he looked healthy, he looked 

strong, he just hadn’t been feeling well, and at that time he 

wasn’t aware of what was happening. 

 

And then I remember hearing just a few short weeks later that 

he was struggling with cancer and he didn’t have a lot of 

opportunity or time — doctors, medical professional wasn’t 

giving him a lot. And you know what, what really speaks out in 

my mind is all of a sudden everything we were doing, all of the 

things and the contributions we felt we were giving to people, 

became somewhat second point as we began to look at the 

eternal nature of each and every one of us. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And I appreciated the opportunity of just conversing with Mike, 

even up to within a few weeks of his passing. One time I called 

him; I said, Michael. We chatted away and I said, Michael — 

and many of you know where I come from — I said would you 

mind, could we have a word of prayer together. And Michael 

said I’d love that. 

 

You know, ladies and gentlemen, we have our disagreements on 

the floor of the House, but we also appreciate who we are as 

individuals. And I appreciate the comments that you’ve made in 

regards to members that we’re recognizing today. And I just 

want to add my comments as to how much I appreciated 

Michael Hopfner, and express my condolences to Lori and the 

family at this time. 

 

I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. With leave 

to make a motion of condolence. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly moved by 

the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. The Premier has asked for 

leave. Is leave granted? 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 3991 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Douglas Graham Taylor 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In a 

few moments I’ll be moving more formally a motion of 

condolence, and I believe the Leader of the Opposition will 

again second that motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll freely admit that this is a little more difficult 

for me personally because of a warm and lasting relationship I 

was fortunate enough to have with Douglas Graham Taylor, or 

Mr. T as many of us will always think of him. And that 

relationship, though on a daily basis spanned really only a 

couple of years — a year and a half really — it lasted beyond 

that. But in terms of that daily contact, it was relatively short 

because I was one of his ministerial assistants when he was a 

minister of the Crown and serving the government and the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, not only as an MLA 

but as a member of the Executive Council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think Mr. Taylor would just as soon that I would 

be quoting Shakespeare or one of his other favourites that he 

loved to quote around the office randomly from time to time. 

But I’m a Lincoln man, so I’m going to offer a quote from the 

former president. He said, “. . . a man’s character is like a tree, 

and his reputation like its shadow; the shadow is what we think 

of it, the tree is the real thing.” 

 

I was fortunate, Mr. Speaker, and I am fortunate today because I 

got to experience and see the real thing when it came to Graham 

Taylor — not the reputation, but the character. And he 

possessed attributes that would be the envy of all of us, I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, especially in executing his duties as a 

public servant and as an MLA. 

 

When I think of Mr. Taylor, I think of passion. And it 

manifested itself in the work ethic and how hard he worked on 

behalf of constituency or his files, how his day would begin at 7 

when he would drive in from Wolseley and end probably 

maybe 10 or 11 o’clock at night when he drove back home. It 

manifested itself in his workday. It manifested itself in what he 

would accomplish during the day, and how he seemed to be 

tireless when it came to the meetings that had to be done. It 

manifested itself in terms of his work on behalf of his 

constituency. 

 

And I know Mr. McCabe is here today, and he will I’m sure 

attest to the fact that Mr. Taylor was just an outstanding 

constituency person, worked tirelessly for the entire 

constituency. And if he had just a little bit of extra left over 

after he was working on Indian Head issues, he was working on 

Wolseley issues, was my experience, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that’s part of the character of the man that I honour today is 

the passion that he had. And it was an example that he set for all 

of us that worked with him and got to know him and became 

friends with him. Because by the way, it was very difficult to 

work for and with Mr. Taylor and not also become a friend, and 

a close friend, and also not to be able to take from his example 

some things that have been very instructive and constructive in 

my life. And I think it’s true for others that worked with him. 

 

So the tree of the thing, the character from Mr. Taylor, was also 

his vision — the vision that he had, not just for his own area of 

the province that he represented in such a dedicated way, but for 

the province in general. And although it was well before my 

time, even before my involvement in youth politics frankly, it’s 

well known, it’s a fact of history that Mr. Taylor proffered his 

vision for the province in the context of a leadership campaign 

— ran for the leadership of his party and ran strong for the 

leadership of his party. 

 

And in order to do that, Mr. Speaker, anyone I think has to 

generally have a notion of where they’d like to take the 

province, should you be successful in that aspiration, or how 

you’d like to lead the team that you’re offering yourself to into 

the future. You have to have a bit of a vision. 

 

And I travelled the province with him so, Mr. Speaker, I got to 

get a sense for what his vision of the province was and what he 

felt about the potential of Saskatchewan, how Saskatchewan’s 

best days would always be ahead of her. And it’s something 

that I hear in this Assembly even today, and sometimes of 

course we’ve come to that conclusion independently. Some of 

us were introduced to that kind of a far-reaching vision because 

we were able to be close with, work with, in this case, Mr. 

Taylor. 

 

His character was also marked by his sense of service. He was a 

servant. In this Assembly, he was a servant on both sides of the 

House for his constituents. And he was tireless in his efforts on 

behalf of his constituents. And then in cabinet, first as the 

Health minister — and again, that was before my time — he 

was tireless in his service to the province of Saskatchewan as 

the Minister of Health. 

 

And great things were accomplished in health care in the 

province is certainly my read of his track record as the Minister 

of Health, both in terms of important capital investments, but 

also in terms of the issue of personnel and human resources in 

our health care system. Within health care I got to see from time 

to time how passionate he was about in particular issues. 

 

And one I remember very distinctly from question period as a 

young staffer in the House when the opposition of the day was 

asking a question, and rightfully so, about an important issue of 

sudden infant death syndrome, something that was very, very 

close to him and to his family. And I remember that day when 

he was basically I think running across the floor of the 

Assembly to where the Minister of Health was to talk a little bit 

about what he had made sure was done during his time as the 

Minister of Health, and what the government was continuing to 

do with respect to monitors and some other initiatives as a result 

of something that was very close to him. 

 

His character was marked by an amazing sense of humour that 

bordered on mischief, more often than not. And it made for a 

great place to work because you really didn’t know what was 

going to happen on any given day, more often than not. And I 

had the chance to speak at his funeral in Wolseley, and I told 

this story, there’s another one I’m going to tell with a few 

editorial adjustments in it. 

 



3992 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

But I will say that one story I told at the funeral, which is true, 

is that the front-line staff in the office were always a little bit 

worried about what Mr. Taylor would come to the office with. 

Because more often than not — I mean I should say regularly, 

probably once a month it seemed — he would come to the 

office with a big garbage bag. Usually the garbage bag would 

be dripping blood. 

 

So when I first started, Mr. Speaker, and saw that I was a little 

bit worried and concerned about what was happening. What 

was happening was that Mr. Taylor would drive in every single 

day from Wolseley. And all too often, unfortunately, he may 

happen across wildlife that had been hit by another vehicle on 

the road — wildlife that he believed was worthy of 

memorializing. And so he would bring in a lot of snowy owls, it 

seemed. But not just snowy owls that were . . . unfortunately 

had lost their lives. 

 

And right across from us, in the office across from us up on the 

third floor, was then the Minister of, I think it was Parks; I’m 

not sure of the name just now. But Mr. Maxwell; Colin 

Maxwell was his name. And he would bring the bag in there for 

awhile, and then he’d go across the hall and Mr. Maxwell 

would have the ministerial people do the taxidermy which 

would stay in the building. And I’ve seen some actual artifacts 

that have long survived Mr. Taylor’s time here that are still here 

today, and I know that ministries have them from around the 

place. And you know that was kind of an interesting place to 

work when that would happen. 

 

There was other stories I could tell. I’ll share one, that I’ll 

maybe do a little bit of editorial adjustment to, about his passion 

for people not just with respect to constituents, but across the 

province. I remember shortly after becoming one of his staffers 

I got a call from my mom who happened to be on the board of 

the Palliser Regional Care Centre — or hospital as it was 

known at the time — in Swift Current. She phoned to say that 

the board had been working hard to get the attention of then 

SPMC [Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation] 

property management who of course — now it’s Government 

Services — but of course they were responsible for all of the 

buildings around the province. 

 

The board of the Palliser was trying hard to get their attention 

because of what was happening at that regional health care 

facility, a geriatric facility as it was known at the time. The 

plumbing wasn’t working very well, and literally those who 

were able to shower on their own would get, every once in 

awhile, alternating blasts of different temperature water which 

was obviously unacceptable. And the board was just having a 

hard time, as too often — I mean it happens sometimes in 

government, I guess — there’s not calls returned as quickly as 

everyone would like and there was a bit of an issue. 

 

And so my mom phoned me up and said, I understand you’re 

working for this gentleman who I think he’s the minister of this 

thing that we’re, you know . . . And she explained the whole 

story. And I said, yes that’s not my area in the office, but I 

guess I’ll raise it with him. I was still pretty nervous and 

worried at the time. And I had the chance to raise it with Mr. 

Taylor as we were heading to Saskatoon. I was going to staff 

him at a meeting. And he said, when we get back to the office, 

have the head of the SPMC there at the office, and we’ll have a 

meeting. 

 

And well, a long story short, and perhaps the most colourful 

exchange that I’ve ever seen occurred after that because Mr. 

Taylor and this official that was head of SPMC, they were also 

good friends. And so the official knew when Mr. Taylor was 

serious, but maybe, you know, being also reasonable about it. 

And I’ll never forget that exchange between the two of them. 

 

And I’ll never forget the call I got about three days later from 

my mom saying, I don’t know what Mr. Taylor did, but we’ve 

gotten a call from the officials and the plumbing is fixed, and 

people are happy. I mean it was just something that needed to 

be done immediately. And Mr. Taylor understood the 

importance of prompt action and how sometimes government 

needs to be reminded that it is the servant and not the master. 

 

Mr. Taylor was known for some trademarks. Trademark boots, 

for example. He wore I think cowboy boots every single day 

right up until the very end when he was the self-appointed tour 

guide and ambassador for Wolseley and enjoyed wearing 

cut-offs but still cowboy boots. And he wore, well I mean, 

boots, cowboy boots are really for all occasions. They’re good 

with suits; they’re good with cut-offs; it doesn’t really matter. It 

certainly didn’t matter to Mr. Taylor. 

 

There are a few other trademarks of his. He used to say that, 

you know, his two favourite kinds of music were country and 

western. And we listened to a lot of that as we would travel 

around. 

 

And there’s one other attribute of Mr. Taylor, of his character, 

that is the tree of the thing — and not the shadow, not the 

reputation — and that is his love for family, his family. And his 

unqualified commitment to his family evidenced by the fact that 

he would drive home every night. And there too is an example 

that some of us have found worthy of trying to emulate, 

although it’s just impossible for many because of distances that 

we may live from home. Wolseley was a little closer. But every 

single night, he’d leave the office and head home to Wolseley 

and talk endlessly about his kids. He talked a lot about Peter 

when we were together, but all of his kids. And we were able to 

become fast friends. 

 

Those that had the honour of serving with Mr. Taylor and his 

kids and especially his wonderful wife Isabel — Mrs. Taylor 

and Katherine are here representing their family today — but 

like her husband, Isabel was just . . . It was just a great honour 

to get to know her and become fast friends and close and lasting 

friends with her. 

 

He had a love for horses that we were reminded of all of the 

time. And his passion manifested itself in the fact that I think he 

had a race horse or two. I know they didn’t do as well as he 

would hope that they would do. He would give us the report 

every now and then from Saskatoon and would make jokes 

about wondering that maybe they’re not really, they shouldn’t 

be thoroughbreds, they should be standardbreds. They should 

be, they were more trotters really than anything else on some 

occasions. And he had great jokes and stories about that. 

 

We have said about all of those that we have honoured today 

that there are examples in all of them. And there was an 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 3993 

understanding, at least I began in terms of my comments about 

Mr. Breker, in saying that we stand on the shoulders of those 

who have went before us. And for no one is that more true for 

me personally, for no one is that more true than Mr. Taylor 

because I have, I got to see in him first-hand the kinds of things 

that can make you successful in public life and received 

first-hand from him important lessons that I still try to adhere 

to, try to follow today. 

 

[15:30] 

 

At the very end of things, we thought actually we were through 

the woods because Mr. Taylor had come through a very 

difficult incident with respect to his heart. And we were getting 

emails at home and, you know, in true Mr. Taylor fashion, I 

think when everyone was sort of thinking . . . well didn’t have a 

lot of hope left, he pulled through and he was fine. 

 

And you know, it wasn’t very long after that that I got the call 

that he had passed away quite suddenly after . . . I think he was 

at a town meeting in Wolseley, engaged in Wolseley affairs and 

was walking home and suffered his heart attack. And so it did 

take us all by surprise. Even though he had been fighting for his 

health only months earlier, he had come through that in typical 

Graham Taylor fashion. And we lost him all too soon. 

 

But towards the end when I was even able to talk to him, he had 

also developed a new reference, Mr. Speaker. He also had 

developed an interest in matters of the heart, matters of faith. 

And I think part of that was some of the leadership from his 

family as well and encouragement. And I would have liked to 

have been there for some discussions and debates; I bet you 

they were pretty good. And we heard the story at his funeral 

about some important developments that had happened in his 

life in respect of that which also was very greatly encouraging 

for all of us to hear at the funeral. 

 

So we will miss him. I will miss him, Mr. Speaker. And I know 

that his family misses him deeply and desperately. And we offer 

our condolences to them today on his passing, and we thank 

them for sharing with the province of Saskatchewan, sharing 

him with all of us. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we should close with that, perhaps a final 

image of Mr. Taylor. And I don’t remember the whole story — 

Katherine told it at the funeral — but this is absolutely vintage 

Graham Taylor, and it’s perfect. Apparently — well I think it 

was this last summer, when he was the self-appointed 

ambassador for Wolseley — he would wait to see coming 

across that beautiful bridge in Wolseley, that walking bridge, 

he’d wait and look for tourists, people that were obviously not 

from there. And then he would go to meet them with his 

cowboy hat and his cut-offs and his cowboy boots, I think. 

 

And this one couple apparently, he reported later to Katherine, 

he engaged in conversation. And they wanted to ask about the 

amazing community of Wolseley and how . . . I mean, 

understand that they’ve just met a man who is in cowboy hats, 

cut-offs, and cowboy boots, and he’s just sort of there to 

welcome them to their town. And they get talking a little bit 

about Wolseley, amazed at how beautiful it is, amazed at all of 

these assets the community has. I think their first question was 

about the bridge itself, I think. And they said, well how did this 

bridge get here? 

 

I know, Katherine, we could correct the record. If I get the story 

wrong, we’ll correct it for Hansard. But I believe they asked 

about this bridge and how it got here. And he said, well I used 

to be the MLA for this area — picture how he’s looking now — 

and I actually used to be the minister of something called 

Property Management Corporation. And there was a chance for 

government to be investing in these kinds of things and so I was 

part of that and I helped get this bridge here. You know, I had 

played a role in that. 

 

And they kind of just wanted to move on from that and they 

said, well what about that beautiful building over there? What is 

that? And he said, oh that’s the nursing home. That’s the 

nursing home. He said, you know, when I was the MLA I also 

got to be the minister of Health. And in addition to a number of 

other facilities, I built that too. I got to be a part of building that 

too. Imagine. And he apparently told Katherine he could see the 

doubt in their eyes. Here’s a crazy guy that’s met them on the 

other side of the bridge, claiming credit for all of the things in 

Wolseley. 

 

But you see, what they didn’t know, Mr. Speaker, is that a 

man’s character — and if I can be so bold as to amend this — 

maybe a man’s achievement is like a tree and his reputation like 

a shadow. The shadow is what we think of; the tree is the real 

thing. And that was the real thing. That day they met Mr. 

Taylor, a pretty average guy, but pretty extraordinary, average 

gentleman and one who served this province with distinction, 

one who clearly left things better than he found them. And I’m 

honoured to be able to honour him in some small way today and 

to offer our condolences to his family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion reads as follows: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Douglas Graham Taylor, who passed away October 7, 

2009, was a well-respected member of this Legislative 

Assembly from 1978 until 1990, representing the 

constituency of Indian Head-Wolseley for the Progressive 

Conservatives. 

 

He served in a number of cabinet posts including as 

minister of Health from 1982 to 1986. Graham’s other 

cabinet positions included the minister of Tourism and 

Small Business, the minister of Supply and Services 

which later became Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation, the minister of Tourism, Small Business and 

Co-operatives, and the minister of Public Participation. 

 

Mr. Taylor was born July 4, 1936. He grew up in 

Candiac, Saskatchewan; attended high school in 

Wolseley. He received a Bachelor of Education and a 

postgraduate certificate in education administration. 

 

Mr. Taylor married his high school sweetheart, Isabel 

Garden, on the 3rd of October, 1959, and together they 



3994 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

had five children. He began his teaching career in Kipling 

and was the principal of the Wolseley High School from 

1967 to 1979. Following politics, Mr. Taylor became the 

agent general for Saskatchewan in Hong Kong. 

 

He was passionate about horses, his community, and this 

province. Graham was the director and founder of the 

Qu’Appelle Valley Science Fair, past president of the 

Indian Head Superintendency Teachers’ Association, 

member of the Qu’Appelle Valley Principals Association. 

 

Graham is survived and sadly missed by his wife of 50 

years, Isabel, and four kids: Robert, Katherine, Susan, and 

Peter. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 

this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 

members of the bereaved family. 

 

It’s my honour to so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to rise with 

the Premier and others who will make a few comments here 

today. I express, on behalf of the caucus, our sorrow and 

sympathy and extend that to Isabel and Katherine who are with 

us today, but also to the other family members. And obviously I 

didn’t know Mr. Taylor as the Premier did. I knew him and 

very much respected and enjoyed his company. 

 

The debate of the day back in that period . . . From ’78 to 1990 

of course was the heyday of the Devine government, and it was 

an exciting time in many ways, and the great debates that went 

on here in the Assembly. And I think people’s memories of that 

period often fade, but a number of the people who were sitting 

on that side of the Assembly — and Graham was one of them 

— people like Gary Lane and Pat Smith and Gordon Currie, 

Joan Duncan, Mr. McLeod, these were very able people. And 

the debates that went on at the time, and it was intimidating 

because obviously when you have a government with 56 

members and you had eight, you get almost blown out the door 

at the back. And, Mr. Speaker, you’ll remember those were 

exciting times. 

 

And of all the ministers, whether it was Paul Schoenhals or the 

brilliant debaters going back and forth, and I remember . . . I 

comment on Gary Lane in particular because he was the person 

I had the most difficulty with, and we’ve chatted about this 

many times since, but he was a powerful speaker. But the best 

minister of all, and this is confirmed by my good friend, Ned 

Shillington — we did a little survey when we were talking 

about Graham the other day — we both agreed that Graham 

Taylor was the best person to put the point of the government 

across and put the opposition in their place. And of course 

every government needs that, and every opposition needs that. 

 

But Mr. Taylor was brilliant in the House. And he had a way of 

explaining things in a very practical way that we would have a 

difficult time answering your supplement question because 

Graham had covered off all three of your supplements. And it 

was very disarming. 

 

And at a time when eight members were expected to carry the 

House . . . Because the strategy at that time was not that you 

had Fridays off; we sat some sessions over 100 days. It was a 

very, very difficult time. And I remember Graham as being one 

of the best adversaries that I’ve ever dealt with. 

 

But having said that, he was also the kind of guy . . . And I 

remember going to CPA [Commonwealth Parliamentary 

Association] meetings, one in particular in Toronto, where we 

simply forgot about politics and we had one of the best times, of 

my life at any rate, just travelling around, talking about small 

communities, and talking about CPA issues. And I think it also 

tells us that from time to time in this business we should simply 

forget about the fact that we’re on different sides and from time 

to time just enjoy each others’ company. 

 

Because I don’t think getting to know each other personally is a 

bad thing because at the end of the day — I say it again — 

we’re all here for the common good of the province. We may 

see it differently, but the fact of the matter is we’re here with 

the blessing, at least for the short period we’re here, of our 

constituents. And I know that Mr. Taylor understood that. 

 

The areas that Mr. Taylor was the minister for, and the Premier 

has mentioned Health and privatization . . . Or we called it 

privatization. Graham did a better job at calling it Public 

Participation. And that was always the challenge of words, and 

I think most of the time he won. Because I would go out to rural 

communities and they’d be talking about Public Participation, 

and I knew my message wasn’t getting across as well as 

Graham’s because I was the critic for privatization. 

 

And I mean that still goes on. And we have these debates in the 

House, and I think it’s a wonderful thing, Mr. Speaker, to have 

known someone like Graham Taylor who took his 

responsibility here seriously but he didn’t take himself 

seriously. And I think many of the comments that the Premier 

has made today show what a very interesting individual he was. 

 

So I want to say in closing that I want to join with the Premier 

and other members who will speak in wishing the very sincere 

condolences and sympathy to the family members who are here, 

but importantly to the family members who aren’t, and just 

know that Graham was a very special man, a special friend, and 

we all miss him. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health, the 

member from Indian Head-Milestone. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege as well to stand in my place and 

add a few words to the record regarding Mr. Graham Taylor. I 

had the opportunity of meeting Graham a number of times of 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 3995 

course as I would when I would be in the community of Indian 

Head or communities around Sintaluta and running into him at 

various events. I also had the opportunity of having Graham 

come to my office a few times and lobby for different interests 

regarding Wolseley and the surrounding area. 

 

But what I have heard more than . . . Maybe I would know 

Graham perhaps a little bit better from the stories that I’ve 

heard of Graham from around the community of Indian Head 

maybe more than just my experiences with him. And what I 

would say is that Graham represented the constituency of Indian 

Head-Wolseley for three terms, from ’78 to 1990. And in 1995, 

that constituency was then redistributed to become . . . 

Wolseley went into of course, as you would know, the 

constituency of Moosomin. And Indian Head was then 

combined with the community of Milestone — and more where 

I was from — to create the constituency of Indian 

Head-Milestone. 

 

Now I can only speak for the constituents that I represent in that 

Indian Head and Sintaluta area, that I think they would probably 

agree the best MLA they’ve ever had or will have happens to be 

Graham Taylor. Now I won’t speak for the constituents of 

Wolseley. Now that’s up to the member from Moosomin to talk 

about that, but I certainly do know that the people in Indian 

Head had a great and have a great respect for Graham Taylor 

and the work that he did. 

 

You know, it’s interesting, and I have only had the opportunity 

to be the Minister of Health in our new government for two 

years and four months and an extra day or two there. Now 

Graham had the opportunity to be the minister of Health for 

four years. And because I haven’t served in any other portfolio, 

I can only speak for the Ministry of Health and acting as the 

Minister of Health — I don’t know if it’s the same perhaps in 

Finance or perhaps in Justice — but there’s, I think there’s a bit 

of a fraternity of ministers of Health. 

 

I know there are a number sitting on the opposite benches who 

have been ministers of Health, and they realize some of the 

trials and tribulations you have to go through. It isn’t 

necessarily a numbers game; it’s a human services game. And I 

don’t mean it game as far as lightly — some very, very tough 

decisions — and I don’t think anyone could serve for four years 

without having to struggle at night with some of the decisions 

that have to be made. I know it’s a tough position because right 

now at two years, four months, and two days I think I’m the 

longest serving Minister of Health in Canada because they tend 

to turn over. 

 

So a tenure of four years is really quite remarkable. And dealing 

with some of the situations and discussions and, as we heard 

today, negotiations that can weigh on a person, certainly 

Graham knew them very, very well. 

 

[15:45] 

 

He did a great job for his constituents. We know that, and I’ve 

heard that many, many times. The Premier referred to a special 

care home that is in Wolseley. And you know, I don’t know if 

you can say that it, in large part, by far the strongest proponent 

of that facility probably in the, prior to it being built and after it 

was built, was certainly Graham. 

In fact, a few of the times that he would be in my office to meet 

on various issues, it wasn’t necessarily on the long-term care 

facility. But I’ll guarantee before the door was shut, before he 

left, he had worked the special care home from Wolseley into 

the conversation somehow. It could have been a conversation 

on something completely different, but I knew that there was 

always wanting to be an expansion of beds in Wolseley because 

the facility has some capacity there. And he was certainly, he 

did a great job of bringing that up any time that he was in my 

office. 

 

I remember the first couple of times that I met him in my office. 

You know, Graham wasn’t a tall, wasn’t an imposing structure, 

physical structure of a man when he came in, but all he had to 

do was start talking and, boy, could he get your attention. 

 

He was a great lobbyer and a great proponent for his 

constituents of Indian Head-Wolseley and then of course, near 

the end, of just the community of Wolseley, as the Premier said, 

as the self-proclaimed ambassador. What a great job he did — 

but not only just for the community of Wolseley, not only for 

the constituents of Indian Head-Wolseley at the time, but I truly 

believe was a huge ambassador for this whole province and did 

just a marvellous job. It is a great honour to be able to represent 

some of the people that he had the ability to represent. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

thank you for the opportunity to enter into the debate on the 

condolence motion. And I’m not going to take much time, but I 

have a couple of things I’d like to say. 

 

Prior to my election in 1986, I was very active in my 

community in Saskatoon and I had the opportunity to meet 

Graham Taylor, along with a number of other people that were 

lobbying for a group home for autistic teenagers and adults. 

And we worked very hard to try and convince the government 

— and Graham was the minister of Health at the time — that 

we should have a group home facility for young adults because 

we knew how difficult it could be for the families of those 

young adults to be with them day in and day out. 

 

And I happened to live on a street where we had two — well 

actually three — autistic young men. And their families were 

getting pretty worn out. And what I appreciated about Graham 

was that when he met with us he did everything he could back 

in Regina, as we would say, to ensure that that facility was 

opened. And the facility was opened shortly after I was elected 

in 1986, and I really appreciated the fact that he invited me to 

the opening of the facility for autistic young men. That’s my 

first observation about Graham Taylor. 

 

The second observation was that Graham was a huge advocate 

for persons who are mentally challenged. And what I 

remembered about him was that he was a fierce debater in the 

legislature — fierce. And when the member from Indian 

Head-Wolseley talks about his stature, it wasn’t his imposing 

stature. It was the voice. And what I appreciated about Graham 

was that he had this tremendous voice in the legislature and he 

was a tremendous debater, but under it all he had his soft side. 



3996 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

And instinctively . . . I don’t know if people knew that, but I 

instinctively knew that he cared about people who didn’t have 

all of the luxuries of life that many of us take for granted day in 

and day out. 

 

I happened to be the critic for privatization after I was the critic 

of Health, and at that time the government made the decision to 

privatize Sask Minerals and the peat plant in northern 

Saskatchewan, up by Carrot River. And Graham had gone out 

to give the word to the workers, and Lorne Calvert and I went 

there shortly thereafter and we met with them. And I’m not sure 

that he was very happy that we were following him around, but 

that was the nature of politics in those days. And when we came 

back to the legislature . . . And as the Leader of the Opposition 

said, he was the minister responsible for Public Participation. 

We called it privatization. And he went about doing the work of 

the government in those days, and there are a number of Crown 

entities that were privatized. And we had many, many debates 

in this Assembly. 

 

I remember the potash debate and I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, you 

remember that debate. For those of us that now enjoy this 

calendar where we come in here in March and we go home after 

the long weekend and we come back in the fall, in those days 

there was no such thing as a calendar. And we stayed in this 

Assembly. I think it started in March and we stayed until 

November. No one had holidays or anything like that. People 

were trying to, you know, work around having families and 

balancing work and families but that wasn’t the expectation. 

You were to be here, and we were. 

 

So to Mrs. Taylor, I served the Assembly with Mr. Taylor, 

Graham Taylor, from 1986 to 1990. He was, as I said, not an 

imposing presence in terms of physical stature, but he had 

physical stature in terms of his ability to debate the issues. He 

may have learned that as a teacher in teacher’s college, a 

principal who had to keep all of those kids in line. I’m not sure. 

But there were many occasions when he kept us in line. 

 

And I just want to say that from my point of view as a young 

person that was not particularly involved in politics before 

1986, but was interested and active in the community, I will 

always appreciate that he listened to parents of autistic young 

adults and he put in place that group home in Saskatoon. So I 

say, thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you. I would also like to rise in the 

Legislative Assembly today and speak to the motion of 

condolence for Graham Taylor. Now I haven’t known the 

Taylor family for years like some of the members here. 

However I did have the wonderful opportunity of working very 

closely with the Taylor family in 2003 election. That’s when 

Graham and Isabel’s son, Robert, chose to run for the 

Saskatchewan Party. And Katherine Gagne, Robert’s sister, was 

his campaign manager. And I got an opportunity to see the 

master at work. 

 

He had instilled in his children the love of public service and 

commitment to this province of Saskatchewan. It was a treat 

and it was an honour to be able to work side by side with them. 

I’m not going to look at them right now because I know it will 

. . . But I had an opportunity to also see what a dedicated family 

man he was. And his children loved him dearly. 

 

I know when I spoke to Katherine over the summer many times, 

she explained how tough it was to see her dad in such bad 

physical shape. But they willed him better at that point. So it 

was kind of a unique situation that he happened to pass away 

doing something he really loved which was walking down the 

streets in his wonderful town of Wolseley. 

 

I know when I was elected in 2007, I had undertaken a public 

service announcement and the phone rang after that and it was 

Graham saying, way to go girl; you did us proud. And I felt so 

pleased that he paid attention, he paid attention to someone like 

myself. And so I felt so honoured that he had taken the time to 

pick up the phone to call me, but also to realize that this was a 

man who never forgot his province, never forgot his family. So 

I think we were all the richer for having someone like Graham 

Taylor committed to this province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour today to 

stand and say a few words to Isabel and Katherine and Ken 

McCabe — Ken being a friend of theirs — about Graham 

Taylor. I want to start by saying I served in the Chamber with 

Mr. Taylor from ’86 until he left. And one of the major 

differences: I’m still here. One of these years I’ll get it right and 

then I’ll be able to take my leave. But in 1986, Mr. Speaker, I 

was the youngest New Democrat elected in that crew. I was the 

kid of the caucus in 1986. As I have said, it seemed like, in 

many ways, a lifetime ago. 

 

As the kid of the opposition caucus — I say this in as nice a 

way as I can now — man, did I dislike Graham Taylor. Because 

as has been pointed out, he could make points that were so 

difficult to refute. He had that commanding presence that I 

didn’t really appreciate because he wasn’t on my team. But I 

know that I would have appreciated them hugely if we’d been 

on exactly the same team at that time. So I say that to help you 

with a sense of pride for Graham and the work that he did. He 

was really an inspirational person. 

 

There was one other thing that I should share. I was the buddy 

MLA in Indian Head-Wolseley, which was the opposition 

shadow, and I spent a lot of time working out there. And I have 

to tell you that — this is particularly for the Taylors, but for 

government members — every time Graham’s name would 

come up and they would talk about his being a teacher and 

being a principal, I knew I had to change the subject. I had to 

get on some solid ground for us because he had such a stellar 

reputation as a teacher and as a principal and he was so 

genuinely well liked in that community. But I learned quickly, 

you know, you just would find something else to talk about. 

Anything else was better than that. But Graham, as I say, an 

interesting person. 

 

I see by the bio . . . I didn’t realize he had been minister of so 

many portfolios. It’s not a huge multitude, but I note with 

interest that he was a member of what became Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation. So again I say, we shared 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 3997 

that. I served as the minister responsible for Property 

Management Corp for just over a year when we formed the 

government. So Graham and I shared that small piece of 

history. 

 

It was about 1988 or ’89 when . . . I’ve got to tell a short story 

about when I met Ken McCabe and I was trying to get the 

nomination for the New Democrats out of the way. Ken came 

as the owner/publisher of the Indian Head News, came and he 

covered the nomination. And we had a gymnasium, school 

gymnasium just packed with people and it was an exciting time. 

 

And at one point, I was introducing the NDP candidates who 

had been nominated from various constituencies. And I said, 

and there’s Ron Wormsbecker and he’s going to beat . . . And 

you think I could remember Lorne Hepworth’s name? We’ve 

all had those moments. But I could not remember Lorne 

Hepworth who was a member of cabinet and serving in 

Weyburn. I couldn’t remember his name. So I said, there’s Ron 

Wormsbecker; he’s going to defeat Bugsy. And of course the 

place just erupted with laughter. And then I remembered it and 

then I went on and said, you know, for those of you who don’t 

know Bugsy, it’s Lorne Hepworth — whom I have considerable 

respect for, incidentally. Mr. Hepworth also served this place 

well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to close by again, I guess, where I started, 

by saying that Graham Taylor had a terrific reputation as a 

teacher, I know as a mentor to many, as a servant, and as a 

servant to the public, and a servant to Saskatchewan. I know 

that our province is better for Graham’s service. I know that. I 

know it deeply. 

 

And I know that it’s a bittersweet moment, particularly for 

Isabel having been married for 50 years. I was so pleased to 

find out, childhood sweetheart. I know it makes you smile, 

Isabel. And it does our hearts all good to know that life can be 

pretty darn good for a pretty long time, and unfortunately it 

wasn’t a little longer. But we’re very grateful for Graham 

Taylor’s service, and we’re grateful to you and the entire family 

for the support. 

 

And again I say to our friend Ken McCabe, welcome to the 

Assembly. And it’s good to see you here honouring your friend, 

our friend, Graham Taylor. Mr. Speaker, it’s been an honour to 

speak to this condolence motion. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The Speaker: — Before placing the question, I too would ask 

for leave to make a few comments. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. As a number of members have 

already indicated, I’ve had the privilege of serving with Mr. 

Taylor, getting to know him first of all following my 

nomination and then election in 1986. Let me say this about Mr. 

Taylor: he was an individual who really took an interest in all of 

the MLAs. 

 

And even as a minister, he recognized that the reason he sat on 

the front benches is because there were more members on his 

side of the House than there were on the other side of the 

House. And he would always come to the back when the House 

adjourned, and as the member from Saskatoon Nutana 

mentioned the lengthy days, and in those days we also sat three 

evenings. 

 

And when we’d break for supper, Mr. Taylor was probably one 

of the first ministers on numerous occasions who came to the 

back. And he’d say to those of us who were fairly new 

backbenchers, where are you going for supper tonight? Can I 

join you? And then we’d go out for supper together. And that’s 

how a lot of us really got to know Mr. Taylor more comfortably 

and got to know who he was as a man — not just by observing 

his actions, but he put his words to action, his feet to action as 

well. 

 

I can also remember the very first banquet after I was elected as 

an MLA. And I invited Mr. Taylor because he had been, as 

we’ve heard, a teacher in the community of Kipling. Well we 

filled the hall. That was easy. And I regret that I didn’t actually 

take that opportunity more often to invite Mr. Taylor because 

wherever he had served, people knew him. And it wasn’t 

necessarily the fact that I had to work that hard, the fact that Mr. 

Taylor was going to be the guest speaker, it was a lot easier to 

get tickets sold to an event. He certainly was a drawing card. 

 

He was an individual who, whether he was in opposition or in 

government, took his politics seriously. And members have also 

brought out the fact of how he represented his constituents. And 

we have guests with us today, not only his wife and Katherine, 

but Mr. McCabe, who will vouch for the fact that he was an 

individual who stood up for his constituency and fought for his 

constituency. 

 

But not only that. As the Premier said, he had a vision for the 

province and in seeking the leadership. And in 1979, I believe, 

is when he sought the leadership. And I remember that debate. 

 

And what was interesting about the politics in those days as 

well, and the opposition members can attest to this, how all the 

parties endeavoured to, at least the day before or a couple days 

before, to fill a facility someplace. It was fill the Centre of the 

Arts or fill the centre of the arts in Saskatoon; it wasn’t just a 

small hall. And you worked to get people there. And the 

opposition members did their thing and the government did 

their thing just to let people know. And Graham was one of 

those who was very instrumental in encouraging members to 

get their constituents out so we could just be one step better 

than the opposition. He was a man who cared for his province. 

 

Well there were a number of stories as the ambassador for 

Wolseley I was going to talk about, but I won’t talk about that. 

I’ll talk a little bit about a couple of the incidents in chatting 

with Mr. Taylor. I remember when he went to Hong Kong and 

chatting with Graham and Isabel. And they were telling me of 

how they arrived in Hong Kong and they had this little suite, 

but there was absolutely nothing in it. So they went shopping 

and they had all these bags and no way of really 

communicating, trying to figure out how are they going to get 

back to their suite with all these shopping bags in their hands. 

And Graham very ingeniously went back to the store and he 

bought a broom. And they hung all the bags on the broom and 

they walked down the street, got their groceries to their place of 



3998 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

residence. 

 

And then a little later in life, after they had come back, I was 

chatting with Graham again. We hadn’t see each other for a 

while and we were chatting about our families. And Graham 

said this to me. He said, I know you’ll understand this. He said, 

you should see those daughters of mine on the streets in Hong 

Kong just preaching up a storm. That was just exactly how he 

expressed it. He was just so proud of his family and of some of 

the stands they had taken and the excitement he brought to his 

life. 

 

You know the interesting thing about Mr. Taylor as well was, 

while he wasn’t actively involved anymore, you can’t say he 

wasn’t actively involved. He still had an interest in politics. 

And I took great pleasure in calling up Graham or listening to 

Graham or looking him up on, whether it was on his acreage. 

You go out to the acreage, and as the Premier mentioned, didn’t 

matter where I saw him, especially in the summertime with 

cut-offs, cowboy boots, and his cowboy hat. And we get 

talking, and of course the discussion always got around to 

looking after the elderly, caring for people, providing services. 

 

And right up to his dying day, I know we were working on a 

little project. We’ve got a ways to go yet there, Isabel, but we 

had a little project that he had in mind of maybe some 

alternatives to some to the ideas that were being presented at the 

time. And I’m looking forward to just sharing some of that. I’ve 

thrown out the broad spectrum with the Minister of Health and 

the Minister of Social Services, basically passing on what 

Graham brought to my attention. Would this work to meet the 

needs of people who aren’t heavy care but need some care? 

How do we meet that immediate need? 

 

And as the Premier said, and a couple other members, I 

remember meeting him — it was about this time last year — in 

the General Hospital when he was struggling for his life with a 

second incident with his heart. And then how he rallied through 

that. And then through the summer it just looked, well, 

Graham’s here. We’ve got him here for quite a while yet. And 

then unfortunately, his untimely passing. 

 

I will always remember his commitment to his community, to 

his province, but as has been said, to his wife and his family. 

And as the MLA for the constituency that now has the 

community of Wolseley in, I want to extend my condolences to 

Isabel, Katherine, the family. To Ken, thank you so much for 

joining us. And thank you so much for joining me earlier today, 

and the fact that we could share some of our thoughts together 

about husband, father, grandfather, and friend. 

 

At this time I will place the motion to be presented by the 

Premier: 

 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and 

expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 

province. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 

move a motion of transmittal. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move by the 

leave of the Assembly: 

 

That notwithstanding rule 8.2 of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

an audio-video record of the oral tributes, together with a 

Hansard transcript and the resolutions adopted, be 

communicated in memory of the deceased to the bereaved 

families on behalf of the Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader by leave of the Assembly: 

 

That notwithstanding rule 8.2 of the Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 

an audio-video record of the oral tributes, together with a 

Hansard transcript and the resolutions adopted, be 

communicated in memory of the deceased to the bereaved 

families on behalf of the Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Why is the member from Weyburn on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — To ask leave to introduce a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Weyburn has asked for leave 

to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you to the other members of the Assembly, 

it’s a great honour and a privilege for me to introduce a special 

guest seated in the west gallery. Mr. Speaker, today we’re 

joined by Judy Buzowetsky who is from Weyburn, splits her 

time between Weyburn and Blaine Lake. And, Mr. Speaker, 

Ms. Buzowetsky was a long time teacher at the Weyburn Junior 

High. 

 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 3999 

It’d be interesting to know how many students she actually had 

throughout her career as a teacher. My wife was one of her 

students, Mr. Speaker. Ms. Buzowetsky has been a University 

of Saskatchewan Board of Governors member. She has a long 

affiliation with the Red Cross. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

Government of Saskatchewan I believe in 1996 presented her 

with the Volunteer Medal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, there’s probably not a person who has 

been to a Throne Speech or a budget speech or dare I say to an 

event at Government House who hasn’t probably had the 

pleasure of meeting Judy Buzowetsky. And so I’d ask all 

members to help me welcome her to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Broten: — With leave to join the member opposite in 

welcoming Ms. Buzowetsky. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join 

the member opposite in joining the guest to the gallery. I’m not 

from her home area, but I have had the privilege of chatting 

with her during a number of convocation ceremonies at the U of 

S [University of Saskatchewan]. 

 

And it’s always interesting to be with her because she takes 

note, I know, of every student that she’s had contact with that 

are passing across the stage, and rightfully so takes a great deal 

of pride in the role that she’s played with many successful 

students and the role that she’s played in the senate of the 

University of Saskatchewan. So I’d like to join with the 

member in welcoming her to her legislature. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 129 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act. 

Mr. Speaker, the procedure for the enforcement of money 

judgments in Saskatchewan has not changed significantly for 

decades. It has never been consolidated into a cohesive, 

comprehensive procedure. 

 

Instead a number of outdated Acts such as The Executions Act 

and The Exemptions Act combine to create an inconsistent and 

difficult legislative framework that requires a great deal of 

expertise and effort used with little certainty of success. This 

had led to the legitimate concern for individuals who’ve gone 

through the court process, that their judgment is of limited value 

since it is difficult, if not impossible, to enforce for an average 

person. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act will 

repeal The Executions Act, The Exemptions Act, The Creditors’ 

Relief Act, The Absconding Debtors Act, and The Attachment of 

Debts Act. It will introduce a new, comprehensive, modern, and 

effective money judgment enforcement process. Under the 

proposed Act, a judgment will have to be recorded in the 

judgment registry to use the new enforcement process. This will 

create a province-wide searchable public registry where all 

judgments that are capable of immediate enforcement will be 

recorded and priority will be determined. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act will also update the exemption protection 

available to debtors in the enforcement process to ensure that 

Saskatchewan’s traditional debtor protection regime is 

rationalized and fundamentally retained. Property other than 

exempt property that is subject to an enforcement charge may 

be seized and sold by an enforcement officer. Mr. Speaker, the 

distribution of the proceeds of an enforcement proceeding 

follows the principle of pro rata distribution among those 

creditors who have given an enforcement instruction to an 

enforcement officer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new legislation will remove a host of 

procedural burdens and legislative inadequacies in this process. 

Instead they will be replaced by a rationalized exemptions 

process that ensures the debtor’s basic needs are protected, 

while allowing creditors to proceed to enforce their judgments 

in an effective manner. This Bill is based on a draft Bill 

prepared by professors Ronald Cumming and Tamara 

Buckwold at the University of Saskatchewan, as well as on 

legislation recommended by the Uniform Law Conference of 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all members of this Assembly will recognize that 

it is only right to ensure that someone who follows the rules 

through the judicial process and obtains the money judgment be 

able to effectively enforce that judgment. Mr. Speaker, this also 

impacts victims of crime who have obtained a restitution order 

and wish to enforce that as well. It is the intention of this 

legislation to see that creditors are much better served by our 

judicial enforcement process. Mr. Speaker, I move second 

reading of The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 129, The Enforcement of Money Judgments 

Act. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to rise to speak at second reading of Bill No. 129, 

as the Minister of Justice has just indicated is, An Act respecting 

the Enforcement of Judgments for the payment of money, 

making consequential amendments to certain Acts and 

repealing certain Acts. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a consolidation, as the minister indicated, of 

a number of pieces of legislation and practices over the years 

that have been put in place and used to assist creditors, Mr. 



4000 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

Speaker, particularly creditors achieve the beneficial results of a 

court order. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, anyone who has the opportunity to take a 

look at Bill No. 129 knows that it is of a great deal of substance. 

When the minister indicated that, in his remarks when the 

minister indicated that previously to this Act being introduced 

and ultimately to be passed, the process required a great deal of 

expertise. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think one can argue that 

expertise is still required, regardless of the consolidation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, anyone who has a chance to look at this Act 

knows, just by simple looking, it’s 111 pages in length. Mr. 

Speaker, 111 pages, I would argue, that’s still trying to 

understand how all this works, still requires a fair bit of 

expertise. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the legal profession 

is still going to want to look at the arguments that are made in 

this consolidation, equate that to past practice, and would still 

want to provide considerable amount of advice to anyone who 

is seeking enforcement of judgments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know that enforcement of judgments has 

always been a challenge in this province, across Canada, 

actually across North America, Mr. Speaker, because there’s 

always two sides to this question before judgment is rendered. 

Mr. Speaker, you always have two individuals or two 

corporations or organizations or an individual and a corporation 

or an organization and an individual. Mr. Speaker, there’s 

always two arguments that are made before a judgment is 

rendered. And, Mr. Speaker, there are those who are seeking to 

receive payment for something they feel that they deserve, and 

there are others who feel that the payment may not be justified 

or cannot be made, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This consolidation doesn’t address the emotional activity, 

engagement of individuals that may occur before a judgment is 

rendered. It simply ensures that there is a fair dealing with the 

circumstances after a judgment is rendered, Mr. Speaker. But 

we can’t forget that even after judgment is rendered there are 

still considerable emotions that are tied up in that judgment. 

And that is why a process, understandable and fair, is required 

to ensure that enforcement of that judgment can be made simply 

and obviously to the benefit of the person or organization or 

corporation to whom the judgment benefits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had expected the minister to take a little more 

time in outlining some of the changes that may have been made 

in the process, Mr. Speaker. If he wants us to believe that the 

old way was difficult for the average person to get enforcement, 

then I would have thought he might have explained a little bit 

more how this consolidation makes it less difficult for the 

average person to find enforcement. 

 

He talks about a new, modern enforcement process. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, nothing he said in his remarks indicates really that 

there is much new or modern here, other than the fact that it’s 

been consolidated, put into one place and perhaps easier for the 

legal profession to make reference on behalf of their clients, or 

perhaps for the average person, as the minister describes some 

of the individuals, the average person to simply read the whole 

thing and get an understanding of what is and what is not the 

process relating to a judgment. 

 

And likely, Mr. Speaker, again you have two groups who may 

have some emotional commitment to the judgment that would 

want to read the Act and understand how fair is this process. 

There is indeed the creditor to whom the judgment has said 

money or objects are to be transferred in favour of the creditor. 

And there are also, Mr. Speaker, those who may still argue the 

judgment was not fair or perhaps wants to know what the 

process does to ensure that their ability to meet other 

obligations continues to be fair. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to stress just a couple of things in my 

remarks here for members of the public. And I want to stress 

these things because there’s always concerns, Mr. Speaker, 

when people are confronted with the idea that something that 

you have may be taken from you in the interests of someone 

else. And so, Mr. Speaker, this whole prospect about 

exemptions is important for people to understand, both those 

who are seeking transfer from one to another in their favour and 

those who may not wish to see any transfer take place. So, even 

after judgment, Mr. Speaker, there are certain exemptions 

which I think people need to know about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister did not indicate whether or not there 

are new exemptions in the Act or whether the consolidation 

simply brings the old exemptions into one place. Mr. Speaker, 

this is something that I think that, when we have a little more 

time to review the legislation and discuss it with the minister in 

committee, that we might want to look a little more in-depth at 

what’s new and what is not. 

 

But for members of the public, Mr. Speaker, there’s an area, it’s 

section 93(1) in the Act as we have it printed. It’s on page 63. It 

deals with exempt property. And this is what is subject to 

exempt property according to the Bill in front of us, subject to 

the regulations of course. And, Mr. Speaker, we all know that 

regulations are an important part of the legislative process, and 

we’ll have to take a look very closely at how these regulations 

will be written and what they’ll mean. But: 

 

Subject to the regulations, the following personal property 

and land of a judgment debtor is exempt: 

 

(a) clothing, including jewelry, with a cumulative value 

that does not exceed the prescribed amount. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, an exemption does include, you know, the 

clothes that you wear on a daily basis, including some of your 

jewellery, maybe your wedding rings and that sort of thing. 

These are exempt from judgment and from enforcement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, “medical [aids] and dental aids or other devices 

required or ordinarily used by the judgment debtor or a 

dependant of the judgment debtor due to physical or mental 

disability.” So, Mr. Speaker, you may not have much, but if a 

judgment is rendered against you, your hearing aid can’t be 

taken away from you. 

 

“Some household furnishings, utensils, equipment and 

appliances.” So, Mr. Speaker, your ability to sit in your living 

room, eat a meal that’s cooked on your stove, again you’ve got 

some exemptions and some protections in that regard. 

 

What about domestic animals, Mr. Speaker, that are kept as 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4001 

pets, with a cumulative value? How do you put a value on a pet, 

Mr. Speaker? I’m sure there’s a legal argument to be made here, 

but “domestic animals that are kept solely as pets with a 

cumulative value that does not exceed the prescribed amount.” 

Mr. Speaker, that’s an exempt property. 

 

Another exempt property, Mr. Speaker, “one motor vehicle with 

a value that does not exceed the prescribed amount”. So perhaps 

the minister with three, four cars in his driveway, have to give 

up three of them if the judgment indicates that, but he’ll have 

one motor vehicle, Mr. Speaker, that he can take to work every 

day. 

 

Other exempt property includes “items of tangible personal . . . 

[value], other than a motor vehicle, required for use by the 

judgment debtor to earn income for the support of the judgment 

debtor and his . . . dependants”. So, Mr. Speaker, this could be 

lawn equipment if he’s doing or she’s doing landscaping work, 

or a trailer to carry that equipment around. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another exempt property listed under (g) under 

section 93: 

 

money, and property or income acquired through the 

investment of money: 

 

(i) that can be separately identified as being received or as 

having been received by the judgment debtor pursuant to 

a legal entitlement to compensation for physical or mental 

injury. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, if you have a workers’ 

compensation claim or perhaps a Canada Pension Plan 

disability income, Mr. Speaker, that’s considered money for the 

purposes of exemption. And: 

 

(ii) that is being used or will be used to meet the 

reasonable and ordinary living expenses of the judgment 

debtor and his or her dependants or to provide medical or 

other care facilities for the judgment debtor or his or her 

dependants. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, certainly if you have been incapacitated in one 

way or another and you have certain living expenses that must 

be covered by money or money property that you have, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s considered exemption. And as far as money is 

concerned, Mr. Speaker, also certain employment income 

necessary to maintain and support you is also considered 

exempt for enforcement of judgment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a few other interesting exemptions I want 

to indicate. For example, another exemption are prepaid funeral 

services or a burial plot intended for the internment of the 

debtor. So in other words, Mr. Speaker, if you’ve prepared for 

the afterlife in some way, that can’t be taken away from you in 

judgment or by those who are enforcing the judgment. 

 

And: 

 

property of the judgment debtor that is of such low value 

that the sheriff believes that the costs of seizure and sale 

are likely to be approximately equal to or greater than the 

amount of the proceeds that would be available for 

satisfaction of the amount recoverable.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if you have nothing of real value, you can be 

assured that if the sheriff doesn’t think it’s worth his or her time 

to take care of that, that property will be exempt from the 

judgment. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, I think one that many people are 

extremely interested in exempt property — the homestead. The 

homestead, Mr. Speaker, provided it is not more than 160 acres. 

So, Mr. Speaker, for those who have always been worried about 

losing the home, the homestead, Mr. Speaker, that has been 

entrenched in law in the past and this legislation, enforcement 

of money judgments, also protects, Mr. Speaker, the homestead. 

And I will add into that section, “an interest in one house, house 

trailer, or equivalent facility and the land on which it is 

permanently situated, with a value that does not exceed the 

prescribed amount.” So, Mr. Speaker, certainly land, house, 

trailer protected in law by this legislation, Mr. Speaker, has 

been and will continue to be exempt under judgment. 

 

And then also, Mr. Speaker, exemptions: 

 

if money or an account has been seized, the portion that, 

combined with income of the judgment debtor that is 

exempt pursuant to . . . [other sections], is required to 

maintain the judgment debtor and his or her dependants 

for a period of one month following the date of seizure, up 

to the prescribed amount.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you are left with money to help to get you 

back into the workforce if you’re out of the workforce, or those 

sorts of things. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that that’s just a brief list of exempt 

property, and of course it’s subject to regulations that we 

haven’t seen yet. But, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that that list is a 

list that a number of people in the province may wish to review 

and make comments upon. I think that there are probably 

questions for the minister and his officials when the opportunity 

is given to us where we can take a look. Is this exemption list 

— if we’re looking at a new and modernized Act, Mr. Speaker, 

to deal with this process — is this exemption list enough or is it 

too much? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s an opportunity here for us to discuss this at 

greater length with the minister before the Act is finalized here 

in the Legislative Assembly. If we want to ensure that we have 

a new, modern enforcement process, if we want to create a 

process that makes it less difficult to enforce for the average 

person, if we want to ensure that the exemption list is updated 

— something that the minister did indicate he was thinking this 

Act would take care of — and if we want to ensure that, by and 

large, the people of Saskatchewan are much better served, well, 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to have to take the time necessary to 

have the discussions with the minister and his officials, with the 

legal community, and with individuals who may be going 

through this process at the moment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it should be indicated to members of the 

public that we are in fact going to amend a considerable number 



4002 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

of other pieces of legislation when we deal with this Act in 

general. Mr. Speaker, we are amending the landlord-tenant Act. 

We are amending the limitation of the civil rights Act. We are 

amending The Mineral Resources Act. We are amending The 

Mineral Taxation Act. We are amending The Municipal Board 

Act. We are amending The Municipal Employees’ Pension Act. 

We are amending The Municipalities Act. We are amending The 

New Generation Co-operatives Act. We are amending The 

Northern Municipalities Act. We are amending The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Act. We are amending The Partnership Act. We 

are amending The Personal Property Security Act. 

 

We are amending The Proceedings Against the Crown Act. We 

are amending The Public Employees Pension Plan Act. We are 

amending The Residential Tenancies Act. We are amending The 

Revenue and Financial Services Act. We are amending The 

Saskatchewan Farm Security Act. We are amending The 

Securities Transfer Act. We are amending The Superannuation 

Act. We are amending The Tax Enforcement Act. We are 

amending The Thresher Employees Act. We are amending The 

Threshers’ Lien Act. We are amending The Traffic Safety Act. 

We are amending The Workers’ Compensation Act. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are repealing The Absconding Debtors 

Act, The Attachment of Debts Act, The Creditors’ Relief Act, 

The Executions Act, The Exemptions Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a considerable amount of work. Obviously 

it’s been a considerable amount of work to get to this point. 

And Mr. Speaker, I congratulate those who have done so much 

work to get us to this point, Mr. Speaker. A lot of that work has 

been shared with the minister. The minister’s speech didn’t 

share a lot of that background with us in his comments. So, Mr. 

Speaker, the work that’s been done to get us to this point now 

can be reviewed and comments received from members of the 

Saskatchewan legal community. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are quite a few members 

on this side of the legislature who have an interest in ensuring 

that indeed this consolidation will do exactly what the minister 

wants it to do. Simple, introduce a new modern enforcement 

process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that it’s difficult sometimes for 

individuals to go to the sheriff, who’s responsible in most cases 

for the enforcement. We know that it’s difficult for individuals 

when the sheriff knocks on their door to say, I’m here to 

enforce this judgment. Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of people 

who are emotionally tied to this issue of enforcement of 

judgments, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that it 

is done to ensure the fairness for all Saskatchewan residents. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with those few remarks, I just want to thank 

again the legislature for giving me the opportunity to say a few 

words on this, but I’d like to ensure that others have a chance to 

review and discuss this Act as well. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 

move that debate on Bill 129, that debate be now adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 129. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 130 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Enforcement 

of Money Judgments Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Enforcement of Money Judgments 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2009. This Bill is the 

companion to The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act. It 

provides for the consequential amendments to bilingual Acts 

affected by the introduction of this major law reform Bill. 

 

One of the Acts amended by this Bill is The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Act, 1997. The Act is amended to reflect 

the new, improved process; however, the existing special 

priority for the enforcement of such orders is preserved. Those 

enforcing maintenance orders will continue to be able to choose 

how best to enforce an order for payment and to use a variety of 

methods to do so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I have noted in my speech regarding the main 

Bill, the intent of this new process is to assist those who have 

played by the rules and successfully completed the judicial 

process to effectively enforce their judgment. These 

consequential amendments to the affected bilingual Acts will 

assist in this objective. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Enforcement of 

Money Judgments Consequential Amendments Act, 2009. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 130, The Enforcement of Money Judgments 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2009. Is the Assembly ready 

for the question? I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And again 

I thank you for recognizing me to speak here at second reading 

of Bill No. 130, an Act representing consequential amendments 

resulting from the enactment of The Enforcement of Money 

Judgments Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you will know, and those who are watching, 

that we’re talking about a Bill that stems from the legislation 

that was just spoken to in the House by the Minister of Justice 

and myself. Essentially we are talking about consequential 

amendments. And the Minister of Justice in his remarks 

specifically pointed out maintenance enforcement provisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I again think that there are a lot of people in 

Saskatchewan today that are concerned about the whole issue of 

maintenance enforcement, Mr. Speaker. In fact in my 

constituency office, I think on a regular basis, the issue of the 

process of maintenance enforcements comes up by individuals 

who have expressed some concern to my constituent assistant 

and to myself. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, any time we as legislators are dealing with the 

issue of or the process of maintenance enforcements, I think 

there are a lot of Saskatchewan residents who would like to 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4003 

know exactly what it is that we are talking about. The Minister 

of Justice, in his remarks, alluded to the fact that this legislation 

will provide new sections of The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Act but, Mr. Speaker, he didn’t do the detail that would 

allow those who are concerned about or have an interest in this 

area to fully understand what is the government’s intention 

here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Obviously that means that the work of the opposition is actually 

increased, Mr. Speaker, because we will need to know what the 

intent of the changes are. We will need to find those who might 

be most affected by those changes, consult with those 

individuals, and of course bring some questions back to the 

minister during the process of review by committee in the 

legislature when we get to that point. 

 

Essentially what this appears to be is, again, a registration of the 

order. Now for the most part, I know that eases the process 

somewhat but, Mr. Speaker, does it address concerns that have 

been made by individuals affected by orders? So, Mr. Speaker, 

we’ll need to address that. 

 

Just for the interest of those who are watching and who might 

be at all interested in what I am referring to in the Act, Bill 130, 

that we’re talking about, there is a section 4, talks about 

sections 44 and 45 of The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

Act are repealed and the following substituted, and essentially it 

gets to this part (2): 

 

44(2) If there are arrears owing under a maintenance 

order, the recipient may enforce the maintenance order 

pursuant to The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act by: 

 

(a) registering the maintenance order as a judgment in 

the judgment registry; and 

 

(b) providing the sheriff with enforcement instructions 

with respect to the maintenance order mentioned in 

clause (a). 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, for all intents and purposes what this is saying 

is Bill 129 created a registration process and Bill 130 says that 

registration process also includes The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Act and the judgments that have been 

made. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are other pieces here that allow the 

sheriff to enforce the maintenance order, that ensure that, if 

there are exemptions, that the enforcement of the maintenance 

order respects those exemptions. And, Mr. Speaker, an 

interesting point here, and I must say I don’t know if it’s in the 

existing legislation or not but I’m sure there will be questions 

relating to this: 

 

On application by the payor, if a judge is satisfied that it 

would be grossly unfair and inequitable to do otherwise, 

the judge may make an order specifying the amount of 

money that is exempt from enforcement. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do believe that’s in the existing legislation, 

but again because the minister didn’t indicate specifically what 

all this means, we’re going to have to review this in detail — 

review the existing Act, consult, and question the minister in 

committee. 

 

I also recognize, Mr. Speaker, that this is an Act that is bilingual 

in the province of Saskatchewan. It’s an Act that is in French 

and in English, Mr. Speaker. There are a number of changes 

that this Act makes that are reflected in the language, the 

language of the French edition, and that is corrected and set out 

in this Bill, No. 130. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while I realize that there are a number of 

members who would like to speak to Bill 130, I think there’s an 

understanding and a recognition that we need to spend some 

time on Bill 129, the Act introduced prior to this, do some 

consultation on this Act, Bill No. 130, and that those members 

would like some time to review that and then make some 

comments here in the Legislative Assembly before questioning 

the minister in committee. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, that having been said, I would like to 

move that the debate on Bill No. 130 be now adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 130, The Enforcement 

of Money Judgments Consequential Amendments Act, 2009. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 131 — The Conservation Easements 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 

government takes seriously its responsibility to maintain a 

healthy environment that is so highly valued by our citizens. 

Ensuring that our ecologically sensitive land is protected is an 

important part of fulfilling this responsibility. 

 

Until now, government has been limited to what it can do to 

protect sensitive land. Conservation easements have been 

shown to be an effective tool to protect important ecological 

values on privately owned land. It’s a tool that has been used 

extensively by conservation organizations such as the Nature 

Conservancy of Canada. 

 

The proposed amendments to this Act strengthen the Crown’s 

ability to maintain and protect these lands. Along with granting 

easements to specific individuals, easements can now be 

applied to Crown land. This new type of easement will have 

enhanced enforcement capabilities and will ensure that our most 

sensitive land will be protected. This will also ensure that the 

easements remain intact and active, even if the lease changes 

hands or the land is sold. 

 

This approach will begin with the comprehensive ecological 

assessment of all surveyed Crown land. This assessment, 

developed in consultation with stakeholders, will determine 

which parcels of land require the protection afforded by a 



4004 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

conservation easement. We are confident that this will help to 

protect our ecologically valuable Crown lands for future 

generations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Conservation 

Easements Amendment Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has 

moved second reading of Bill No. 131, The Conservation 

Easements Amendment Act, 2009. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And I was pleased to hear the minister’s comments and a very 

quick explanation as to Bill No. 131, The Conservation 

Easements Act, what exactly it does, why it’s being moved 

ahead. And I also noticed that it also makes a consequential 

amendment to The Tax Enforcement Act. I didn’t hear any 

comments on that but I do know that there has been a fair bit of 

interest in this Act and what it basically does, what the minister 

just laid out. 

 

Basically a new definition is created that reflects a new category 

of easement that may be applied to Crown land, where the 

Crown is both the initial grantor and holder. So it fills a gap, 

obviously, as we move through environmental protection and, 

as the minister said, protect sensitive lands. That we will see, I 

would think, a number of changes that will be coming on a 

fairly steady basis until we get up to speed and make sure that 

we have all the protections in place that we need and 

opportunity for protection here in place that we need here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I guess really what comes to mind is, why the new class or new 

category of easement when we know that a conservation 

easement may already be granted for a number of purposes: the 

protection, the enhancement, or restoration of natural 

ecosystem, wildlife habitat, or habitat of rare, threatened, or 

endangered plant or animal species? So why add a new 

category? And what have we missed? 

 

Well it turns out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Crown and the 

Crown in right of Canada or a municipality may grant a 

conservation easement to itself or anyone eligible to be a 

holder. So the explanation for the changes to that existing 

provision are that the Crown no longer will require the power to 

apply a conservation easement to its own land, as it will have 

the new power to create Crown conservation easements with 

enhanced compliance provisions. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s really 

I think a very quick explanation of what this Bill is doing. 

 

But there are also a number of references to other Acts. There is 

some housekeeping that is contained within the Bill and I know 

that a number of new pieces raise a couple of questions. And I 

know that as we move forward we will hear some of my 

colleagues who have a great interest in the environment and 

changes, and an interest in how the Government of 

Saskatchewan is moving ahead, protecting the environment. 

And the minister made the comment that this is of great interest 

to citizens across the province. 

 

The environment is becoming more and more an issue of the 

day and it is becoming a general topic of discussion when we 

are out and about at various events. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

I’m sure you’ve ran across it also in your constituency — I 

know all of my colleagues have — that the environment and the 

steps that are taken are of interest and importance right across 

the province, and also how they all fit together, how the puzzle 

and all of the pieces of this puzzle fit together to provide that 

overall package that people are looking for for environmental 

protection right across the piece. And that’s a question that 

many will ask and many will be looking at when we are talking 

about The Conservation Easements Act and the changes that are 

coming forward in here. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know there are a number of changes. It may 

not sound that comprehensive or that involved when we look at 

how small the Bill is, but it does have an impact. And I know 

there are a number of people that are interested and I know 

there are a number of my colleagues that have an interest in 

speaking much to the detail of the Bill and what the possibility 

of the changes are. But, Mr. Speaker, with that I know there are 

a number of consultations that we have in progress and many 

more to do, and looking at the other impacts of this legislation, 

so as of this time I would adjourn debate on Bill 131. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 131, The 

Conservation Easements Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

(Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our 

government recognizes the need to ensure that areas of 

ecological value are protected. This Act will allow the 

government to protect sensitive land more efficiently, more 

effectively, and more sustainably than ever before. 

 

Until now, government had no detailed values inventory of 

protected land in our province. We didn’t know why a piece of 

land was currently being protected and if that land still had the 

characteristics that originally qualified it for protection. Much 

of the current protected land is used for various activities such 

as grazing. We will now be able to identify which land has 

changed and is suitable for limited activity. We will also be able 

to tell which land is the most sensitive and needs stronger 

protection. 

 

This Act also creates a Crown land ecological assessment. This 

will allow government to evaluate and identify important 

ecological values and know how best to protect them. This has 

been developed in consultation with a wide variety of 

stakeholders such as the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, the 

Nature Conservancy of Canada, Nature Saskatchewan, Ducks 

Unlimited Canada, The Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations, Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association, and the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4005 

Most importantly this Act will streamline management and 

enhance the protection of ecologically valuable land. The 

changes will allow the Crown to sell land with permanent 

easements attached. 

 

Our government believes that the land users are great stewards 

of the land and have a vested interest in its ongoing 

environmental protection. To ensure that they do so, fines for 

contraventions of easements will increase from $2,000 to 

$100,000 for individuals and from $50,000 to $500,000 for 

corporations. The amendments to this Act will continue to 

ensure the protection of Crown land while allowing land 

ownership by responsible owners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of the wildlife habitat 

protection amendment Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has 

moved second reading of Bill No. 132, The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

I recognize the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And again I must say that it looks like a very quick piece of 

legislation, but it will have huge impact across the province. 

And when we look at The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act . . . 

And it will be amended. In fact the schedule will be repealed, 

and the schedule is the listing of the designated lands in The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. And the explanation of the 

legislation goes on to talk about the province’s position to adopt 

a new strategic approach to evaluate and manage ecological, 

social, and economic values on Crown land in the surveyed area 

of Saskatchewan and ensure protection of critical features while 

enabling sale of the land. 

 

This new approach includes assessing the ecological attributes 

of all Crown land with an initial focus on land within The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. This information will be used 

to determine which lands may be sold, sold with a conservation 

easement, or retained by the Crown. 

 

And that’s just the first couple of paragraphs, and it raises a 

number of concerns. I know that there is a great deal of concern 

across the province for wildlife lands and protection of habitat 

in a number of areas. And I know the previous government paid 

particular attention to, if there was a reason that some of the 

land would’ve been removed from the schedule, that there 

would be a replacement or a goal to within a very short period 

of time replace that land, so that we were maintaining a wildlife 

habitat across the province that was appropriate for the species 

within the province. 

 

Now I’m very pleased that the minister made the comments of 

talking about the stakeholders, the amount of consultations that 

had been held so far on this piece of legislation. And there was 

a couple of others that I could think of that may have been 

added to the list and I may just have missed the minister making 

the comments in her few comments towards the legislation. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when we see changes such as this and the 

same with The Conservation Easements Act, the changes that 

have been made to that, there is concern. And we talk about the 

effect that each has on the other and how the environment is a 

puzzle and there are many pieces to that puzzle that we need to 

make sure that we have in place, and that we are making the 

appropriate changes across the province to make sure that there 

is protection, not only for wildlife habitat, but for sensitive 

ecological areas. And make sure those are protected, not only 

for the future of the province, but the future of citizens of the 

province so that they can enjoy not only the land but the 

opportunities that we have here. 

 

So while, Mr. Speaker, there is a number of changes that will be 

made, consequential amendments to other Acts, I know we need 

to have a closer look at the legislation and see exactly what it 

does change to the, in the consequential amendments. And I 

look forward to having an opportunity . . . oh, sorry. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time being 5 o’clock, this House 

will now recess until 7 p.m. later this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 

 

 



4006 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

CORRIGENDUM 

 

On page 3161 of Hansard No. 3A, Monday, October 26, 2009, 

the member who delivered the statement entitled “Proclamation 

of Health Care Provider Week” was identified as Mr. Forbes. 

 

The member should have been identified as Mr. Iwanchuk. 

 

We apologize for this error. 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Introduction of Page 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3973 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3973 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3973 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3973 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3973 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3974 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3974 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3974 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3974 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3974 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3989 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3998 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3999 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3974 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3974 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3975 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3975 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3975 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3975 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3975 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3975 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3976 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3976 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3976 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3976 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 International Women’s Day 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3977 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3977 

 34th Annual Kinsmen Telemiracle 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3977 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3977 

 Impaired Driving Awareness Week 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3978 

 Public Finance and Potato Chips 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3978 

 2010 Vancouver Olympic Games 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3978 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Potash Royalties and the Provincial Economy 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3979 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3979 

 Contract Negotiations for Health Care Workers 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3980 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3980 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3981 

 Support for Victims of Domestic Abuse 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3982 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3982 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 611 — The Autism Spectrum Disorder Strategy Act 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3983 

MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3984 

CONDOLENCES 

 Mathieu Theodore Breker 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3984 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3985 



 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3986 

 Michael Alfred Hopfner 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3986 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3987 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3987 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3988 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3989 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3990 

 Douglas Graham Taylor 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3991 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3994 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3994 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3995 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3996 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3996 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3997 

  D’Autremont (communication motion) ................................................................................................................................ 3998 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 129 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3999 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3999 

 Bill No. 130 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4002 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4002 

 Bill No. 131 — The Conservation Easements Amendment Act, 2009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4003 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4004 

 Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4004 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4005 

CORRIGENDUM .......................................................................................................................................................................... 4006 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


