




















































Hansard: April 14, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 44A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 14, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4817 

 April 14, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to all members of this honoured Assembly, I’d 

like to introduce two gentlemen from my constituency. Seated 

in your gallery are Bernie Collins and Dick Willows. And, Mr. 

Speaker, these are constituents of mine from Estevan. And at 

one time, I was a constituent of Bernie Collins, as he was the 

Member of Parliament for Souris-Moose Mountain. I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming these gentlemen to their 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — To you and through you I’d like to introduce 

a number of people in both the Speaker’s gallery and the west 

gallery, too many to name individually, but members of the 

group, SCN Matters. They came here today to try to illustrate to 

the government how important it is both for film and television 

producers, and viewers and people in Saskatchewan. 

 

So I’d like for us to all welcome them to their legislature today. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Following my 

colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale, I would like to highlight 

one person who’s a part of the group here in the legislature 

today who have come to hear some answers from the 

government on the issue of the proposed closure of SCN 

[Saskatchewan Communications Network]. And that individual 

is Melanie Jackson. 

 

Melanie lives just a stone’s throw outside of Saskatoon Massey 

Place, and she’s the producer of Wapos Bay, a very successful 

program that is produced here in Saskatchewan. She tells me 

that last year alone the program brought in $1.2 million into the 

province. It employs 45 full-time employees, and when you 

include cast members, it actually, the number goes up to 90. 

 

Eight episodes were produced last season for a total of 34 in 

total. So I think it’s another great example of a program here in 

Saskatchewan that has direct ties to SCN as evidence of the 

economic growth and stimulus that can be created through the 

work of SCN. So I would ask all members in the Assembly to 

join me in welcoming Melanie as well as the other individuals 

who have come here today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Member from Regina Coronation Park.  

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 

to introduce an individual in the east gallery. This individual is 

one of the newly elected vice-presidents of the New Democratic 

Party, elected at the convention in Prince Albert that we 

recently had. A great convention it was, and we elected some 

very fine people to be part of the New Democratic Party 

organization. 

 

I’m referring of course to Kent Peterson who originally hails 

from the Nipawin area and is at the University of Regina right 

now pursuing his studies. This is a gentleman that has a great 

future in Saskatchewan or wherever he winds up being, but I 

predict it’ll be in Saskatchewan. Please join me in welcoming 

Kent to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join with 

the member opposite on welcoming Mr. Kent Peterson. He’s 

originally from White Fox area which is right close at the 

constituency of Carrot River Valley. And I’d like everybody in 

the Assembly to thank him for showing up. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join with the member from Massey Place in welcoming 

Melanie to the legislature this afternoon. The member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale and the Leader of the Opposition and 

myself had a opportunity to tour the Wapos Bay set last week 

during the Easter break from the Assembly. We had a chance to 

interact and meet with many of the people that work for Wapos 

Bay, and they were able to show us exactly how they make 

these puppets that they use on their sets. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is a children’s program. It’s a very 

famous children’s program. And it’s absolutely amazing the 

numbers of young people that have come out of film school, 

animation school and design school that are employed here in 

Saskatoon, city of Saskatoon, in our province, contributing to 

the film and video industry. So, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank 

Melanie, who is one of the producers and creators of this very 

successful children’s series, for hiring all of these young people 

in the province of Saskatchewan. These are jobs that mean that 

people can buy homes, can build their lives here. And I think 

we owe a great deal of tribute to the Wapos Bay producers for 

the work that they have brought to our province and the jobs 

and the economic development that has certainly been evident 

in the city of Saskatoon. So thanks for coming down. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to as well join the members in 

extending an invitation. My youngest brother Jack and his wife 

Collette are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. Jack was the 

speaker at the Saskatchewan Prayer Breakfast this morning. I 

must say that he did a commendable job. I guess only a brother 

can only do that, but I want to thank him for taking the time to 

come and join us. Jack’s involved with the Impact Society and a 

program called Heroes, reaching out to youth across our land. 

So I would ask the members to join me in welcoming my 

brother and his wife to this Assembly. 

 



4818 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2010 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to arise today to present a petition 

on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are 

concerned about the safety of our highways. This particular 

petition applies to the No. 10 Highway between Fort 

Qu’Appelle and the junction of No. 1. This portion of this 

highway is the main artery of travel to year-round tourist 

destinations as well as this highway serves three major inland 

grain terminals. So the traffic flow on this road is very heavy, 

and at times it’s believed to be quite dangerous for the motoring 

public. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and the 

junction of No. 1 in order to improve the safety for 

Saskatchewan’s motoring public. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Ituna, Wynyard, and Balcarres, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it’s my pleasure 

to again present a petition on behalf of the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition. This petition is in support of the 

implementation of the Saskatchewan scholarship fund, that 

being the same scholarship fund that was promised in the 2007 

general election by the Sask Party. The prayer of the petition 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement the promised Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s signatures are from Regina, from White 

City, and from Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition that speaks to the issue of protecting renters 

from unreasonable rent increases. And, Mr. Speaker, over the 

past number of months, there are many communities in 

Saskatchewan where renters have seen rents close to doubling 

in one increase, and it’s been very difficult for some residents to 

be able to maintain that cost of rent. And, Mr. Speaker, it also 

touches on a number of other provinces that have rent control 

guidelines in provinces right across Canada and that, that 

should be something that the government should address here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And we, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the government to 

consider enacting some form of rent control with a view 

to protecting Saskatchewan renters from unreasonable 

increases in rent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of Saskatchewan residents, I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

rise with a petition in support of people with autism. And the 

growing number of children diagnosed with autism has left 

parents and guardians becoming educators, advocates, 

caregivers, and financiers. And the majority of Canadians now 

do live in provinces that have adequate autism spectrum 

disorder strategies and funding. So the petition reads, the prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing a 

comprehensive provincial autism spectrum strategy that is 

based on proven best-practice, evidence-based research 

treatments and programming; and given the complexity of 

the disorder and its treatments, that individualized 

funding concept be adapted for parents and guardians of 

autistic individuals. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition is signed by residents from Regina, Saskatoon, 

P.A. [Prince Albert], and Wilkie. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition in support of 

maintaining educational assistants in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And as the public will know, the Saskatchewan 

Ministry of Education introduced a document where they 

propose to replace a large number of educational assistants with 

a small number of professionals like speech-language therapists 

and psychologists. And this is not practical, particularly for 

those living in rural Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Cause the government to provide funding for the required 

number of educational assistants to provide special needs 

students with the support they need and maintain a 

positive learning environment for all Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in rural 

Saskatchewan, people from Buena Vista, Craven, Esterhazy, 

and Gerald. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



April 14, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4819 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reinstatement of the 

domestic abuse outreach program in Saskatoon. And we know 

the domestic abuse outreach program provided a number of 

valuable services to women victims of domestic violence and 

their children, including helping women find emergency shelter, 

accompanying women to their homes, courts, hospitals, or the 

police station as needed. It was cut without consultation 

December 31st, 2009. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to take 

the following action: to cause the provincial government 

to reinstate the domestic abuse outreach program as a 

provincial government service and make it available in all 

parts of Saskatchewan. 

 

And this is signed by concerned citizens in the city of 

Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of repairing Highway 123 that goes to the 

community of Cumberland and to commit the money that was 

previously committed on behalf of the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] government. The petition is signed by the leadership and 

First Nations of Cumberland House. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining and repairing 

this highway. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Cumberland House and area. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that has been circulated by the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition, a petition in support of affordable 

undergraduate tuition costs and a request that the Sask Party 

government have its actions match its rhetoric. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average of 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of the expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The petition is being circulated by citizens 

of the province because the Saskatchewan Party government 

specifically amended the retention program to exclude master’s 

and Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] graduates and graduates from 

schools outside the province of Saskatchewan. And the prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the provincial government to immediately expand the 

graduate retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. 

students. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks from the city of 

Regina. I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

petition is with respect to Sask Party’s lack of action with 

respect to climate change: 

 

We, the prayer reads as follows, respectfully request that 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately, 

without delay, acknowledge and recognize that climate 

change is occurring and that the impacts of climate change 

are escalating and worsening; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

undertake immediate actions to mitigate climate change by 

reducing greenhouse gas emissions, actions which will 

serve to protect Saskatchewan people from the significant 

costs to our economy, global security, and quality of life 

which climate change threatens to bring about, and to also 

protect Saskatchewan people from longer and more 

frequent droughts, reduced river flows as the glaciers 

which feed our rivers shrink, erratic rainfall with more 

frequent and more serious flooding, and loss of at least the 

southern part of Saskatchewan’s valuable boreal forest 

which is treasured by so many in our province; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, begin the process of creating 

a meaningful, significant, comprehensive, and broad-based 

strategy including enacting substantial and meaningful 

legislation and substantial and meaningful regulations to 

meet the commitment solemnly pledged repeatedly in 

October and November of 2007 during the last provincial 

election by the Premier, the current member from Swift 

Current, who at the time of the last provincial election 

when he made this serious and significant commitment 



4820 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2010 

was serving as the leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition, to reduce our province’s greenhouse gas 

emissions by 32 per cent from the levels of greenhouse gas 

emissions which our province produced in the year 2007 

and to meet said 32 per cent reduction of greenhouse gas 

emissions by the year of Our Lord 2020, 10 years from 

now or one short decade away; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the Premier to instruct his 

Minister of Environment, the current member from 

Martensville, to recognize the importance of honouring the 

Premier’s solemnly pledged commitment and to set about 

the important task of developing a substantial and 

meaningful plan to seek a reduction of our province’s 

levels of greenhouse gas emissions rather than continuing 

to evade all responsibility in her duties to actually address 

this critically important issue which will directly affect our 

province’s economy and the quality of life for all of our 

residents; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, reject the intensity-based 

reduction targets which the provincial Sask Party 

government has shamefully followed the federal 

Conservative government in adopting, in favour of 

absolute reduction targets, and to immediately enact said 

absolute reduction targets in the new management and 

reduction of greenhouse gases Act; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, reverse its ill-advised decision 

to cut all funding to the Prairie Adaptation Research 

Collaborative and to recognize that the Prairie Adaptation 

Research Collaborative is a valuable and much-needed 

organization in that it generates practical options to help 

Saskatchewan adapt to the current and future impacts of 

climate change and fosters the development of new 

professionals in the emerging science of climate change 

impacts and adaptation; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, restore the full amount of 

funding which it recently cut to the Prairie Adaptation 

Research Collaborative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 

today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents 

that are concerned about the privatization of our Crown 

corporations. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately, 

without delay, acknowledge and recognize that for more 

than 100 years Saskatchewan has thrived on the 

affordable and accessible services offered by our Crown 

corporations, such as but not limited to SaskPower, which 

provides electrification to rural residents and continues to 

do so today. SaskTel, which provides access to telephone, 

cellular, and Internet services. Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company or STC, which provides 

transportation to and from many of rural communities. 

The Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan, 

which provides loans to our agricultural producers. The 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, which 

provides protection to agricultural producers from natural 

conditions beyond their control.  

 

The Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan, 

which establishes the strategic directions for subsidiary 

Crown corporations through effective governance and 

performance management and enhances Saskatchewan’s 

long-term economic growth and diversification through 

Crown corporations. Enterprise Saskatchewan, which was 

designed to foster economic growth but has produced 

minimal results thus far. Information Services 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, which is responsible for 

the administration of land titles, vital statistics, survey and 

personal property registries, as well as related geographic 

information and mapping systems. The Municipal 

Financing Corporation of Saskatchewan, which assists in 

making capital funds available for the financing of sewer 

and water, school, hospital, and other essential 

construction and local improvement projects by 

municipalities, school divisions, and health districts. 

 

The Saskatchewan Communications Network which the 

government recently pulled all funding to, effectively 

killing its future operations. Saskatchewan Gaming 

Corporation, which offers casino entertainment in a 

socially responsible way. The Saskatchewan Government 

Growth Fund Management Corporation, which creates 

and manages investment funds. The Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance, which is known more commonly 

to Saskatchewan people as SGI, and provides home and 

auto insurance. The Saskatchewan Grain Corporation 

which manages the government’s fleet of rail hopper cars. 

 

Saskatchewan’s Health Information Network, which 

manages the development of a province-wide health 

information network, which also had its funding 

drastically reduced in the recent budget. Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation, which promotes self-sufficiency 

and independence by providing housing and housing 

services for families, seniors, persons with disabilities, 

and others who could not otherwise afford safe, secure 

shelter. The Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, 

which is responsible for the distribution, sale, and 

regulation of alcohol and gaming in the province. The 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board, which ensures financial 

credibility for cities, towns, villages, northern and rural 

municipalities and school divisions and ensures appeals 

respecting planning, assessment, fire prevention, 

municipal boundaries, and conservation and development 

are heard and decided. 

 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, which supports 

the growth and success of Saskatchewan’s technology 



April 14, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4821 

sector through the development and operations of 

research parks on the campuses of the province’s 

universities in Saskatoon and Regina and at the forest 

centre in Prince Albert. Saskatchewan Research Council, 

which provides research, development, and the transfer of 

innovative, scientific, and technological solutions and 

applications and services to the province. Saskatchewan 

Watershed Authority, which leads the management of the 

province’s water resources to ensure safe drinking water 

sources and reliable water supplies for economic, 

environmental, and social benefits of Saskatchewan 

people. SaskEnergy Incorporated, which provides heat 

and energy to the homes and businesses across our 

province; and SaskWater, which provides quality water 

and waste water services. 

 

And in doing so, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, commit to retaining the full 

public ownership of these valuable institutions that 

provide us with services such as power generation, 

telephone and Internet services, transportation, insurance, 

agricultural credit, health information, affordable housing 

facilities, research in energy, crop insurance, and quality 

drinking water access; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

recognize that Crown corporations have been providing 

the people of Saskatchewan with affordable, accessible 

services for more than 100 years; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

recognize that Saskatchewan residents in both urban and 

rural centres in all corners of our province continue to 

benefit from the manner in which our Crown corporations 

are investing millions of dollars back into our towns, 

cities, schools, charity organizations, and community 

events, institutions, and groups which ensure the 

continued prosperity and vitality of our urban and rural 

centres; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

recognize that thousands of people and families in 

Saskatchewan prosper directly from employment and 

benefits provided by our Crowns, and if we want to retain 

these benefits, it is vital to keep these organizations 100 

per cent publicly owned; 

 

And in doing so, to cause the provincial government to 

cease their growing trend of piecemeal privatization, 

selling off profitable parts of Crown corporations for 

political reasons, most recently exhibited with the Wall 

government’s announcement of a 20-year, $700 million 

purchase agreement with Northland Power of Toronto to 

supply 261 megawatts of power from a new plant here in 

North Battleford, forcing the Saskatchewan taxpayers to 

pay yet another backdoor tax through increased power 

rates in order to protect this private, out-of-province 

company from fluctuating natural gas rates despite the 

fact that SaskPower has not only the capacity but also the 

expertise to develop this facility within their existing 

power generation capability; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

reverse their decision to privatize hospitality networks 

which provides operator services in hospitals and 

long-term care facilities; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

reverse their decision to outsource SaskTel services such 

as email services, Max TV, video conferencing, 

SecurTek, and directory assistance; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

condemn the actions of the previous Devine 

administration, their actions upon taking office to 

privatize our valuable, publicly owned Crown 

corporations such as selling off most of Saskatchewan 

Mining Development Corporation and the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, as well as splitting the 

natural gas division from SaskPower and proposing its 

privatization, selling off controlling interest in the Prince 

Albert pulp mill, and privatizing Sask Minerals despite 

the fact that many of these operations were some of the 

most important institutions to Saskatchewan people and 

many of these operations were profitable operations year 

after year; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

commit their unfaltering support for full public ownership 

in our provincial Crown corporations and to commit to a 

complete cessation of their continued erosion of these 

Crown corporations through backdoor privatization. 

 

I so submit on behalf of constituents of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of maintaining quality health care services in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan 

must recognize the value of health care providers by having a 

commitment to adequate funding and the installation of 

good-faith bargaining in a provincial bargaining process. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the government so far has used a heavy hand with 

its essential services legislation and making a mockery of the 

collective bargaining process in the province. And the petition 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to negotiating a fair and just 

collective bargaining agreement with health care workers 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

This petition is signed by residents of Regina, and I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition signed by residents in Saskatchewan 

concerned about the government’s veto of the non-partisan 

choice of a bipartisan committee at the legislature of the Chief 

Electoral Officer. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 



4822 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2010 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take 

the following action: 

 

Cause the government to recognize the fundamental role 

that democracy plays in our province and that in order for 

democracy to be delivered to its full potential we must 

have the best candidate in these positions of 

responsibility; 

 

And in so doing, to uphold the mandate of the Office of 

the Chief Electoral Officer, which is an independent 

office of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly and 

respect its mandate as posted publicly: 

 

To ensure the right of the people of Saskatchewan to 

participate freely in honest, open, and fair electoral 

events and to encourage the involvement of political 

parties, candidates, and electors by raising their 

awareness and understanding of electoral processes that 

are transparent, efficient, and accessible. 

 

And in so doing to uphold the values of Elections 

Saskatchewan, which are: 

 

To be independent and non-partisan, ensuring public 

confidence in the independence of the office and its 

activities by treating all stakeholders equally and 

without preference; 

 

To have integrity, making certain that every decision 

and every action enhances the democratic rights of all 

electors by interpreting and applying policy and 

legislation fairly and consistently; 

 

To be open and transparent in all activities through 

consistency of action, regular and public reporting, 

broad communications and information sharing 

between and during electoral events; 

 

To be accountable to electors and the members of the 

Legislative Assembly through statutory reporting of 

activity and performance against published standards 

and open discussion of the legislation and regulatory 

framework of electoral events and election finances; 

 

To be efficient in designing processes and ensuring 

financial accountability through the development, 

management, and deployment of up-to-date and 

cost-effective technology, processes, access channels, 

and tools that encourage maximum participation and 

facilitate maximum compliance with financial reporting 

obligations; 

 

[14:00] 

 

To be effective in electoral event delivery procedures 

and operations, reducing barriers to compliance, 

participation, and access to the process for electors, 

candidates, and parties, ensuring that workers are well 

prepared, processes are well designed, and 

measurement systems are in place; 

 

To be innovative, creative, and flexible in delivering 

the present and preparing for the future, looking 

broadly for opportunities and partnerships while 

considering electoral process needs and adopting 

optimal solutions; 

 

To be consultative with our stakeholders, using 

advisory committees to evaluate legislative, regulatory, 

and operational frameworks to ensure that they are 

current and relevant, regularly reviewing all 

stakeholder perspectives and needs and by sharing 

evaluations of Election Saskatchewan’s performance; 

 

To be professional in all our activities by bringing to 

Saskatchewan the best practices of electoral 

administration across Canada and in democracies 

across the world; 

 

To create a co-operative working environment and to 

encourage all members of the election team to work 

together and to work with their stakeholders and 

partners to better serve the electorate of Saskatchewan. 

 

And in so doing, to recognize the Chief Electoral Officer 

plays an integral role, delivering many democratic 

processes in a fair and impartial manner and therefore 

must hold the trust, confidence, and respect of not only 

the elected members of this Assembly but also of all 

political parties in the province and, by extension, all 

members of the public; 

 

And in so doing, to recognize that the person who is hired 

to become the next permanent Chief Electoral Officer will 

deal with two provincial elections, including the 

upcoming election 2011 as well as the following election 

in 2015; 

 

And the Chief Electoral Officer will also deal with the 

redistribution of the provincial electoral map, which may 

result in shifting electoral boundaries to reflect 

demographic and population changes and therefore alter 

the composition of the provincial constituencies elected 

members of the Assembly currently represent; 

 

And the Chief Electoral Officer will also conduct a 

review of the provincial election Act which sets out the 

guidelines by which we all must follow for the 

administration of provincial elections, by-elections, 

enumerations other than during the writ of the election, 

and provincial election finances, all of which will have 

implications on future election results; 

 

And in so doing, recognize that the current Acting Chief 

Electoral Officer has been recommended as the best 

candidate for the permanent job by a bipartisan committee 

and by a majority of the leaders of the major political 

parties to this job on a permanent basis and that a 

recommendation of this nature should be accepted by the 

government; 

 

And in so doing, to Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan appoint the chosen candidate, the current 

Acting Chief Electoral Officer, on this job on a permanent 



April 14, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4823 

basis. 

 

I so submit. This is signed by residents of Regina. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Indeed it’s my 

pleasure to rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned 

residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the 

unprecedented mismanagement of our finances by the Sask 

Party government. They allude to the two consecutive years of 

$1 billion deficits and the $1 billion of debt growth that’s under 

way within this province under the Sask Party government. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens of Regina. I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to present a petition again today in support of the 

Saskatchewan film industry and the Saskatchewan 

Communications Network. This petition is signed by concerned 

citizens who have watched the film and television industry 

languish here in this province for the last couple of years 

without support from the government, and now feel it’s been 

kicked to the curb with the closure of SCN. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately and 

without delay recognize the substantial economic 

contribution that the Saskatchewan film and television 

industry has contributed to our provincial economy; 

 

And in doing so, to recognize that more than 1,200 jobs in 

the film industry were created in 2007-2008, providing 

quality employment to highly skilled and talented people 

in this industry which keeps many young people and their 

families in our province while also recruiting people from 

outside Saskatchewan borders to come here to pursue 

their career, yet this government’s failure to address 

critical issues to the film industry is actively driving many 

of these individuals and jobs out of the province; 

 

And in doing so, to recognize that other provinces provide 

higher maximum tax credits for the industry, with many 

providing film companies with the option of tax credits 

based on either production costs incurred or labour costs, 

yet because of the inaction of this government, film 

companies are not choosing to film in Saskatchewan but 

are now actively choosing other jurisdictions to invest 

their time, money, and job prospects; 

 

And in doing so, to recognize that because of this 

government’s inaction, production in the film industry has 

declined by 70 per cent in the last two years and 

businesses associated with the film industry have begun 

to close their doors, most recently William F. White and 

PS Production Services; 

 

And in doing so, to listen to the film industry and its calls 

for changes to the film employment tax credit that will 

allow the Saskatchewan film industry to be more 

competitive with other provinces; 

 

And in doing so, to recognize the irreplaceable role that 

Saskatchewan Communications Network or SCN plays in 

fostering the film industry in Saskatchewan, yet this 

government’s short-sighted decision to shut down SCN 

will cost Saskatchewan filmmakers an important vehicle 

for showcasing their work and therefore impact their 

future career possibilities; 

 

And in doing so, to recognize that SCN’s benefits are 

enjoyed not only by the Saskatchewan film industry, but 

also to large audiences spanning the province, especially 

in rural Saskatchewan, since many programs are filmed in 

rural Saskatchewan, bringing economic and cultural 

benefits, and many programs tell stories about 

experiences specific to rural Saskatchewan and SCN is 

broadcast on channels that are available in rural areas 

without access to SaskTel Max; 

 

And in doing so, to recognize that SCN’s benefits also 

apply directly to Saskatchewan’s best and brightest young 

people through initiatives like 15 Minutes of Fame, 

investing in projects created by emerging filmmakers and 

supporting educational programming for young people 

such as Drug Class and Wapos Bay; 

 

And in doing so, to recognize that the void left if SCN is 

to close will not be filled by a comparable company since 

SCN tells Saskatchewan stories to Saskatchewan people, 

building a sense of community and pride in the province, 

allowing Saskatchewan to have a voice on the Canadian 

and international cultural landscape by supporting 

award-winning programming, and provides culturally and 

socially significant programming that cannot be found 

anywhere else; 

 

And in doing so, to recognize the positive contributions 

that SCN has generated for the provincial economy: for 

example, in 2007, SCN spent $1.6 million that triggered 

$17 million in production; in 2008, SCN spent $1 million 

that triggered $11 million in production; and in 2009, 

SCN spent $780,000 that triggered 3.3 million in 

production and therefore provides an excellent return on 

investment to our provincial economy; 



4824 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2010 

And in doing so, recognize that shutting down this 

valuable network will deal an irreparable blow to the 

cultural, economic, and social landscape of our province; 

 

And in doing so, to immediately and without delay 

reverse its decision to shut down Saskatchewan 

Communications Network. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed by residents of Regina. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort, the 

Minister of Finance. 

 

National Parkinson’s Disease Month 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April is 

National Parkinson’s Disease Month. Parkinson’s disease 

affects the nervous system and causes people to have less 

control over their muscles. About one in every 250 people over 

the age of 40 and about one in every 100 people age 65 or older 

are affected by this disease. Although the average age of onset 

is 57, occasionally it appears in childhood. Men are more likely 

to develop Parkinson’s than women. Although the cause is not 

yet clear, scientists believe a combination of genetic and 

environmental factors are involved. 

 

At this time, there’s no known prevention for Parkinson’s 

disease, and treatments only help to manage symptoms. The 

first sign in most people is a trembling hand. Later the arms and 

legs may be affected. There is no cure, but by raising awareness 

we can help raise funds for those searching for a cure and for 

urgently needed support programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize the efforts of the Parkinson 

Society of Canada, which is the national voice of Canadians 

living with Parkinson’s disease. Their purpose is to ease the 

burden and find a cure through advocacy, education, research, 

and support services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that everyone in this Assembly recognize 

April as National Parkinson’s Disease Month. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Prince Albert Students Win Law Day Competition 

 

Mr. Furber: — On March 27th, law students from my alma 

mater, St. Mary High School, competed and came in first place 

in the provincial Law Day competition in Saskatoon. 

 

At this competition, students from schools from across the 

province act as witnesses, prosecution, defence, and they 

participate much as if they were in a real court. Law Day was 

set up to give people, and in this case students, a better 

understanding of how the legal system works, and to empower 

the public. 

 

At this year’s event, the mock case involved Reggie from the 

Archie Comics on trial for theft over $5,000 and possession of 

stolen goods. The mock trial ended with Reggie being found not 

guilty on the first count, but guilty on the second count. But 

more importantly, in this case, Mr. Speaker, it gave St. Mary 

students first place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the St. Mary law team was made up of Amanda 

Hayduk, Julie Mills, Matthew Derworiz, Brenner Holash, and 

Danielle Mitchell. The team was guided by local lawyer, Neil 

Raas. Beginning in February, he worked with the students once 

a week to prepare them for the trial. 

 

All students felt that they learned a great deal about the justice 

system through this exercise. It might also have served as a 

reminder to the students to walk on the right side of the law. As 

Matthew Derworiz told the P.A. Herald, it “. . . showed the 

importance of staying out of trouble with the law if even Archie 

[comic] characters can be found guilty.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 

congratulating St. Mary High School law students on their 

victory at the provincial Law Day competition. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Child Abuse Prevention Month 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April is Child Abuse 

Prevention Month in Canada. Mr. Speaker, our children are our 

pride and joy. They are the best representation of ourselves. We 

must do everything in our power to ensure that the next 

generation is loved and protected. We want our children to have 

every advantage we did not have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you may know, I was sent to St. John’s 

Training School at the age of eight, one of the most violent and 

brutal reform schools in Canadian history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, child abuse is an atrocity that unfortunately 

persists till this day. The term child abuse refers to the violence, 

mistreatment, or neglect that a child or adolescent may 

experience while in the care of someone they either trust or 

depend on. There are multiple forms of child abuse. 

 

Physical abuse involves deliberately using force against a child 

in such a way that the child is either injured or is at risk of being 

injured. Sexual abuse and exploitation involves using a child for 

sexual purposes. 

 

Neglect is often chronic and it usually involves repeated 

incidents. It involves failing to provide what the child needs for 

his or her physical, psychological, or emotional development 

and well-being. 

 

Emotional abuse involves harming a child’s sense of self and 

includes acts or omissions that result in or place the child at risk 

of serious behavioural, cognitive, emotional, or mental health 

problems. 

 

I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that we all move together to be a 



April 14, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4825 

province that honours all of our children as God’s precious 

creations. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Rosemont/Mount Royal Family Fun Day 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to extend recognition and thanks to the 

Rosemont/Mount Royal Community Association for their 

continued leadership in our community. As just one example of 

their many meaningful contributions, I reference the 

Rosemont/Mount Royal Family Fun Day on February 6th at 

Martin Collegiate. I was pleased to attend. 

 

The event was well attended by children and adults, providing a 

great opportunity for the community to come together. The 

event featured an exceptional strawberry social. Activities 

included oversized board games, a craft table, face painting, a 

draw for two beautiful gift baskets, a giant jumper, a Dino 

Bouncer slide that even my wife couldn’t resist, Mr. Speaker. 

They were a hit with children and adults. Overall it was a great 

success and very well organized. 

 

I’d like to extend sincere thanks to Chairperson Jim Emmons, to 

all the executive members too numerous to mention here today, 

to community organizer Theresa Baumgartner, and to the many 

volunteers that came out to make the family fun day successful. 

I know that the community appreciated this event very much, as 

well as the numerous ongoing activities that the association is 

engaged with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join with 

me in extending our sincere thanks to the Rosemont/Mount 

Royal Community Association for their enrichment of our 

community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Terry Fox’s Marathon of Hope 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

today marks the 30th anniversary of Terry Fox’s Marathon of 

Hope. At a very young age, Terry was diagnosed with 

osteosarcoma, but because cancer treatment was still in its 

infant stages, the doctors were forced to amputate his leg. 

 

Terry soon adjusted to life as an amputee and found inspiration 

in Dick Traum, the first amputee to compete and complete the 

New York Marathon. Not satisfied with the amount of attention 

and funding for cancer research, Terry sought to run across the 

country in hopes of receiving just a single dollar from each 

Canadian citizen for cancer research. Terry named this 

endeavour the Marathon of Hope. Even though Terry faced 

considerable challenges in running from coast to coast on a 

prosthetic leg, Terry’s spirit won over. Soon his Marathon of 

Hope began to attract international attention and donations kept 

pouring in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rest is history. Since Terry’s vision came to 

light, over half a billion dollars has been raised for cancer 

research through the Marathon of Hope. Terry has become a 

Canadian icon throughout the world and his name has become 

synonymous with hope. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this 

House and Assembly to join me in honouring Terry Fox and his 

Marathon of Hope. Terry Fox truly was, and remains, the 

greatest Canadian ever. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Legislative Assembly Members 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the Merriam-Webster’s Dictionary 

defines hypocrisy as “the act of persistently professing beliefs 

or actions that are inconsistent with one’s actions. Hypocrisy is 

thus a kind of lie.” This behaviour certainly fits with the Sask 

Party government. 

 

For example, they criticize the Leader of the Opposition for 

working outside the province. Yes, the Leader of the Opposition 

worked in Alberta for 9 years; a fact that we are proud of. He 

was a top-level executive in a large and successful company 

working with governments from around the globe. He travelled 

the world, gaining perspective and expertise that he has brought 

back to our caucus. 

 

Now the hypocrisy of the members on that side of the House 

though, if they would examine the work experience of their 

leader, they would realize that the Premier spent several years 

working outside the province as well. The only difference, Mr. 

Speaker, was that while our leader was a well-respected 

businessman, the Premier was nothing but a low-level hack 

working for the Mulroney Tories. 

 

But the hypocrisy continues. The Sask Party also criticized our 

leader for donating the entire taxpayer-funded portion of his 

pension to charity, ignoring the fact that at least two Sask Party 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] are happily 

raking in thousands of taxpayer dollars every year. It is purely 

hypocritical for the Sask Party to criticize our leader while their 

members are collecting, keeping 100 per cent of their pensions. 

 

So before this government’s pointing fingers, they should 

remember that three are pointing back, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Before I recognize the 

next member I just want to remind members that they’re not to 

refer to other member’s character, either directly or indirectly, 

or to speak unbecomingly of members. We’ve mentioned that 

on many occasions, whether in statements or any other 

comment. Final statement. 

 

I recognize the member from Moose Jaw North. 

 

76th Annual TheatreFest  

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, since 1932 Theatre 

Saskatchewan has been performing live theatre in the province 

through volunteer-based membership groups. In fact it’s the 

oldest and largest community theatre organization in Canada. In 

Saskatchewan, there’s an impressive array of talent performing 



4826 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2010 

in live theatre and we, the people of Saskatchewan, are indeed 

fortunate to be able to have an engaging experience by taking in 

some of these live theatre performances. 

 

Last week from April 4th to 10th, Saskatchewan Theatre held 

its 76th Annual TheatreFest in Moose Jaw. Performances took 

place in the Mae Wilson Theatre, one of the most exquisite 

restored theatres in all of Saskatchewan. TheatreFest promotes 

the very culture of live theatre. It improves the quality of life, 

builds pride in our communities as well as supporting economic 

growth. 

 

This annual competition of live theatre production comes from 

communities throughout Saskatchewan including Strasbourg 

and Melfort, Kerrobert, Regina, Prince Albert, The Battlefords, 

and of course the pride of culture, my hometown of Moose Jaw. 

There were over 100 participants at TheatreFest and about 

1,000 spectators who attended the variety of theatrical 

performances throughout the week. 

 

I’d like to extend congratulations to the actors, the directors, the 

writers, the crew, the volunteers, and everyone involved in 

TheatreFest 2010 on the success of this great theatre 

competition. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Rulings on Points of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move to question period, I want to 

speak to the two points of order that were raised yesterday. 

 

Yesterday the Government House Leader raised a point of order 

regarding questions raised by the Opposition House Leader 

during question period. The Government House Leader 

contends that the questions impugned the motives of 

government members by accusing them of fixing the 2007 

election. In response to the point of order, the Opposition House 

Leader said the point of order was based on quotes he made 

from a legal judgment. 

 

Upon review of the questions asked by the Opposition House 

Leader, there were three questions on page 4763 of Hansard 

where he asked if certain members conspired to fix the outcome 

of the 2007 general election. This part of the question was not 

part of the material quoted by the member. Even though the 

question was direct and not couched in the quote, I want to 

remind members of a principle: one cannot do indirectly what 

cannot be done directly. 

 

Speaker Hagel made this point on March 31st, 1999 when 

stated and I quote, “Although he’s quoting directly, that still 

does not permit members to engage in the use of 

unparliamentary words when engaging in debate.” In this case, 

the accusation was made directly. 

 

A similar accusation was ruled out of order on March 26, 2001 

when a group of members was associated with the 

contravention of election laws. In this ruling, Speaker 

Kowalsky stated, and I quote: 

 

I remind members that the proceedings of this Assembly 

are based on a long-standing tradition of respect for the 

integrity of all members. The integrity or motives of 

members, whether individually or collectively, should not 

be questioned indirectly in debate. 

 

This was also expressed in Speaker Osika’s ruling made May 

12, 2000 when a series of statements made in debate attempted 

to connect members of the opposition with criminal 

convictions. These comments were also ruled out of order. 

 

It is well substantiated by the parliamentary authorities and our 

own rules and practices that such accusations are well beyond 

the bounds permitted by parliamentary debate. I have found it 

necessary to rule on this a number of times in the last number of 

months. Using the device of a question to ask a member if he or 

she participated in an impropriety is doing indirectly what one 

cannot do directly. 

 

Asking a member to admit that he conspired to fix an election is 

the equivalent of an accusation of wrongdoing. There is little 

difference between this and the incidents earlier this session 

when questions and comments left the impression that certain 

members are under investigation. I repeat the words of Speaker 

Kowalsky: “The integrity or motives of members, whether 

individually or collectively, should not be questioned indirectly 

in debate.” 

 

I find that the comments made by the Opposition House Leader 

are out of order. I ask him to withdraw the remarks and 

apologize to the Assembly. I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw the remarks and 

apologize. 

 

The Speaker: — In the second point of order, I would like to 

deal with that was raised yesterday, the Opposition House 

Leader raised the point of order that touched on the role of the 

Chair in dealing with his line of questions related to party 

political functions, which he contends were relevant to 

responsibilities of the Premier and the Attorney General. 

 

In response to the point of order, the Government Deputy 

House Leader contended that it is inappropriate for the Minister 

of Justice to comment on matters that are before the courts. I 

committed to review the whole matter to ensure that the rules 

are being appropriately and fairly applied. 

 

During the spring of 2007, Speaker Kowalsky found it 

necessary to repeatedly caution members about the impropriety 

of a line of questioning about a caucus matter. That led to a 

point of order which was ruled on April 26th, 2007. With 

respect to the propriety of the line of questioning Speaker 

Kowalsky made these two points: “. . . questions must be posed 

in a manner that clearly connects the issue to the responsibility 

of a minister or the government as a whole.” And “. . . when a 

question is put that is not directly connected to a government 

responsibility, the Speaker shall rule the question out of order 

but provide the government with the option to respond.” 

 

Speaker Kowalsky also reiterated the Assembly’s practice to 

allow questions related to political parties when they are posed 

in terms of statutes or the administration of law. 

 



April 14, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4827 

I wanted to point out that our present rule 19(2) came into 

existence partly in response to the subject of the ruling I have 

just quoted. Even though the rules specifically prohibit such 

questions, it has been my practice to follow the guidelines 

established by my predecessor. 

 

Specifically in regard to the line of questioning by the member 

for Regina Dewdney, I have reviewed the verbatim record. The 

first question asked did not relate to a ministerial responsibility, 

and it was difficult to see a clear connection in the questions 

that followed. It was only through the Opposition House 

Leader’s point of order that he sought to clarify the connection 

by stating that the trust money falls within the purview and 

responsibility of the Minister of Justice. 

 

In the questions asked yesterday, a certain level of nuance was 

applied which was not discernable to the Speaker. I repeat what 

Speaker Kowalsky stated, “. . . questions must be posed in a 

manner that clearly connects the issue to the responsibility of a 

minister.” Further compounding the issue is the fact that it is 

not always possible for the Speaker to have a complete 

knowledge of what falls under the purview of a minister. 

 

I provided with the minister with an opportunity to respond. In 

the future, if a matter questioned is not part of that 

responsibility, it would be appreciated if the minister could say 

so. Until recent events, I can find no other examples of a 

minister simply not responding to a question. Rule 19(3) 

anticipates a minister will provide a response even if it is to 

decline or to take notice. 

 

Henceforth in similar circumstances, for the record, I request 

that ministers orally decline the question. The minister may 

decline with or without reason. In the meantime though, I will 

continue to intervene to provide caution where it is deemed 

necessary and provide ministers an opportunity to voluntarily 

answer in accordance with the guidelines established by 

Speaker Kowalsky. 

 

On this last point I want to relate a relevant precedent on the 

topic of interventions by the Speaker. On March 23rd, 1994, the 

Opposition House Leader of the day complained in a point of 

order that the Speaker was precipitously intervening in question 

period about a line of questions. In making the point of order, 

the Opposition House Leader stated that it is not up to the 

Speaker to decide if the question should be answered but, and I 

quote, “. . . the responsibility of the minister to make a decision 

to answer or not to answer . . .” 

 

Speaker Rolfes ruled that his interventions were to warn the 

members to an irregular proceeding, as he is bound to do as 

outlined by paragraph 323 of Beauchesne’s, 6th Edition. This 

ruling further enforces the responsibility of the Speaker to 

intervene when it is deemed necessary. 

 

I now want to address the comments made by the Deputy 

Government House Leader in response to the point of order. 

The member is correct in his assumption that matters before the 

court should not be discussed or debated by members. In my 

review of precedents on sub judice, I find numerous rulings 

over the years that have defined Saskatchewan practice as 

follows. Sub judice: 

 

[sub judice] is not a rule in the sense of being a standing 

order, but rather a long-standing practice or convention 

that has been applied fairly strictly in this Assembly to 

motions, questions, and returns. 

 

It is applied more rigidly here than in any other jurisdiction. 

Given the Deputy Government House Leader’s assertion that 

the matter is before the courts, I inquired with the Registrars of 

both the Court of Queen’s Bench and the Court of Appeal. The 

Registrar of the Court of Appeal indicated that the matter is 

scheduled to be heard before the Court of Appeal on Thursday, 

April 15th in Saskatoon. 

 

For the benefit of members I want to take a few moments to 

explain the principle of sub judice. The Chief Justice of the 

Supreme Court of Canada, in hearing the New Brunswick 

Broadcasting Company versus Nova Scotia (Speaker of the 

House of Assembly) case in 1993, stated the following: 

 

Our democratic government consists of several branches: 

the Crown, as represented by the Governor General; the 

legislative body; the executive; and the courts. It is 

fundamental to the working of government as a whole 

that all these parts play their proper role. It is equally 

fundamental that no one of them overstep its bounds, that 

each show proper deference to the legitimate spear of 

activity of the other. 

 

The passage appears on page 319 of Maingot’s Parliamentary 

Privilege in Canada, Second Edition. Maingot further states, 

“The legislative bodies in turn exercise deference by their rules 

of sub judice, no matter awaiting or under adjudication by a 

court of law should be brought before it.” 

 

On April the 18th, 1978, Speaker Brockelbank made the 

following ruling dealing with a point order that asserted that 

certain oral questions were sub judice, and I quote: 

 

The sub judice rule is based on two principles. The first is 

that the Legislative Assembly should take no action 

which might prejudice the rights of citizens before the 

courts. The second principle is that the Assembly should 

not set itself up as a second or alternative forum of debate 

of matters already before another judicial body. 

 

[14:30] 

 

On March 23rd, 1994, after checking with the court registrar as 

to the status of a matter before the courts, Speaker Rolfes ruled, 

and I quote: 

 

It has long been the practice of this Assembly that matters 

before the courts are not to be discussed or [to be] debated 

by members. The purpose of this convention is to protect 

the parties involved in the court action and to maintain 

respect between the legislative and judicial branches of 

government. 

 

As I have stated, this Assembly has taken a strict interpretation 

of the application of sub judice. Because the matter is before the 

courts, I rule any questions related to this matter are out of 

order. 

 



4828 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2010 

Before closing, I want to comment on the timing of the point of 

order which is the subject of the ruling. It was made in the 

midst of an unrelated proceeding. In the future, I ask that points 

of order unrelated to the matter under debate be held until the 

question before the Assembly is either concluded or adjourned. 

I thank members for their co-operation. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Personal Health Information 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Health, and it deals with a report received today 

from the Information and Privacy Commissioner, a report that 

dealt with a pharmacist in the Sunrise Health Region where 

they had been investigated for a breach of privacy of a former 

patient. And my question to the minister relates to a comment 

made by the investigator in this case, where he says, and I 

quote, “The investigation focuses on the misuse of the 

pharmaceutical information program, or PIP, for an illegal 

purpose.” 

 

In the report that the minister will have received and other 

members will have received, there are recommendations. My 

question to the minister is: based on this report from the Privacy 

Commissioner, what has the minister done and what has the 

government done to rectify this matter of misuse of information 

that is to be kept confidential by pharmacists in the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the pharmaceutical information program has been in 

place . . . It’s one of the first portions of an electronic health 

record. It’s been in place in the province for a number of years, 

and has been serving the province very well. 

 

It is a great concern of our government, especially, and I’m sure 

all individuals in the province, if there is a breach in security of 

a program such as PIP, the pharmaceutical information 

program. We know that has taken place. The Privacy 

Commissioner has looked into it. He has made a number of 

recommendations. Those recommendations we are looking at, 

Mr. Speaker, because our first priority is to make sure the 

security of personal information, in this situation 

pharmaceutical information, is paramount, Mr. Speaker. We’ll 

be looking at those recommendations and implementing the 

ones that we feel will help secure that information into the 

future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister indicates or 

tells us that the program, the PIP program, is working well. In 

his report, the commissioner says, and I quote: 

 

Given the weaknesses in PIP exposed by this 

investigation, I recommend that Saskatchewan Health 

take immediate remedial action that would involve both a 

technical solution and revised policy. 

 

My question to the minister is this: based on this 

recommendation that it isn’t working, contrary to what he says 

here in the Assembly, what steps have been taken and what 

steps will be taken to protect information of health care users in 

this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I had 

mentioned before, the pharmaceutical information program has 

been set up in the province a number of years ago, and has been 

functioning in the province for a number of years, supplying 

excellent service for the practitioners that have access to the 

program, Mr. Speaker. It is a program that really absolutely has 

to be delivered in the province, and I think has been delivered 

quite well. It is disconcerting though when there is breaches of 

security, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It has been up and running for a number of years. This is the 

first major breach of security that we know of, Mr. Speaker. 

And as a result of that breach of security, the Privacy 

Commissioner has looked into it, made some recommendations. 

As I said in my previous answer, we’re looking at those 

recommendations, recommendations that we can follow through 

on, that will secure personal information, in this case 

prescription information, we’ll be moving on, Mr. Speaker, 

because again number one priority is the security of patients’ 

information. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Privacy Commissioner 

is talking about firming up health records in the province and is 

worried and concerned, as many individual citizens are in the 

province, about their health records. At the very time when this 

discussion is going on, I have here an order in council dated 

March 31st, signed by the President of the Executive Council, 

the Premier, which opens up information of health patients 

across the province when they use the health services. 

 

My question to the minister is this: why, at a time when across 

Canada citizens are worried about their health records, would 

we choose now to open up the files and give out information 

that belongs to the patient to anyone? Why are we doing that? 

And when will you realize that the people of the province don’t 

want this action? And when will you reverse your decision? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in the case of 

the PIP program, any time there’s a breach of security, a 

program that’s been set up to ensure that the security is in place, 

Mr. Speaker, we are going to look into it — a totally different 

issue than what he finished with the question, Mr. Speaker, the 

issue around patient information. Name and address, Mr. 

Speaker, will be given out through health regions. 

 

Once the health region has reached a contract with a foundation, 

Mr. Speaker, that is totally different than what the Opposition 

Leader just finished saying, that the patients’ information will 

be opened up. That is not the case, Mr. Speaker. That is 

misinformation. It is simply a name and an address. Patients 

have all the opportunity through their stay, whether it’s through 



April 14, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4829 

entrance, discharge, and for a couple of months after, to opt out 

of the program, Mr. Speaker, at any time. They will be well 

informed of that, that they can opt out at any time through the 

process. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 

minister. The fact of the matter is that patients in this province 

don’t want any of their information given out to anyone. And 

they don’t want it given out for any reason. That’s the fact. In 

fact the commissioner states in his report, and I quote, “It is 

critically important that all persons involved in our health care 

system recognize that motive is largely irrelevant when some 

patient’s privacy is violated.” It doesn’t matter whether it’s for a 

good reason or a bad reason. 

 

The commissioner says that is the property of the individual, 

not of the Minister of Health, not of the Premier, who is busy 

talking to someone else to divert from the question. The fact is, 

this is the property of the individual. And, Mr. Speaker, my 

question to the minister is, when is he going to come to his 

senses and realize the people of this province don’t want this 

information released? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. For a 

number of years, for decades actually, this information was 

released from health regions to foundations, Mr. Speaker, in the 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask members to give the 

Minister of Health the same opportunity to respond as was 

given the Leader of the Opposition to place the question. Order. 

The Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we have a province of 

Ontario that has changed their regulations to fit this. We have a 

province of Manitoba that’s changed their regulations. Mr. 

Speaker, we have Alberta is now looking into it. It’s in front of 

a committee that, after talking to a number of their members, 

feel that they’re going to be moving in that direction, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this simply . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Saskatoon Fairview 

will allow the response. Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this is simply allowing 

health regions that so choose. There will be a number of health 

regions that won’t enter into an agreement with a foundation. 

Some will. I believe Regina and Saskatoon are already working 

with their foundations to make sure that the proper protocol is 

in place. 

 

We as the Ministry of Health are setting up a template contract 

that will allow that to work and, Mr. Speaker, we will be 

allowing patients to opt out at any time, at any time through the 

process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I said, it is a decision that our government has made as 

well as other provinces in this country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in the order in council that 

was signed on March 31st by the Premier, in the regs it states, 

under subsection (2): 

 

A designated trustee may, in accordance with this section: 

 

(a) use client information for fundraising purposes [we 

understand that]; or 

 

(b) disclose client information to a fundraising agency 

for fundraising purposes. 

 

The question that many citizens in this province have when they 

look at this document is who those other fundraisers are, who 

the fundraising purposes, the client information under the 

trustee, who can they release that information to. Because it 

says right here, “disclose client information to a fundraising 

agency for fundraising purposes.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is why the public is concerned. They don’t 

understand why any information is being released and who it’s 

going to be released to. The question is, why don’t we just 

withdraw this order in council? We’d support to do it today and 

get rid of this misguided idea and purpose for it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we have been through 

this. As I said that the Ministry of Health is working on a 

template contract to work with the health regions, the couple, 

two or three, that are going to enter into agreements with the 

health foundations in their area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to first of all commend the absolute 

marvellous work that foundations have conducted over the 

number of years throughout this province in every constituency 

in this province, Mr. Speaker. Foundations have done a 

marvellous, marvellous job. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, foundations have done a 

marvellous job throughout the province. They have donated to 

hospitals for equipment. They have in some cases built 

hospitals, under the previous government. I think of the 

community of Redvers, for example. A hospital that was built 

in that community, 100 per cent raised through a foundation, 

Mr. Speaker. No money from the government opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. Foundations do wonderful work in this province. And, 

Mr. Speaker, and health regions and foundations have worked 

very closely and will continue to work very closely, Mr. 

Speaker, to ensure the best care that we can offer in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 



4830 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2010 

Finance and Electoral Issues 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, section 9(b) of The Department of 

Justice Act states, and I quote, “The minister shall . . . see that 

the administration of public affairs is in accordance with the 

law.” Surely the Minister of Justice would agree that part of his 

role is therefore to ensure that elections in this province are 

conducted fairly and impartially and in accordance with the law. 

 

To the Minister of Justice: does the minister agree that he has 

an obligation to ensure that elections in this province are 

conducted fairly and impartially? 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The question would be 

more appropriately put to the Board of Internal Economy. But 

at the same time, the member, the member may wish to 

respond. I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members across are 

well aware that this matter is . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. You wanted a response. Listen. The 

Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this matter is . . . The 

members opposite are well aware that this matter is before the 

courts. Within their caucus, they have two members in good 

standing of the Law Society of Saskatchewan. What I’d like to 

ask the member from Regina Dewdney to do is ask those 

lawyers how appropriate it would be for any member of the 

House to comment on a matter that is going to court within the 

next two or three days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is directly where those members are trying to 

go with this line of questioning. It would be inappropriate for 

me or for any member in this House to speculate on what is 

going to take place on a matter that is currently before the court. 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite know full well what’s 

taking place later this week. I’d ask them just to wait 

comfortably and see what happens when their matter goes 

before the court. They’ll get a response from the court and it 

would be highly inappropriate for any member of this House to 

comment on what our judiciary, members of the judiciary might 

do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday afternoon the Premier’s 

special adviser, Mr. Downs, handed out a court document 

pertaining to a case before the courts to reporters in the 

legislative rotunda. Mr. Downs is an employee of the Premier’s 

office. He was doing this during working hours and he was 

doing it in his capacity as an employee of the Executive 

Council. 

 

To the Premier: since he now agrees that this case is relevant to 

his responsibilities as President of the Executive Council, can 

he tell us will he be asking the Deputy Premier, Mr. Downs, and 

. . . [inaudible] . . . to make themselves available to the court at 

their earliest opportunity? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if documents are provided 

that are . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Documents are provided that are matters 

of public record. That’s certainly the prerogative of individuals 

to provide information and background information that would 

be available anywhere. But what would be inappropriate, Mr. 

Speaker, is for any member of the Legislative Assembly to 

comment in the Chamber or outside the Chamber on any matter 

that’s currently before the court. Mr. Speaker, I would go one 

step further and urge all of the members in this Assembly not to 

make any comment on a matter that will be before the Court of 

Appeal later this week. 

 

And what I’d like to do, Mr. Speaker, is invite the members 

opposite to have consultation with the two members that are in 

their caucus that are members in good standing of the Law 

Society, and in fact, Mr. Speaker, members that in their 

practices that before they were elected, enjoyed a good 

reputation. And what I do is ask those members to have 

consultation with those members of the Law Society and to 

determine, make an appropriate decision that they should wait 

and see what is going to happen when the matter goes to court, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, if the Premier won’t . . . Mr. 

Speaker, if the Premier won’t stand to answer these questions, 

then he must be saying that Reg Downs handed out these 

documents without his authority and that he conducted Sask 

Party business on government time. 

 

To the Premier: will he be disciplining Mr. Downs for 

conducting party business on government time or was Mr. 

Downs operating with his full knowledge and agreement? 

Which is it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I understand what Mr. 

Downs was passing out was a copy of Justice Kyle’s decision, a 

document that is in fact public record, because there was some 

issue as to what was quoted or not quoted. 

 

What I’d like to do is ask the member from Dewdney and all 

the members opposite just to wait and see what takes place 

when the matter goes to the Court of Appeal. I’d like to urge 

them just to exercise a little bit of restraint, and wait and see 

what kind of a decision comes out of the Court of Appeal. I’ve 

indicated before and, Mr. Speaker, in your ruling you’ve 

indicated before how prejudicial it could be, not just to the 



April 14, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4831 

members in this House but also, Mr. Speaker, and more 

importantly, to the litigants who have a matter before the Court 

of Appeal. 

 

It would be totally inappropriate for anybody in this House to 

make any kind of a comment on a matter that is currently before 

the courts. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the members on this 

side are not going to be doing that, nor should the members on 

that side. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for Film and Television Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, SCN has brought millions of 

dollars of out-of-province investment into our economy and 

provides a vehicle to ensure Saskatchewan people have a 

chance to tell Saskatchewan stories. SCN viewers and those 

involved in the film and television industry came here today to 

their legislature looking for the answer to a very simple 

question. 

 

To the minister: why is this government shutting down SCN? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank 

the member for her question. Mr. Speaker, when the decision 

was made in this budget to wind down the operations of SCN, it 

certainly wasn’t a decision that I as minister made lightly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we certainly want to see the broadcaster continue 

in another form. That is why we, Mr. Speaker, that is why we 

are in the coming days going to be moving towards the 

expression-of-interest stage in this matter, Mr. Speaker. That’s a 

more formal process to see if there are interested parties that 

want to come forward to operate the broadcast licence, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But in the interim I can inform the members opposite that there 

has been interest on an informal basis of individuals and 

different groups that are looking to continue on with the 

operations, and we are working towards hopefully a successful 

conclusion over the coming months, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this government is shutting 

down SCN — or winding down, the euphemism we use here — 

without due process or a plan and in an awfully big hurry. And 

Saskatchewan taxpayers will pay the price. We know for 

example the government will have to spend money settling 

contracts with independent producers, many of whom spent 

money, made decisions, and secured outside financing based on 

SCN’s broadcast licence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how much is it going to cost 

Saskatchewan taxpayers to settle SCN’s contracts with 

independent producers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the member will know and 

the member can refer to the budget. Mr. Speaker, we have 

provided funding in this budget for SCN to wind down their 

operations, and including in that is making sure that all the 

producers and all the production companies that we had 

contractual obligations with under SCN, all of their contracts 

will remain whole, Mr. Speaker. We will ensure that that takes 

place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve been in very close contact with the CRTC [Canadian 

Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission], Mr. 

Speaker, and the Canadian Media Fund to ensure that those 

contracts are fulfilled, whether that be on the remaining time 

that SCN continues to operate the channel, Mr. Speaker, or 

through other sources that are available including video on 

demand through SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. And we will ensure that 

all of those contracts remain whole, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — The question was actually, how much? Does 

this government even know how much? Mr. Speaker, it’s 

becoming increasingly clear that this government has no 

comprehension of the critical role that SCN plays in our 

province’s film and television industry. People wanting to tell 

Saskatchewan stories are able to leverage the broadcast 

agreement with SCN to secure other broadcast licences and 

outside financing. 

 

SCN broadcast licences have been a critical component in 

growing our film and television industry here. One of the 

sources of out-of-province funding is the Canadian Media Fund. 

Without SCN, our province will lose $1 million this year alone 

in investment from this fund. 

 

To the minister: what is his plan for helping filmmakers 

leverage financing from the Canadian Media Fund without 

SCN? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to again say to the member that we are undergoing a 

process right now where we are looking to see what interested 

parties there are in continuing the broadcast operations, in 

continuing with the CRTC licence within the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is our hope — and the work that is being done right now — 

that that licence continues in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. And we know that there are under $1 million, about 

$940,000, Mr. Speaker, that are in an envelope of funding for 

SCN through the Canadian Media Fund, Mr. Speaker. 

According to the Canadian Media Fund policy, Mr. Speaker, 

and the discussions that the management team has had with the 

Canadian Media Fund, those funds are eligible to be transferred 

over to a new entity once we have gone through this transition 

process and a new operator is found for the CRTC licence, Mr. 



4832 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2010 

Speaker. 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that support remains for the film 

and television industry in the province whether that be through 

the film employment tax credit, Mr. Speaker, through funding 

to SaskFilm which is higher than it has been under the NDP in 

previous governments, and the sound stage, Mr. Speaker, here 

in Regina. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

absolutely appalling that these discussions are going on now 

after the fact rather than making the cut. But this is typical of 

this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s film and television industry is in 

crisis. It’s in absolute dire straits right now. Next week PS 

Production Services will close its doors. This comes on the 

heels of the recent closing of William F. White just a few weeks 

ago. The minister just said that he supports the film and 

television industry, yet in the middle of this crisis the 

government is rushing to sell off one of the key mechanisms 

producers have used for years to secure outside financing for 

telling Saskatchewan stories. 

 

To the minister: what’s the government’s plan to ensure 

Saskatchewan stories get told and that Saskatchewan producers 

are able to secure their first trigger broadcast licences without 

SCN? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve already said in the 

House, Mr. Speaker, what is happening now is we are looking 

at interested parties. We’ll be entering a formal process where 

we’ll be having parties that are interested in continuing on with 

the CRTC licence and continuing the broadcast operations that 

SCN has done up until this point, Mr. Speaker. We have had a 

number of discussions as a ministry and with stakeholders, Mr. 

Speaker, in the past. There is going to be a larger working 

group that is going to be put together that will be made up of 

industry stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, SaskFilm, the ministry. 

That’s going to be taking place in the coming days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but I want to assure the member that this is 

something that we are taking a very hard look at, Mr. Speaker. 

We know that the success in the past, Mr. Speaker, of the 

industry, in large part, has been because of major productions, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re looking . . . I know SaskFilm is looking at 

bringing a major production to the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, and I look forward to hopefully some good news 

on that front. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — I’ve just drawn a complete blank, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: I’m 

wondering how the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask members in the gallery not 

to participate. Member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I’m wondering how the closure 

of SCN, how this minister can reconcile the closure of SCN 

with the cultural policy that he just released three weeks ago 

about reconciling community, culture, and commerce. 

 

The Speaker: — Member responsible for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to talk 

about the cultural policy in this province that was introduced by 

this government, Mr. Speaker. We hadn’t had a cultural policy 

or a cultural statement by any former government for over 25 

years in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can talk about a number of things that this 

government has done for the culture of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, whether it be the Building Pride program that helps 

communities celebrate the pride that they have in their province, 

Mr. Speaker, the new five-year agreement with Sask Sport, Mr. 

Speaker, when it comes to lottery funding, any number of other 

programs that this government has put in place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re going to be working with the industry going forward 

when it comes to the film and television industry, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s going to be a larger working group that is going to 

come together in the next couple of days to look how we move 

the industry forward despite this transitional period. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On a point of 

order. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d ask the Government House Leader to state 

his point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

during member statements, the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres used words that had been designated as unparliamentarily 

in Beauchesne’s, Mr. Speaker, when she referred to the 

government and members as hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker — 

Beauchesne’s, page 148, October 25, 1966. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite also referred to the Premier 

as nothing but a low-level hack, Mr. Speaker, as a derogatory 

term in an attempt to demean, denigrate, and to dishonour the 

Premier. The member from Regina Walsh Acres continuously 

insults and impugns the honour of members of the government, 

Mr. Speaker, even after apologizing for her previous actions. I 

ask that she withdraw her remarks and apologize unequivocally 

without restating her offending remarks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

member from Regina Walsh Acres in her member statement 

today made a statement about actions of the minister and the 



April 14, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4833 

government in acting in a way that has been inconsistent with 

the integrity of this House, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, I ask 

you to watch and read the statement very carefully, watch on 

tape, Mr. Speaker, and review the Hansard very carefully of the 

statement and bring back your ruling, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I believe . . . Order, order. I believe earlier 

today, following the statement, I asked the members to be 

cautious as to how they present their statements and the words 

they use. Given the point of order that’s been raised, we will 

look at the statement to ensure that indeed the proper action was 

followed. 

 

Why is the Opposition House Leader on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader may state his 

point of order. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

on a point of order. 

 

This Assembly and Houses, assemblies across the country, Mr. 

Speaker, work on co-operation and the parties working 

together. Mr. Speaker, on May the 15th, 2006, the Standing 

Committee on House Services appointed a subcommittee whose 

purpose it was to study and make recommendations on the 

adoption of a legislative calendar and revisions to sitting times. 

The subcommittee was made up of the Speaker, the 

Government House Leader, the Opposition House Leader. It 

was a joint, co-operative, collaborative effort between the 

government and the opposition to make this House work better. 

The subcommittee returned to the standing committee with 

recommendations on rule changes which were unanimously 

adopted on October the 16th, 2006. 

 

Despite agreeing to these rules in 2006, the current government 

is going against both the letter and the spirit of these rules by 

convening standing committees outside the regular hours of the 

Assembly to deal with Bills and estimates. Bills and estimates 

were previously dealt with in the House in the Committee of the 

Whole and the Committee of Finance respectively. 

 

The rule changes adopted in 2006 were intended to assist 

members in dealing with the work previously dealt with, with 

the Committee of the Whole and the Committee of Finance, 

more efficiently. But within the hours of the Assembly, the rule 

changes were not intended to permit the majority to subvert due 

process and force its will upon the minority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Rule 6(1) specifies the sitting times of the Legislative Assembly 

as follows: Monday, 1:30 to 10:30, with a recess between 5 and 

7; Tuesday 1:30 to 10:30, with a recess between 5 and 7; 

Wednesday 1:30 to 5 p.m.; Thursday 10 a.m. till 1 p.m. 

 

Rule 6(5) then states, “Committees of the Whole Assembly 

shall follow the Assembly’s recess and adjournment times.” 

 

And finally, rule 123 states, “The procedures of the Committee 

of the Whole Assembly shall apply to all standing committees 

unless otherwise specified in the rules.” The sitting hours of the 

whole Assembly are specified in the rules and the rules of the 

whole Assembly apply to committees, Mr. Speaker. 

 

While the official opposition recognizes there may be from time 

to time a need for standing committees to meet outside of the 

specified sitting hours — and it has happened many times — in 

order to properly consult on public or important matters, such 

instances should occur by mutual agreement of the parties. This 

amounts to the majority . . . The current actions by the 

government, in setting committee times outside the sitting hours 

without any consultation with the opposition, Mr. Speaker, 

amounts to the majority forcing its will upon the minority in 

violation of the rules of the Assembly and the intent of the 

changes made by this Assembly. 

 

The official opposition therefore requests that you rule on this 

matter in accordance with the Rules and Procedures of our 

Assembly, the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. And we 

would further request that we would have that ruling by 5 

o’clock today, Mr. Speaker, because of the request by . . . or not 

the request but the motion to meet this evening by the 

government. And, Mr. Speaker, we received no notice this 

morning. The announcements came this morning, Mr. Speaker, 

less than 24 hours prior to a committee meeting, Mr. Speaker. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask that you consider this point of 

order. 

 

The Speaker: — . . . speak to the point of order. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Opposition House 

Leader had the opportunity to place his point of order without 

interference. I ask the opposition members to allow the 

Government House Leader to respond. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

two points on this particular issue. First point, Mr. Speaker, is if 

the member has an issue with the operation of the rules of the 

House . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the 

Opposition House Leader has a concern about the operation of 

the rules of this House, a better place to deal with that is 

through a point of privilege. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the rules of the Assembly clearly lay 

out that committee hearings outside of regular sittings are 

contemplated, planned for, and done, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the House Leader . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — The Opposition House Leader says that 

there was no notice. Mr. Speaker, our House Services office 

contacted their House Services office at 5 o’clock yesterday 



4834 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2010 

afternoon, Mr. Speaker, to inform them of committee hearings 

today. That was 24 hours, actually 27 hours in advance, Mr. 

Speaker. Further that there would be committee hearings being 

held on Thursday afternoon, so another 24 hours on top of that, 

Mr. Speaker. So notice has been provided to the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The rules before this Assembly clearly outline and allow for 

committee hearings to be held outside of the House’s regular 

hours. And it happens all the time, Mr. Speaker, with the 

scrutiny committees, Mr. Speaker, and other committees as well 

now that we have gone to the policy field committees. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’ve listened to the point of order and 

I’ll certainly take the time to review the point of order. I will 

not give a commitment to a response by five. But also the point 

of order is more a debate between the two House leaders in 

organizing the time, which has normally happened in the past 

and the House rules committee. I will look at . . . I will review 

the point of order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I ask members to have the courtesy to 

allow the Clerk to place the question before us. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to question 1,350 through 1,437. 

 

The Speaker: — 1,350 through 1,437 are ordered. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy House Leader, 

Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hours of Sitting 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. At the end of my remarks I will move the motion to 

extend the sitting times of the Assembly and the sitting times 

for standing committees for the remainder of the spring session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why would a motion of this nature, a motion to 

extend the hours this Assembly will sit each day, be necessary? 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read a quote from the member for 

Saskatoon Meewasin stated in this House on March the 15th: 

 

In the British parliamentary [system] . . . A majority has a 

right to pass its legislative agenda. A majority has a right 

to pass its budget . . . But the minority has the right to 

hold the majority to account, to ask questions, and to get 

answers. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t agree more. The rules of this 

Assembly afford the opposition the opportunity to debate each 

specified Bill for a total of 20 hours. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member from 

Athabasca will allow the Deputy Government House Leader to 

speak. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The rules of this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, afford the opposition the opportunity to debate each 

specified Bill for a total of 20 hours. Furthermore, the rules 

state that the cumulative time for debating budget estimates is 

no less than 75 hours. Mr. Speaker, in order that all of these 

critical hours of debate be realized, and in order that the 

government can move its legislative agenda forward as the 

member from Saskatoon Meewasin reminded us is the tradition 

of the British parliamentary system, our government is ready 

and willing to sit in this Chamber from early morning until well 

into the night. That is why we are proposing that, for the 

remainder of this spring session, that this House sit from 8:00 

a.m. until midnight, Monday to Thursday, with time allotted for 

two recesses each day in order that the opposition has ample 

time to debate this government’s legislation and get the answers 

that they claim they are seeking. 

 

Traditionally this Assembly has been an often combative and 

adversarial setting wherein vigorous but reasoned debate on the 

government’s agenda is conducted. However, Mr. Speaker, the 

spirited and confrontational discourse within this Assembly has 

historically been conducted with a modicum of decorum, 

respect, and co-operation between parties. But the New 

Democrats in opposition have refused to show any willingness 

to be reasonable or even slightly co-operative in advancing the 

business of this Assembly through the process. 

 

Case in point, Mr. Speaker, currently before this Assembly is a 

piece of legislation, Bill 117, The Hunting, Fishing and 

Trapping Heritage Act. This is indeed a short piece of 

legislation whose purpose is to enact in law the recognition of 

the proud tradition of hunting and trapping in our great 

province. It’s a piece of legislation that the opposition have 

described as “low-hanging fruit,” “thin gruel,” “superfluous,” 

“redundant,” “puffery,” “meaningless.” And yet the opposition 

has seen fit to filibuster Bill 117 for over eight hours thus far — 

a Bill they describe as meaningless. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the primary rationale provided by the opposition 

for holding up Bill 117, for spending over eight hours 

filibustering this Bill, the reason articulated once again by the 

member from Saskatoon Meewasin is that Bill 117, The 

Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act, is meaningless 

because of its length and because all it accomplishes, according 

to the opposition, is to declare a day. 

 

Well that’s interesting rationale, Mr. Speaker, but perhaps it’s 

more than just a little bit hypocritical. Mr. Speaker, in 2006, the 

then NDP government introduced a Bill in the spring sitting, 

Bill 49, The Police and Peace Officers’ Memorial Day Act. Mr. 

Speaker, that Bill was half a page long, and about half the 

content of the Bill was a preamble. The intent of this Bill 

established the last Sunday in September each year as Police 

and Peace Officers’ Memorial Day in Saskatchewan. I think we 

can all agree, or at least those of us on this side of the House 

would agree that the merit of that piece of legislation, Bill 49, 

The Police and Peace Officers’ Memorial Day Act, despite its 

length, was of significant importance to the people of 

Saskatchewan, particularly those in law enforcement. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when in opposition, members on this side of 



April 14, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4835 

the House did agree. When a second reading on the Bill was 

moved, did the Saskatchewan Party obstruct the Bill? Did we 

filibuster for eight hours on a one-page Bill? No we didn’t, Mr. 

Speaker. The approach of the Saskatchewan Party was one of 

co-operation and courtesy, recognizing the intent of the Bill for 

what it was, to acknowledge the selfless contributions of fallen 

police and peace officers who made the ultimate sacrifice in 

service to our great province. To quote the member from 

Saskatoon Southeast, the current Minister of Justice: 

 

. . . we want to ensure that this Bill is passed in a timely 

manner so that memorial day can take place in the year 

2006. We want to commit to the members opposite and to 

the members in the gallery that we want to ensure that this 

Bill has speedy passage and that we will do everything 

that we can so that it passes during this session. 

 

Fast forward four years to the present day, Mr. Speaker, and we 

see none of that spirit of co-operation from members opposite, 

no reasonable approach to conducting the business of this 

Assembly. 

 

As another example of this, Mr. Speaker, the practice of this 

Assembly in regards to the Speech from the Throne and budget 

debates has long seen co-operation between the government and 

opposition on a speaking order to allow all members to speak. 

This year, however, when the whips met to organize a speaking 

order, the opposition NDP refused to co-operate, stating that 

they would take as much time as they all wanted, thereby 

preventing some members the opportunity to participate in this 

year’s budget debate and express the wishes of their 

constituencies. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while the government would prefer to conduct 

the business of the Assembly within the agreed-upon hours set 

out in the rules, it’s become abundantly clear that once we wade 

through the empty rhetoric and feigned indignation of members 

opposite, that their honest intention is simply to obstruct the 

traditional process of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition claims they’re seeking further 

explanation and further clarification on the purpose and intent 

of each respective Bill before the Assembly, explanation that 

they and the people of the province absolutely have a right to 

hear. But if it’s answers they seek from cabinet ministers, Mr. 

Speaker, and if it’s a genuine debate they desire, why won’t 

they move legislation to committee? 

 

I believe the answer’s a simple one because those opposition 

members are taking their cues from their new leader who is 

intent on making the province ungovernable. The opposition’s 

tactic is not about giving careful review and ample debate to the 

legislation before this House, it’s about obstructing the process 

and traditions of this Assembly. 

 

[15:15] 

 

It’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that in 1996 the then NDP 

government introduced a similar motion to extend the sitting 

hours in order to obtain the required hours on their own 

legislation and budget estimates. When they received push back 

from the Liberals, who were the official opposition at the time, 

the Economic Development minister of the day, who is today 

the Leader of the Opposition said, “The public of 

Saskatchewan, who are basically paying for the operation of the 

Assembly, would wonder why Liberals don’t want to work 

longer hours.” 

 

So we should expect that NDP’s opposition, under that 

member’s leadership today, will be just as ready and willing as 

those of us on government benches are to work longer hours 

and in order to fulfill the required hours of debate for legislation 

and budget estimates that the rules of this Assembly rightly 

afford. 

 

I’d like to read another quote, Mr. Speaker, from April 16th, 

1993 by a member of this Assembly. And I’ll read: 

 

Mr. Speaker, in speaking to the point of order, I just want 

to make the comment very briefly that under the point 

that we are at in the agenda of the Assembly, we have 

seen the opposition members move adjournment motions. 

What we are doing here in terms of procedure might seem 

to be very similar; that is, moving a motion to extend the 

hours. 

 

I would make the argument, a much more legitimate 

argument if you’re worried about getting the work of the 

people done, to extend the hours in order to accomplish 

the will of the government which is duly elected by the 

people of the province. That’s a fundamental principle 

that should be allowed in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that quote was by the Leader of the Opposition. 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I will move the following motion: 

 

That the Rules and Procedures for the sitting times of the 

Assembly and the sitting times for standing committees 

shall be varied on an interim basis for the remainder of 

the spring period of the third session of the twenty-sixth 

legislature as follows: 

 

1. Notwithstanding Rule 6(1), the ordinary times for the 

daily meetings and adjournment of the sittings of the 

Assembly on Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays 

shall be at 8 a.m. and adjourn at 12 midnight, with a 

recess from 12 noon to 1:30 p.m. and 5 p.m. to 6 p.m.; 

 

2. Notwithstanding Rule 6(1), the ordinary times for the 

daily meetings and adjournment of the sittings of the 

Assembly on Thursdays shall be at 8:00 a.m. and 

adjourn at 12 midnight, with a recess from 1 p.m. to 2 

p.m. and 6 p.m. to 7 p.m.; 

 

3. Notwithstanding Rule 14, the order of business 

conducted by the Assembly on Thursdays shall be as 

follows: 

 

(a) Government orders from 8 a.m. to 10 a.m.; 

 

(b) Routine proceedings commencing at 10 a.m. to 

be followed by private members’ public bills and 

orders and private bills in order of precedence 

specified by Rule 14(3) concluding at 1 p.m.; 

 

(c) Government orders resuming at 2 p.m. until the 



4836 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2010 

adjournment of the sitting; 

 

4. Standing committees shall meet and adjourn at the 

following times when convened: 

 

(a) Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays shall be at 8 

a.m. and adjourn at 12 midnight, with a recess from 

12 noon to 1:30 p.m. and 5 p.m. to 6 p.m.; 

 

(b) On Thursday shall be at 8 a.m. and adjourn at 12 

midnight, with a recess from 1 p.m. to 2 p.m. and 6 

p.m. to 7 p.m.; 

 

5. Standing committees may convene and meet at other 

times in accordance with the regular provisions of the 

Rules and Procedures; 

 

6. By order, the Assembly and standing committees 

may adjourn earlier than the adjournment times 

specified by the Sessional order; and further 

 

That the provisions of this sessional order shall come into 

effect the sitting day of its adoption and shall expire upon 

the adjournment of the Assembly on the sitting day 

preceding the completion day of the third session of the 

twenty-sixth legislature. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Deputy Government House Leader. 

Will the members take it as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Then I shall read the motion: 

 

That the Rules and Procedures for the sitting times of the 

Assembly and the sitting times for standing committees 

shall be varied on an interim basis for the remainder of 

the spring period of the third session of the twenty-sixth 

legislature as follows: 

 

1. Notwithstanding Rule 6(1), the ordinary times for the 

daily meetings and adjournment of the sittings of the 

Assembly on Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays 

shall be at 8 a.m. and adjourn at 12 midnight, with a 

recess from 12 noon to 1:30 p.m. and 5 p.m. to 6 p.m.; 

 

2. Notwithstanding Rule 6(1), the ordinary times for the 

daily meetings and adjournment of the sittings of the 

Assembly on Thursdays shall be at 8:00 a.m. and 

adjourn at 12 midnight, with a recess from 1 p.m. to 2 

p.m. and 6 p.m. to 7 p.m.; 

 

3. Notwithstanding Rule 14, the order of business 

considered by the Assembly on Thursdays shall be as 

follows: 

 

(a) Government orders from 8 a.m. to 10 a.m.; 

 

(b) Routine proceedings commencing at 10 a.m. to 

be followed by private members’ public bills and 

orders and private bills in order of precedence 

specified by Rule 14(3) concluding at 1 p.m.; 

 

(c) Government orders resuming at 2 p.m. until the 

adjournment of the sitting; 

 

4. Standing committees shall meet and adjourn at the 

following times when convened: 

 

(a) Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays shall be at 8 

a.m. and adjourn at 12 midnight, with a recess from 

12 noon to 1:30 p.m. and 5 p.m. to 6 p.m.; 

 

(b) On Thursday shall be at 8 a.m. and adjourn at 12 

midnight, with a recess from 1 p.m. to 2 p.m. and 6 

p.m. to 7 p.m.; 

 

5. Standing committees may convene and meet at other 

times in accordance with the regular provisions of the 

Rules and Procedures; 

 

6. By order, the Assembly and standing committees 

may adjourn earlier than the adjournment times 

specified by the Sessional order; and further 

 

That the provisions of this sessional order shall come into effect 

the sitting day of its adoption and shall expire upon the 

adjournment of the Assembly on the sitting day preceding the 

completion day of the third session of the twenty-sixth 

legislature. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

another sad day in the Chamber today when the government 

acknowledges that it again has failed to be able to live within 

the rules established not only by this House, Mr. Speaker, but 

by Commonwealth parliamentary Houses all around the world, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Rules are meant to apply to everyone, Mr. Speaker. Rules are 

developed to ensure that everyone works well together. Only 

those who cannot abide by the rules, who don’t like the rules, 

Mr. Speaker, push to change the rules and do it unilaterally in a 

way, Mr. Speaker, that in fact disadvantages the minority. Mr. 

Speaker, there are a lot of things that one can say — and maybe 

I will say them — about the majority and the minority, Mr. 

Speaker. But I will get to that in a little while. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister who just made the motion spent about 

five minutes outlining why this motion needs to be made, why 

these rules need to be changed. Mr. Speaker, he did not make a 

case for the change. Mr. Speaker, he could not make a case for 

the change because, Mr. Speaker, there is no reason for this 

change to be made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will have a number of things to say about the 

motion in front of the House today. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

going to use whatever time is allocated to me, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure that the public understands the circumstances that we 

find ourselves in today and, Mr. Speaker, understands the total 

incompetence of the government opposite, not just in their 



April 14, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4837 

budgeting process, Mr. Speaker, not just in the way they 

manage the affairs of the province but, Mr. Speaker, in this 

case, the way they manage the affairs of the Legislative 

Assembly, the body that represents and respects the values of 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We are here, Mr. Speaker, at the privilege of the Saskatchewan 

public. Mr. Speaker, I respect this place like I respect no other 

because, Mr. Speaker, this place represents the people of the 

province. And each member of this Assembly were sent here by 

a majority of the people voting and taking decisions about the 

future of this province within each of the constituencies, Mr. 

Speaker. We still believe, we still believe in one person, one 

vote. We still believe in representation by population. We still 

believe that every voice in this Chamber represents many voices 

throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what the government is doing by putting 

this motion forward, Mr. Speaker, is disrespecting this whole 

process that says everyone here is equal and the rules apply to 

all equally. Now, Mr. Speaker, a simple point which I will also 

come back to later, a very simple point, Mr. Speaker. If the 

government feels that they cannot achieve the goals that they 

have set for themselves, the rules allow for an extension of the 

time available to us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, without compromising the 

public’s ability to participate —because the rule says we’re 

going to have meetings at 10 o’clock on a Friday night, 11 

o’clock on a Friday night, at midnight on a Friday night, Mr. 

Speaker — the public’s going to be very excited to know that if 

they want to participate and understand what’s going on, they 

are going to have to be up at 11 o’clock on a Friday night to 

make sure they know what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Instead of that happening, Mr. Speaker, the rules already allow 

us to go beyond the end date on the calendar, Mr. Speaker. 

Currently the end date is May the 20th. The government has 

between now and the end of the day of May the 20th to 

conclude its business. But if they can’t conclude their business 

within that period of time, Mr. Speaker, the rules — agreed to 

by all members of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and previous 

Assemblies — the rules allow for an extension of the days. So 

we could be sitting for an extra five days if necessary, Mr. 

Speaker, to allow the government to complete its business. 

 

But no. Will the government consider that, Mr. Speaker? No. 

They didn’t today in presenting this motion, and they did not 

previously when they moved a similar motion, Mr. Speaker. 

The Government House Leader has said we will not extend the 

days because it allows the opposition more question period 

time. 

 

In other words, he doesn’t want to be accountable to the public 

of Saskatchewan. He doesn’t want the representatives of the 

people asking questions of the members of the cabinet, of the 

executive of the government, Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t want, he 

doesn’t want the people of Saskatchewan to know what this 

government is doing. He’d rather get out of here quickly, 

discuss matters in the middle of the night, keep information 

from the public, Mr. Speaker, so they don’t know what’s going 

on. Because they don’t understand accountability; they don’t 

understand transparency; and, Mr. Speaker, more importantly, 

they disrespect the whole principle of democracy, Mr. Speaker, 

which is what motivated every one of us to be here in the first 

place. 

 

Think about it, Mr. Speaker. Why are we here? It’s not to do 

what the Premier thinks we should do. It’s not to do what the 

Minister of Finance thinks we should do or the Minister of 

Agriculture. It’s to do the will of the people of the province, Mr. 

Speaker. And the will of the people can sometimes take some 

time, Mr. Speaker, to get it done right. 

 

This government has a history already in a very short period of 

time of acting first and consulting second, ignoring the whole 

concept that the public view is important. It’s all about them. 

It’s all about us in government. It’s all about power. And this 

motion, Mr. Speaker, is an expression of power. It’s about us. 

It’s about what we want. It’s not about what the public thinks or 

wants or needs to know. 

 

The public does need to know, Mr. Speaker. But more 

importantly, the public wants to participate. Every one of us in 

this Chamber, and the members opposite can’t say they don’t 

hear, but every one of us, Mr. Speaker, gets phone calls from 

members of the public. They tune in, Mr. Speaker, at 1:30 every 

afternoon: Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, and 10:30 on 

Friday mornings or 10 o’clock to listen to question period. And 

they phone us, Mr. Speaker. They phone us after question 

period and they say, good question or not so good question, 

maybe you should think about something else; or what kind of 

an answer was that you got today; or more importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, that was useful information. I’m glad to have heard 

that. I’m glad to have got that. 

 

When this government moved the same motion earlier, Mr. 

Speaker, and changed the rules for a couple of days before they 

decided it wasn’t necessary, Mr. Speaker, they had question 

period as it is indicated in the rule change, Mr. Speaker, at 10 

o’clock in the morning, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday. The 

public, the media, and others, Mr. Speaker, were out of sorts. 

This was unusual. This was not the practice. And as a result, 

Mr. Speaker, you had people feeling uninformed, out of the 

loop, unable to participate in the process, Mr. Speaker. The 

bottom line is when we change the rules there are consequences 

that occur to those rule changes, Mr. Speaker, and almost 

always they fall out to the public. They go to where the public 

is interested in what their government is doing. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I acknowledge that to a very large extent 

there are many members of the public who do not distinguish 

government members from opposition members. These are our 

members of the Legislative Assembly. These are individuals 

who have been elected to represent the views of the 

Saskatchewan public. And broader parliamentary democracy, 

Mr. Speaker — Canadian public, British public, Mr. Speaker, 

Australian public — the Commonwealth parliamentary 

democracy is a large family. And we have a great history, Mr. 

Speaker, of respecting the views of individuals, respecting the 

need for public to participate in the democratic process. 

 

The democratic process, we all must remember, Mr. Speaker, 

does not stop after the ballot has been stuffed in the box. The 



4838 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2010 

democratic process continues 365 days a year. We get the 

letters. We get the phone calls. We get people providing us with 

advice, asking for information from us so that they can indeed 

evaluate what’s taking place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last two years and a bit since the election 

in late 2007, the public has been seeing a practice that they 

aren’t very pleased with, Mr. Speaker — this act first, consult 

later. 

 

This motion clearly indicates, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Government House Leader and the Deputy House Leader who 

moved the motion today, Mr. Speaker, have not even consulted 

seriously with the members of the opposition. Just for example, 

Mr. Speaker — and I’ll make some comments on a number of 

the Bills in front of the Chamber, Mr. Speaker — but the 

Deputy House Leader in his very short remarks, that did not 

explain why this motion is necessary, cited the Hunting, Fishing 

and Trapping Heritage Day Act, Mr. Speaker. And he 

referenced the fact that opposition members were stalling this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker. I was in the Chamber, Mr. Speaker. I have to 

assume the members opposite were in the Chamber, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s the respectful practice. I listened to the 

speeches that were made on the Hunting, Fishing, Trapping 

Heritage Day Act, Mr. Speaker. I listened very carefully 

because, of course as a former Member of Parliament, I 

represented a large part of Saskatchewan where hunting, 

fishing, and trapping were a vocation, a way of life, and 

supported a quality of life, Mr. Speaker, that many other 

Saskatchewan people could only dream of having. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, those speeches were very relevant to the Act 

in front of the legislature, Mr. Speaker, because northern 

hunters, fishers, and trappers had indicated — to not just to 

members from the northern constituencies, but to all members 

of the Chamber, Mr. Speaker — that in fact their way of life 

was under the attack by the actions of this government. And in 

fact while we all would like to ensure that we recognize and 

respect hunting, fishing, and trapping, Mr. Speaker — which is 

what the Act does — the speeches were indicating to 

government you have to respect those who hunt, those who fish, 

those who trap 365 days a year, that northern people, Mr. 

Speaker, have to be thought of as more than just people who 

hunt, fish, and trap on a given day, that this is a way of life. It’s 

a quality of life, Mr. Speaker. It’s the way people feed their 

families, clothe their families. And we can talk about that, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of one day a year, but that actions of 

government speak 365 days a year. So the speeches, Mr. 

Speaker, were very relevant to the circumstances that our 

constituents were asking us to convey to the government. 

 

And obviously, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t speak enough about the 

Bill because just this week the member from Cumberland asked 

questions of the Minister Responsible for First Nations and 

Métis Relations about activities specifically relating to trappers 

in the province of Saskatchewan. The member from 

Cumberland asked four questions in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, 

after having attended meetings of the Trappers Association in 

northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations did not 

mention the word trapping once in his four answers, not once. 

He didn’t give any indication that he even understood the 

question, let alone understood the way of life of people in the 

North, Mr. Speaker. So when the member from Meadow Lake, 

who represents people who hunt, fish, trap, and — I might add 

— gather, when the member from Meadow Lake stands up and 

says we were stalling debate on that particular Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, he failed miserably, failed miserably to understand the 

point of view that the public was making through the members 

of this Legislative Assembly. 

 

And no way ever should a member of government be telling 

another member of the Legislative Assembly, members of the 

opposition, members who are elected to be here, Mr. Speaker, 

what message they should bring from their constituents into this 

Chamber, Mr. Speaker. They cannot tell us what we can and 

what we cannot say when it is relevant to the legislation in front 

of us. 

 

We support hunters, fishers, trappers, Mr. Speaker, and 

gatherers, not just throughout northern Saskatchewan, all across 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. We support those people and what 

they’ve done and the way of life and the way they work and the 

way they live their lives, Mr. Speaker. And when the 

government demonstrates they don’t understand, we are going 

to tell the government, the members of the Saskatchewan Party, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to tell them what they need to know. 

That’s how you govern a country, Mr. Speaker. That’s how you 

govern a province. That’s how you respect the people who 

elected you to be in this place. 

 

And instead, instead, Mr. Speaker, of saying you might have a 

point, members of the public, you might have a point, we’ve got 

to think about this a little bit more . . . No, instead of doing that, 

they say we’ve heard enough of you. We’ve heard enough. You 

spoke too much on this Bill. We don’t want to hear. We don’t 

want to hear anything more. We don’t agree with you, Mr. 

Speaker, so what we’re going to do is, we’re going to extend 

the hours. We’re going to get you to speak at 8 o’clock in the 

morning. We’re going to get you to speak at midnight. And 

we’re going to keep that information from the public, Mr. 

Speaker, because they know that, you know, the public is not 

fully engaged through all of this process, Mr. Speaker, and it 

gets them out of this place earlier than they would like to get 

out of here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as a result of all of that, it’s the majority imposing its will 

upon the minority, Mr. Speaker, something that is frowned 

upon worldwide, Mr. Speaker, and it has been forever. The 

majority, the majority in a democracy, Mr. Speaker, does get its 

way. The majority does get its way, Mr. Speaker. We all 

understand that, but we have rules to ensure that the minority is 

protected while the majority is getting its way, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve had this debate throughout the Commonwealth for 

generations, Mr. Speaker, and the members opposite have to 

understand we are here today because of what has gone before 

us. And that principle, Mr. Speaker, of the minority acting in 

the interests of the minority, the majority acting in the interests 

of the minority, Mr. Speaker, goes back even before the 

Commonwealth existed. And maybe if I have time I might even 

provide a bit of a history lesson to some of the members 

opposite who don’t seem to know exactly what it is that I’m 

talking about here. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the argument that the Saskatchewan Party is 



April 14, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4839 

making today — not well articulated by the member from 

Meadow Lake, the Deputy House Leader, Mr. Speaker — the 

argument that the government is making today highlights the 

fact that this government cannot manage the business of this 

House. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, when you take into account 

the management of last year’s budget, what appears to be the 

management of this year’s budget, the management of some 

programs, Mr. Speaker . . . Well just use the management of the 

. . . what happened this week, Dutch elm disease, Mr. Speaker. 

They took it out of the budget one day, couple of questions in 

the legislature from the opposition, and they put some money 

back into the Dutch elm disease program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They hadn’t thought this thing out. They still haven’t done the 

right thing on Dutch elm disease, Mr. Speaker, but they 

acknowledge they made a mistake. Something as simple, Mr. 

Speaker, as trying to protect, trying to protect living trees in the 

province of Saskatchewan — elm trees, American elm trees, 

Mr. Speaker — something as simple as that, they couldn’t get 

right. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they cannot manage the business of this 

House. They failed on budgets. They failed in programs. Now 

they are demonstrating that they’re failing in managing this 

House, Mr. Speaker. And while we acknowledge and 

understand there’s not a lot of history across the way in the 

government benches in terms of managing government, Mr. 

Speaker, there is some history there in terms of understanding 

how governments manage. 

 

The Government House Leader for example, Mr. Speaker, has 

been here for quite a number of years — in fact one of the 

longest-serving members of the Chamber, Mr. Speaker. The 

Government House Leader has sat through many meetings 

where rules have been discussed, where rules have been 

changed by mutual agreement, Mr. Speaker. The Government 

House Leader understands this place works best, is at its most 

efficient when there are agreements between the parties, those 

representing the majority and those representing the minority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the Government House Leader and the 

Deputy House Leader bring forward this motion, they are 

acknowledging that they have failed in their capacity to manage 

the business of government. 

 

This is almost unprecedented, Mr. Speaker. There have been 

cases in the past where extraordinary measures have had to be 

taken in extraordinary circumstances. Mr. Speaker, when you 

examine the legislative agenda of the members opposite, you 

wonder what’s extraordinary there. What is it that is so 

important that we have to extend the hours and move ourselves, 

Mr. Speaker, into a rule change that has been pushed on to the 

Legislative Assembly by the government? 

 

I think one thing that the public needs to be aware, Mr. Speaker, 

before I get into the legislation that is currently before the 

government, or before the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I 

think one thing the public needs to be aware of is that this 

legislative agenda that the government has brought forward 

includes Bills that no one in the Assembly has yet seen. 

 

The government is saying you’re stalling things, you’re slowing 

things down, you won’t move Bills forward when in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, that isn’t the case at all. And I’ll demonstrate that in a 

couple of minutes. That’s not the case. Bills have been moving. 

They’ve gone to Committee. In fact a couple of Bills have even 

been passed in this Assembly in this session already, Mr. 

Speaker. So the government’s argument that Bills aren’t 

moving through here quickly enough is not only bogus, Mr. 

Speaker, but it highlights the fact that the government is still 

trying to get a legislative agenda through that they haven’t fully 

disclosed yet. 

 

Disclosure is an important part of trust. And, Mr. Speaker, if 

you want agreements, you need to have trust. This government 

is losing trust on the financial front. It’s losing trust on the 

management front. And it has lost trust, Mr. Speaker, from 

members of the Assembly in terms of managing the business of 

this place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Government House Leader has indicated that, 

coming out of the budget, there are at least six budget Bills 

coming forward. None of those Bills, Mr. Speaker, have yet 

been disclosed to the members of the Legislative Assembly or 

to the public. And yet the minister, the Government House 

Leader, is asking the members of the opposition to agree to pass 

this whole package of legislation without knowing what that 

whole package looks like, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So when you’re sitting in the chairs over here elected to 

represent people of Saskatchewan, and the people of 

Saskatchewan have said to you, represent me to the best of your 

ability, Mr. Speaker, we carry an awful lot of responsibility on 

our shoulders, Mr. Speaker, representing those individuals. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, when the government says, we’re not 

going to tell you what we got but we want your agreement to 

pass these Bills or, my golly, we’re going to just impose our 

will upon you, we’ll change the rules to make you do this — we 

say, very clearly, the people of Saskatchewan are being 

disrespected when this sort of activity happens. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s just not, not acceptable for any member 

on the opposition benches to acknowledge or accept or agree 

with the motion that’s been put forward here to change the rules 

unilaterally, change the rules without any reference whatsoever 

to the public. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the government failed to establish why this 

motion is needed. It failed to provide the public with an 

understanding of what its legislative agenda really is. Mr. 

Speaker, it failed to recognize that in this Chamber there are 

rules that allow them more time if they want it, but as I said 

earlier, they are choosing not to follow the rules that exist 

because they don’t want to be accountable to the public of 

Saskatchewan. Instead they are choosing to change the rules so 

that they can remain unaccountable. 

 

We have no idea, Mr. Speaker, what’s yet to be brought 

forward by this government. And I think the public needs to be 

aware, I think the news media is already aware, that this is a 

direct result, Mr. Speaker, of the opposition refusing to sign an 

agreement that the minister, the member from Cannington, the 

Government House Leader, brought forward to the opposition 



4840 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2010 

an agreement that he drafted that asked the members of the 

opposition to sign off on all Bills by May the 20th without 

having seen them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We wouldn’t do that. We respect our constituents too much, 

Mr. Speaker. We want the public to trust the members of the 

Legislative Assembly. They learned to trust members of the 

New Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker. They are not trusting 

members of the Saskatchewan Party, and, Mr. Speaker, with 

materials, motions, and actions like this, Mr. Speaker, there will 

be no new trust earned by the members of the government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just want to help the public to better 

understand this issue. The member from Meadow Lake, in 

raising this motion, used one example about how this 

government was stalling legislation and he used Bill No. 117, 

The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act as his 

example, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well there are a number of pieces of legislation before this 

Chamber, and as the public . . . or the public may not know this, 

but on Monday I believe it was — today is Wednesday — on 

Monday, members of the opposition passed through second 

readings seven Bills, sent them off to committee for study. The 

committees are ready to take those Bills and move through 

them. Before that, Mr. Speaker, a couple of other Bills had been 

dealt with at second reading, had gone to committee and in fact 

have actually passed this Assembly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the members of the opposition were 

prepared yesterday, before the government approached with this 

ridiculous idea about changing the rules to suit their purposes, 

Mr. Speaker. The members of the opposition were prepared 

yesterday to move a number of other Bills forward. But, Mr. 

Speaker, with this type of bullying that the members of 

government are imposing upon the rules of this Chamber and 

the opposition members here, Mr. Speaker, it’s simply 

unacceptable to follow along the lines of what they are putting 

forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want the public to understand what is before us. 

I’m going to go through some of the legislative matters that we 

have in front of us. I won’t describe in great detail what the 

legislation is, Mr. Speaker, but I may come back and do some 

of that before my time expires today. 

 

But for example, Mr. Speaker, let’s just have a quick look at 

what is before the Chamber. We have The Agri-Food 

Amendment Act. That’s Bill No. 97. As of yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, the total time debating that Bill was 4 hours and 51 

minutes. 

 

The Bill No. 98, The Municipal Financing Corporation 

Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, a Bill that the member from 

Meadow Lake knows very well, municipal financing 

corporation amendment Act, that Bill so far, Mr. Speaker, has 

had 32 minutes of debate. Certainly there’s no stalling going on 

here, Mr. Speaker. We’ve barely got an understanding of what 

that Bill’s even all about. 

 

In fact let me tell the public that the minister, in moving the Bill 

No. 98, municipal financing corporation amendment Act, spoke 

for a total of four minutes. Mr. Speaker, that four-minute 

introduction hardly gave members of the Legislative Assembly 

or the public any time whatsoever to understand what was in 

that piece of legislation. In fact it raised many questions in the 

minds of the public, Mr. Speaker, and as a result there’s still 

more time needed on this. 

 

But that’s a Bill, Mr. Speaker, that I could say is one that could 

move to committee very quickly after a couple of members 

have had their say, Mr. Speaker. And there will be questions 

raised in committee because that’s our responsibility. 

 

Bill No. 100, the Doukhobors of Canada trust fund amendment 

Act, for a lot of people might not be considered the most 

important Act in the world. But for members of the Doukhobor 

community, Mr. Speaker, this is an important Act. There have 

been many phone calls and discussions that have taken place 

outside this Chamber on this Act. But, Mr. Speaker, this piece 

of legislation has had less than one hour — 59 minutes of 

debate in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker. Certainly nobody is 

stalling that Bill, although there are a lot of answers that the 

members of the government have to provide to the Doukhobor 

community in Saskatchewan. 

 

What about The Credit Union Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, 

Bill No. 101? Two hours and 45 minutes. The Personal 

Property Security Amendment Act, Bill No. 102, 1 hour and 11 

minutes, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 103, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Professional Discipline) Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, 2 hours 

and 58 minutes. That’s all of the debate that has occurred in 

here. 

 

Keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, the public has to recognize there 

are 58 members of the Legislative Assembly from 58 

constituencies in this great province of ours, Mr. Speaker. 

People who have elected their members to help develop good 

laws and help administer good laws and discuss the distribution 

of financial resources throughout this province, Mr. Speaker — 

58 members of the legislature. 

 

You can imagine that if members wish to represent their 

constituencies and speak to good legislation, it’s going to take 

some time for that to move through this Chamber. The 

government seems to believe that anything less than two hours 

is quite appropriate, Mr. Speaker. We have rules in this House 

that acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that most Bills need 20 hours of 

debate. We have rules to that effect — 20 hours of debate 

before a Bill can actually just be deemed to be moving on. 

 

There was a recognition when the rules were established, Mr. 

Speaker, that Bills need some time to work their way through 

the Chamber. No. 1, to ensure that the public is aware of them; 

no. 2, that the public can review them; no. 3, that the public can 

comment on them; no. 4, that those comments can be 

communicated to government; no. 5, that government can 

respond; no. 6, that the public can review the response; no. 7, 

that that response to the response can be communicated; and 

finally, Mr. Speaker, that there’s an evaluation at the end of the 

day of, is this right? Is this wrong? Can we proceed, Mr. 

Speaker? So a number of steps. 

 

The speeches in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, allow the public an 

opportunity to get to know what’s in front of the Chamber, and 

when a minister speaks for two minutes like they did on the 



April 14, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4841 

agriculture food amendment Act, four minutes on The 

Municipal Financing Corporation Act, four minutes on The 

Doukhobors of Canada Act, seven minutes on the credit union 

amendment Act, seven minutes on The Personal Property 

Security Act, Mr. Speaker, the public doesn’t know what’s in 

the legislation. 

 

A government that’s now known for being unaccountable and 

non-transparent, Mr. Speaker, who speak as little as they 

possibly can on a piece of legislation, does not provide the 

public with an opportunity to have any trust in that process. 

 

So members of the opposition communicate with members of 

the public and then communicate that, provide that feedback to 

the government. And that takes me back to the comments I 

made earlier about Bill 117 that the member from Meadow 

Lake referenced. If the public just listened to the comments 

made by the Minister of the Environment when she introduced 

the legislation . . . In fact, Mr. Speaker, according to the records 

compiled by the Clerks, the Minister of the Environment, in 

introducing Bill No. 117, spoke for one minute. 

 

No member of the public, Mr. Speaker, fully understood what it 

was that this legislation meant to the people of northern 

Saskatchewan who were involved in hunting, fishing, and 

trapping, Mr. Speaker. Nobody knew what this meant to them. 

But on reflection, on communication, on discussions with 

members of the North, with people who are engaged in hunting, 

fishing, and trapping, members of this Assembly communicated 

to government very clearly that hunting, fishing, and trapping is 

important. Recognizing it is equally important, but recognizing 

the value of those individuals and the contributions to society 

that they make, Mr. Speaker, is a 365-day-a-year task, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And this government didn’t get it, didn’t understand it. And 

even after that amount of time spent in this Chamber discussing 

that, the Minister from Meadow Lake proved today that he still 

doesn’t get it. He doesn’t understand the people of the North, 

Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t understand the people who engage in 

northern and, more importantly, traditional lifestyles, Mr. 

Speaker. And one can argue — thank goodness — that we are 

allowed the opportunity to speak in this Chamber for a short 

period of time, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that members of the 

government recognize and understand what it is that the public 

of Saskatchewan really thinks. 

 

Let me carry on. Bill No. 102, Mr. Speaker, The Personal 

Property Security Amendment Act, 1 hour and 11 minutes, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s all that that debate has taken place in this 

Chamber. Hardly enough time to recognize the real value of 

personal property security throughout our province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The miscellaneous statutes (professional discipline), Bill 103, 2 

hours and 58 minutes. The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, Bill 104, 2 hours and 24 minutes. 

The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, Bill 105, the 

minister spoke for two minutes, Mr. Speaker. There’s been a 

total debate in this House for 13 minutes so far on this 

important Bill, Bill 105. 

 

How about The Labour Market Commission Repeal Act? The 

Labour Market Commission, Mr. Speaker, was a body 

established to help to ensure that the Saskatchewan economy 

and the Saskatchewan labour force found a way to come 

together. When I talk to business in this province, Mr. Speaker, 

business tells me their single biggest challenge right now is 

finding an adequate supply of skilled labour — single biggest 

challenge that they have. What’s one of the first Bills that this 

government has brought forward? A Bill that repeals the one 

body that’s been working on trying to ensure that labour and 

business can find a way to come together, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The minister, in introducing The Labour Market Commission 

Repeal Act, the Minister Responsible for Enterprise spoke for 

three minutes, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure the public felt very 

comfortable that the government was doing the right thing. But 

worse than that, Mr. Speaker, that Bill has only been called for 

debate for 11 minutes in total, Mr. Speaker, 11 minutes. Is the 

New Democratic Party stalling legislation in this House, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

This important Bill that brings business and labour together . . . 

unlike Bills 5 and 6 which pushed business and labour apart, 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 80, Bill 43 pushed business and labour apart, 

Mr. Speaker. My goodness, this Bill, which brings them 

together, being repealed, the implications of that are significant 

— 11 minutes of debate, Mr. Speaker. For the public to 

understand this and to put the words of the member from 

Meadow Lake in moving this motion together, Mr. Speaker, 

they just won’t believe it. 

 

How about The Weed Control Act? Obviously the Minister of 

Agriculture thought The Weed Control Act was important 

enough to bring it into the House. The public thought this was 

important enough to support. The Minister of Agriculture 

introduced The Weed Control Act. He spoke for two minutes, 

Mr. Speaker, this important piece of legislation — two minutes. 

No other member of government spoke to this important piece 

of legislation. But by golly, Mr. Speaker, the Bill has had 25 

minutes of debate, 25 minutes in total, Mr. Speaker. You know, 

as important as it is, does the public fully understand what’s 

happening with weed control? Absolutely not, Mr. Speaker, 25 

minutes of debate does not do justice to that Bill. 

 

But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, there’s a Bill for weed 

control, but to protect American elms this government can’t do 

anything. To protect American elm trees, Mr. Speaker, they 

pulled the money away. And to make matters worse, to make 

matters worse, they downloaded the costs of protecting 

American elm trees onto municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Municipalities should pay attention to the answers the Minister 

of the Environment made in her answers to questions the other 

day, Mr. Speaker. Municipalities should know that she talked 

about the municipalities’ unprecedented revenue, unprecedented 

revenues that now allow them to afford these downloaded costs. 

So the government can bring in a Bill on weed control, but it 

can’t bring in anything that protects American elms, and in fact 

downloads new costs to municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you put these things together. You try and think of 

them in the context of why does this government want to 



4842 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2010 

change the rules to meet its legislative agenda. It’s just bizarre, 

Mr. Speaker, as you try and put these things together, just 

bizarre. 

 

How about The Cities Amendment Act? An important Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. We amend The Cities Amendment Act on a regular 

basis. The cities, through its provincial organization, the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association and 

individually as individual cities, Mr. Speaker, are always 

bringing forward suggestions for change to strengthen the 

abilities of municipalities to work on behalf of their taxpayers 

and their citizens. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this important piece of legislation, while 

there’s still some consultation that’s occurring, this is an 

important piece of legislation that the opposition takes 

seriously. And remember there are 20 members of the 

opposition, every one of them who comes from a municipality 

of one sort or another, Mr. Speaker, every one of them who is 

talking to the mayors or the reeves of their communities, Mr. 

Speaker, and may have something to say about the value of 

municipalities and the impact of this legislation on their 

municipalities. They may wish to communicate to the 

government what they’re hearing in their communities. 

 

This important piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, has had 2 

hours and 47 minutes of debate time in the Chamber. Mr. 

Speaker, certainly the government can’t say that’s enough, 

that’s enough time to move on; opposition members are stalling 

this legislation. Two hours and 47 minutes on an important Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Bill is good, if the Bill has the support of the 

public of Saskatchewan, on May the 20th, Mr. Speaker, those 

Bills will pass. That’s what agreements do. That’s how you 

manage the House. You present good legislation. You allow 

them to go through its normal process. And by the 20th of May, 

if they don’t pass, the public passes judgment on the opposition. 

If they do pass, the public passes judgment on the government. 

It’s a simple formula, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government has failed to understand that and failed to 

understand that when the opposition does its job, legislation 

will pass, Mr. Speaker. For some reason, this government 

doesn’t feel that this opposition is working with the people of 

Saskatchewan to see that these things get done. Just the 

opposite is the case, Mr. Speaker. And by the phone calls we’re 

getting, it’s obvious the public trusts the opposition more than 

they trust the members of government. And it’s motions like 

this, Mr. Speaker, that are only going to make matters worse. 

 

Let me carry on with this. Bill 109, The Municipalities 

Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker — similar to The Cities 

Amendment Act — 3 hours and 55 minutes. That Bill is just 

about ready, Mr. Speaker, to move on to committee for some 

discussion there, some questions that we’ve been asked to raise. 

 

Bill No. 110, The Northern Municipalities Act, there are always 

issues in northern municipalities in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

The northern mayors are very vocal in the support of their 

communities, Mr. Speaker, and it’s important that we listen to, 

understand, and communicate the information that we are 

gathering from those communities. This Bill — Bill 110, The 

Northern Municipalities Act — Mr. Speaker, total time debated, 

2 hours and 50 minutes, Mr. Speaker, certainly no abuse of the 

House schedules when we look at that. And then the 

consequential amendments to The Northern Municipalities Act, 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 111, 1 hour and 54 minutes. 

 

How about The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, Mr. 

Speaker? An Act that the minister thought was worthy of two 

minutes of introduction, Mr. Speaker. Well this justices of the 

peace amendment Act has received a total of 2 hours and 29 

minutes of debate in the House. Again, Mr. Speaker, I can’t say 

that’s an abuse of the privileges that members have to speak to 

government legislation. And then there were consequential 

amendments: Bill No. 113, The Justices of the Peace 

Consequential Amendments Act, 1 hour and 24 minutes, Mr. 

Speaker. Again there’s no abuse there on that piece of 

legislation. 

 

Something that the public is very much aware of, we get 

complaints all the time, Mr. Speaker, the system relating to 

small claims in our province. The government brought in Bill 

No. 114, The Small Claims Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, that 

Bill has had 33 minutes of debate. Ten per cent of that time or 3 

minutes was what the minister took to explain the importance of 

this piece of legislation. Nobody in this province who wants to 

know what The Small Claims Amendment Act was all about 

would’ve understood it from the minister’s description, Mr. 

Speaker, so it’s important for members of the opposition to 

spend the time necessary to deal with that 33 minutes in time. 

 

How about The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, Bill No. 115, 2 

hours and 3 minutes? And then of course the famous, now 

famous Bill No. 117, The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping 

Heritage Act — Mr. Speaker, the member was absolutely right; 

there’s been eight hours of debate on that Bill, Mr. Speaker. But 

as I indicated before, the minister, the House Leader, the 

Deputy House Leader and, by extension, the government didn’t 

get it. Even after eight hours of debate, the government 

members still do not understand the arguments that are being 

made by people who lived their lives through hunting, fishing, 

and trapping, those who the Act is supposed to respect, 

acknowledge, and revere, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve now sent Bill No. 118, The Milk Control Repeal Act, Mr. 

Speaker, to committee. That one had 2 hours and 34 minutes of 

debate. Another Bill, No. 119, The Ticket Sales Act, 2 hours and 

43 minutes. Bill No. 120, The Financial Administration 

Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker . . . The Financial Administration 

Amendment Act, I think any time the public hears those words 

they shake, Mr. Speaker. What’s the government doing with our 

money? The Financial Administration Amendment Act. Well 

the minister took three minutes to explain that to us. Before the 

House adjourned because of the time of day, Mr. Speaker, the 

New Democratic Party spoke for 15 minutes on that Bill. Mr. 

Speaker, it has never been brought back to the Chamber. Total 

time debating The Financial Administration Amendment Act, 18 

minutes, Mr. Speaker. No way will anybody accept the 

argument that this opposition is wasting time, Mr. Speaker, or 

abusing the privileges of this House in terms of stalling. 

 

The government has a number of environmental Bills, Mr. 

Speaker, and if government members think they’re going to 

build trust with the people of Saskatchewan, which of course is 

sadly lacking, then of course they’re going to have to do some 



April 14, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4843 

things on the environment, Mr. Speaker. The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act is Bill No. 121. It’s an Act that 

should allow members of the government to express their desire 

to meet the needs of the public of Saskatchewan. And of course 

the public is going to want to respond to absolutely everything 

that’s said on an environmental Bill. The Minister of the 

Environment, on The Environmental Management and 

Protection Act, Mr. Speaker, spoke for seven minutes. No other 

member of government chose to enter the debate on this Bill, 

for a total debating time, though, Mr. Speaker, of 2 hours and 

30 minutes. 

 

If the environment is a centrepiece of what the government 

wants to be recognized for or remembered for, fondly 

remembered perhaps, after they’ve been retired, Mr. Speaker, 

surely to goodness, two hours of debating time is insufficient. 

It’s not an abuse, Mr. Speaker. It’s insufficient to communicate 

the wishes of the public. 

 

And there are a number of others. Let’s take a look at The 

Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, something that’s 

very significant in this province and the public wants to 

comment on — three hours of debate. That’s all that the House 

has had so far from 58 members of the legislature, three hours 

of debate on something as substantial as The Environmental 

Assessment Amendment Act. 

 

Bill No. 123, The Forest Resources Management Act, Mr. 

Speaker, a total debating time of 1 hour and 27 minutes. Now 

there are people in this province who are arguing — and rightly 

so, Mr. Speaker — that this government has messed up the 

management of the forestry in Saskatchewan, messed up 

royally, Mr. Speaker, to the point that we’re not even making 

sawdust in Saskatchewan any more, let alone other product 

from the forest, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got trucking companies 

that aren’t working in the forestry any more. We’ve got mills 

that aren’t working any more. We’ve got promises, the famous 

promise from the minister from Prince Albert Carlton, Mr. 

Speaker, during the election campaign: “A vote for Darryl is a 

vote for the mill open.” Well, Mr. Speaker, two and a half years 

later, the mill is going to be dismantled, Mr. Speaker — not 

opened, dismantled. I don’t remember. I don’t remember that 

being the promise on which he got elected, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when the public sees that the government is addressing 

forestry issues in legislation, they’re going to want to know 

what is it that the government has to say on this. What activity 

is the government engaging in? Where’s the government taking 

us next, Mr. Speaker? There’s a piece of legislation. It doesn’t 

matter what’s in it at the beginning of the process, Mr. Speaker. 

The public sees the name The Forest Resources Management 

Amendment Act, and the public wants to know. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister spoke for four minutes. The 

Bill’s had a total of 1 hour and 27 minutes in total. The minister 

responsible for forestry didn’t have a thing to say about this, 

Mr. Speaker. And more importantly, there just hasn’t been 

enough time allocated so far, Mr. Speaker, to be able to 

adequately express the concerns and the interests of the public 

of Saskatchewan with regards to the public right to have its 

resources managed appropriately. 

This government has failed on so many levels, Mr. Speaker. 

This government has failed on so many levels. And it is 

incredible that the minister from Meadow Lake — who also 

represents a forestry community, Mr. Speaker — it is incredible 

that the minister from Meadow Lake says to the public, by way 

of a motion, that the opposition is stalling the passage of 

legislation in this Chamber and therefore he needs to change the 

rules. He needs to impose his will on the members of the 

opposition and on the public, Mr. Speaker, so that indeed this 

piece of legislation will either be debated at midnight, when 

nobody’s watching, Mr. Speaker, or just get sent off to 

committee for questions that could also be discussed on a 

Friday night at midnight, Mr. Speaker. It’s just unacceptable. 

Completely unacceptable. 

 

There’s still more legislation, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 124, The 

Legal Profession Amendment Act, this Bill has received 45 

minutes of debating time; Bill No. 125, The Crown Minerals 

Amendment Act, 2 hours and 31 minutes. 

 

Bill No. 126 — oh boy, the public likes this one, Mr. Speaker, 

— The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act. 

Greenhouse gases, Mr. Speaker, climate change. What is more 

important to the public in Saskatchewan than the subject of 

climate change, Mr. Speaker? Every member of the public is 

concerned in one way or another about climate change, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This government does not have a very good record in 

responding to climate change issues or in fact managing 

greenhouse gas issues, Mr. Speaker. Here the government 

brings forward a Bill. Now let’s think about this a little bit. The 

government had a Bill on greenhouse gases, withdrew it, other 

legislation was brought in, and then this legislation was brought 

back again, almost as an afterthought, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They felt that they needed to get something on the record, Mr. 

Speaker. You listen to a couple of the speeches that have been 

made. Anybody that’s listened to the speeches that have been 

made on Bill No. 126 recognizes the horrible record that this 

government has on climate change and greenhouse gas 

response, issue responses, Mr. Speaker. Anybody who listens to 

those speeches knows the failure of this government to act on 

that. 

 

Well the public is responding to this, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

phoning. They’re writing letters. They’re sending in petitions, 

Mr. Speaker. The public is engaged in this. But this government 

says the opposition is stalling this piece of legislation because 

how long have we spoke on this? One hour and 32 minutes, Mr. 

Speaker — hardly enough time for an individual member of the 

legislature to communicate to government the wishes of the 

Saskatchewan people, let alone 58 members of the legislature 

speaking to a Bill of this nature. 

 

It is ludicrous, it is ludicrous for the member from Meadow 

Lake and the Government House Leader, the member from 

Cannington, to say that the opposition is stalling legislation in 

this House and not allowing the government to get its agenda 

passed. There are messages, Mr. Speaker, that the public needs, 

wants, wishes, and will send to members, to government, Mr. 

Speaker, and it’ll be through the voices that the democratically 

elected members of this Assembly have. 



4844 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2010 

How about The Assessment Management Agency Amendment 

Act, Mr. Speaker? That’s Bill No. 127. Remember, assessment 

management agency is what? It’s the agency that determines 

how much property tax we pay. Property tax is an issue that 

gets people excited throughout this province, Mr. Speaker, and 

rightly so. How much time has been spent on The Assessment 

Management Agency Amendment Act? Fifty-three minutes, Mr. 

Speaker. Not an abuse of the Legislative Assembly, not a 

stalling tactic on behalf of the opposition — 53 minutes on an 

Act that related to the setting of property tax in this province. 

The public has an interest. They need to know what’s going on. 

 

And how about the labour mobility amendment Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, Bill No. 128, miscellaneous statutes? Well that’s an 

interesting Bill, Mr. Speaker. Fifty-two minutes is all that was 

spoken on that. 

 

How about Bill 129, The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act, 

enforcement of money judgments. People, Mr. Speaker, are 

interested in the enforcement of matters. Twenty-six minutes is 

all the debating time that we’ve had in this Chamber on that 

piece of Bill, Mr. Speaker. And its consequential amendments, 

Bill 130, the enforcement of money judgments, Mr. Speaker, 24 

minutes. Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, there’s certainly no abuse 

or stalling going on there, is there? I can’t think of a single 

person in Saskatchewan who would argue that 24 minutes on 

any Bill is unacceptable to the government. How about The 

Conservation Easements Amendment Act, Bill 131? 

Twenty-five minutes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this is an interesting one, Mr. Speaker. It’s one that I am 

getting a new appreciation for, thanks to the fact that members 

of the opposition caucus have been consulting across the 

province. I refer specifically, Mr. Speaker, to Bill No. 132, The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment 

Act. Mr. Speaker, keep this in mind, the minister spoke for two 

minutes, and the public’s supposed to know what’s going on in 

this Bill. The minister spoke for two minutes. There’s been a 

total of 1 hour and 5 minutes on this Bill. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, does the public care about habitat protection, 

lands that have been designated for habitat protection? 

Absolutely they do, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been around this 

province most of my life. I’ve sat in the living rooms of people 

who have dedicated lands to habitat, Mr. Speaker. After 

generations of taking care of that land — and they put it in the 

trust of the province, Mr. Speaker — those lands were 

designated habitat lands. More importantly, Mr. Speaker, 

because these lands are seen to be a provincial treasure, the 

lands were put, the description of those lands was put in 

legislation, put in legislation because if you wanted to remove 

the designation on that land, you would need to have a 

thoughtful discussion about the removal of those lands. 

 

It would have to be public. It would have to be very transparent. 

There would have to be significant consultation, Mr. Speaker. 

And when you need to change legislation, it requires thought. 

You have your first, second, and third readings of a Bill. You 

have public disclosure. You have committee process. You have 

media scrutiny, Mr. Speaker. If you’re going to amend a Bill to 

take lands out of habitat protection, you need to do it in a 

careful, thoughtful manner. 

 

Well we are now learning, and you wouldn’t know this from the 

minister’s speech on Bill 132, the habitat protection, land 

designation, amendment . . . If you listen to the minister’s 

speech, you heard her say, we believe in the protection of 

habitat lands, but we’re going to manage it differently. You had 

no idea, Mr. Speaker, from listening to that speech that what the 

legislation actually does is it takes the protection out of 

legislation and puts it into regulation. 

 

How easy is a regulatory change, Mr. Speaker? I think even, I 

think even the most ordinary of public members know that a 

regulation change is something that happens very quickly, very 

easily. In this situation, in the Saskatchewan context, Mr. 

Speaker, a regulation is changed by cabinet. It’s changed at a 

cabinet meeting behind closed doors. It’s changed at a cabinet 

meeting where the minutes are not published. It’s changed at a 

meeting, Mr. Speaker, that is completely silent. One day the 

regulation reads, these lands are protected. The next day the 

regulation reads, oh, those lands aren’t there any more. What 

was the criteria that cabinet used for the discussion of the 

removal of those lands? Don’t know; wasn’t put forward in the 

legislation. Certainly the minister’s speech contained no 

information to that effect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public is starting — thanks to speeches in the 

House and others now reading the Bill — the public is starting 

to understand what this legislation is all about, and they’re 

asking members of this Assembly to communicate to 

government the folly of their ways. If we believe in the 

protection of habitat, then consultation with Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation and Ducks Unlimited and the Nature 

Conservancy, Mr. Speaker, is paramount. 

 

And while discussions did take place, Mr. Speaker, there wasn’t 

a full disclosure of what was going to take place here. The 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation says their response wasn’t 

even listened to in the drawing up of this new piece of 

legislation. And now they are responding, Mr. Speaker, in a 

public way. Their voice can only be heard in this Assembly by 

members of the opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Even that having been said, Bill 132, the wildlife habitat 

protection, land designation Act has had a total debating time of 

1 hour and 5 minutes. Mr. Speaker, no one who cares about 

habitat in this country will say that the New Democratic Party is 

abusing their privileges as members of the legislature — no 

one, Mr. Speaker. But the member from Meadow Lake says we 

are. The member from Meadow Lake says in this motion that 

we are abusing our privileges as spokespeople for the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan. We are abusing our privileges, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Meadow Lake is saying, we’ve got to change 

the rules because the opposition is stalling us passing this Bill. 

Well on a piece of legislation like this, Mr. Speaker, the public 

doesn’t want the Bill passed. The public says to the 

government, don’t do it. The government wouldn’t listen to 

begin with. 

 

There are members over there who have a lot of Wildlife 

Federation members in their constituencies, who have members 

of Ducks Unlimited in their constituencies, Mr. Speaker. Every 

one of them is getting a phone call, but are they speaking, Mr. 



April 14, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4845 

Speaker? Not one member of government has spoken to the 

wildlife habitat protection land designation Act, Mr. Speaker. 

And we have a total of 52 . . . No, just a minute. I lost my place 

here, Mr. Speaker. There it is. It’s right at the top of the page: 1 

hour and 5 minutes, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite have 

to understand — and that’s why debate is so important in this 

Legislature — have to understand what the public is saying 

about this legislation and about other pieces of legislation. 

 

This is one of those examples that I referred to at the beginning 

of my remarks, Mr. Speaker. This government tends to act first 

and consult second. And sometimes, and it’s turning out to be 

more times than not, sometimes they get it wrong when they 

act, and changes need to occur. The Minister of the 

Environment already acknowledged that once this week, Mr. 

Speaker, on the Dutch elm disease issue. Mr. Speaker, she 

needs to understand that on the issue of the wildlife habitat. 

 

How about The Opticians Act, Mr. Speaker? An important Bill. 

It’s going to introduce some new programs into the province. 

We need to fully understand what’s happening with regards to 

the optician. The minister spoke for three minutes to give us an 

idea of what’s there. A number of consultations have taken 

place. But this Bill, Mr. Speaker? The debate time in this 

Assembly so far, 57 minutes, Mr. Speaker. Compare that to the 

government’s actions on chiropractic care; not a single Bill in 

this House to this point. Maybe there’ll be one coming. We 

don’t know. 

 

[16:30] 

 

But on chiropractors there was an agreement, Mr. Speaker, 

negotiated. There was a program in place. There was funding in 

place. There was additional money put into the health care 

budget, Mr. Speaker. The government has unprecedented 

revenues — 10 billion this year, Mr. Speaker, compared to 7 

billion just three years ago, an extra $3 billion of revenue — but 

not a piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, not an opportunity for 

debate outside of question period. And they cut the chiropractic 

program from our health insurance plan in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Chiropractors, Mr. Speaker, and more importantly chiropractic 

patients, Mr. Speaker, are paying the price for this 

government’s mismanagement and incompetence on the 

financial end of things, Mr. Speaker. Now we’re seeing the 

public paying a price for the mismanagement and incompetence 

on the legislative management schedule. 

 

While we’re on health, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 135, The 

Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, 43 minutes 

have been taken up to debate this Bill so far, 43 minutes. Hardly 

enough time to help the public to understand what’s in this 

legislation and, more importantly, not enough time, Mr. 

Speaker, to express the will of the public back to the 

government. 

 

Bill No. 607, The Public Safety, Security and Protection Act, 

this was a private member’s Bill. It’s had 1 hour and 33 minutes 

of debate, Mr. Speaker. Other private member’s Bill 609, The 

Whistleblower Protection Act, has had 18 minutes of debate. 

And there are other private members’ Bills on the order paper, 

Mr. Speaker, that have not yet come to the House for debate at 

all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The motion in front of this Chamber does something that most 

members should find unconscionable, Mr. Speaker. The motion 

removes the ability of this Chamber to discuss private 

members’ Bills at all. Thursdays have always been designated 

as an opportunity for private members to bring forward matters 

that are separate and apart from government legislation. And 

we’ve had great success, Mr. Speaker, over the last few years 

with private members actually influencing the legislative 

agenda and the quality of life for people in this province. 

 

I remember a couple of years ago the member from . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — No, not . . . I’ll get to Lloydminster. But the 

Deputy Speaker . . . Arm River. I remember, Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Arm River bringing forward a private member’s 

Bill in recognition of a John Diefenbaker day, Mr. Speaker — 

debated, passed, became law in the province of Saskatchewan. I 

remember the member from Wood River bringing forward a 

piece of legislation that recognizes the service of cadets in our 

communities and in our country, Mr. Speaker. A private 

member’s Bill introduced, debated, and passed, Mr. Speaker. I 

remember just a few weeks ago the member from Lloydminster 

bringing forward a piece of legislation to protect ponies in the 

Bronson Forest, Mr. Speaker — brought forward, debated, and 

passed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I have to admit I’ve had some success myself. I introduced 

a motion to recognize UN [United Nations] peacekeepers and 

the value that UN peacekeepers have provided to not only the 

people of this province but across Canada. That Bill was 

presented, debated, and passed by this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well the opportunity of individual members to influence the 

legislative agenda and change the circumstances for some 

people in this province, Mr. Speaker, the opportunity for 

members to do that is being removed by this change in the 

rules. 

 

Unintended consequence? Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, or intended. 

The bullies on the other side, the government members who 

wish to impose their will upon this House, Mr. Speaker, are 

saying for all intents and purposes, it’s only what we want to 

bring forward, not what anybody else wants to bring forward 

that’s important. We don’t want any more question periods. We 

don’t want to be held accountable any longer than we have to 

be. We don’t want any private members bringing forward 

legislation or motions that might be relevant to issues of the 

day. And more importantly, we don’t want members of the 

public to participate or even know what’s going on here, 

because we’re going to just tighten this schedule up. We’re 

going to push it off into the middle of the night and we’re going 

to do this, Mr. Speaker, without any consensus whatsoever. 

 

In fact there isn’t even consensus on the government benches 

on this issue, Mr. Speaker. There are members opposite I know 

who have argued with the Government House Leader about the 

efficacy of this motion that’s in front of us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ve gone through a little bit about the legislative agenda of this 



4846 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2010 

government. Just a small point I should make, Mr. Speaker. 

Anybody that is reading this in Hansard will be able to go back 

and take a look at the legislation that I mentioned. You know, 

all the names of the legislation are there and some discussion. 

 

While there are some important Bills, while there are some 

important issues raised in that legislation, and while there are 

some important issues that the public would like to 

communicate, Mr. Speaker, by and large, this is not a terribly 

ambitious legislative agenda from a government that’s in their 

third year of a four-year mandate. Not a very ambitious agenda 

at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are seeing a government that is lacking in vision for what 

this province should look like. For most of the first two years 

their vision came from the strings attached to the pompoms that 

were being raised in congratulations of the hardworking people 

of Saskatchewan who have built a booming economy. All of the 

graphs that we see presented by economists, Mr. Speaker, all of 

the graphs that take a look at what has happened in the 

Saskatchewan economy show all the upward trends starting 

prior to November of 2007 when this government got elected. 

 

But every word of vision that the Sask Party government has 

emitted during its first year, little short of two years in office, 

Mr. Speaker, has been to cheer on this economy that they had 

nothing to do with building but, Mr. Speaker, that they believed 

that by simply cheering it on, all will be well. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the pompoms seem to be down. Still proud 

of the province, Mr. Speaker, but by golly, it’s hard to be 

supportive of a booming economy when your own budget is in 

the tank. They have failed to manage increased resources to the 

benefit of Saskatchewan people, and as a result of that failure, 

individuals are having to pay more. 

 

And there are numerous examples of this throughout the 

province in the last few weeks since the budget came down, Mr. 

Speaker. Something as simple as Dutch elm disease, Mr. 

Speaker. Because this government mismanaged the resources 

available to it, we could see an expansion of Dutch elm disease 

in the province attacking and killing living trees throughout 

Saskatchewan. Some people think that’s not important. I think 

it’s important, Mr. Speaker. I think my colleagues think it’s 

important. 

 

What about West Nile disease, Mr. Speaker, West Nile disease? 

A couple of years ago in 2007, Saskatchewan had over 1,000 

cases of West Nile disease. The numbers the last couple of 

years have fallen off a little bit, but West Nile is still a concern 

to Saskatchewan people. In order to manage its mismanaged 

budget, this government has chosen to cancel the mosquito 

control program in the province of Saskatchewan. Did they . . . 

[inaudible] . . . a link between the health of the Saskatchewan 

public and the life of a mosquito? I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. 

I don’t think they put these two things together. 

 

The mosquito control program has been effective, Mr. Speaker, 

in managing not just mosquitoes but managing incidents of 

West Nile disease. The public wants its government to protect 

them from all sorts of things, Mr. Speaker. And West Nile 

disease is something that this government can actually impact 

and protect members of the public through a simple budgetary 

matter. Not important to this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the interests of saving face on a poorly managed budget, the 

cancellation of the mosquito control program could actually see 

the increase in the number of West Nile cases in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Or if the controls are going to be there, they’re 

going to be there because of the municipalities, municipalities 

who are using local tax revenues to protect their citizens, Mr. 

Speaker. Like Dutch elm disease, a downloading to the 

municipal sector, something that should not be happening at a 

time when revenues for the government’s use are at the second 

highest level in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. 

The mosquito control program was in place when the 

government had $7 billion in revenue. Why can it not be in 

place when the government has $10 billion of revenue? 

 

Same as chiropractic care in our province, Mr. Speaker. It was 

in place. It was in the budget. It was funded and financed when 

the government had $7 billion in revenue. Why can it not be 

there when the government has $10 billion of revenue? Why 

not? 

 

It’s fiscal financial mismanagement, Mr. Speaker, and the 

public will only know about this as debate occurs. And debate 

happens on the floor of this legislature, and it happens during 

hours, during times that are defined and set out by agreements 

reached through discussions by representatives of the 

government and the opposition parties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we equate the inherent need for this motion 

with the activities that government has shown so far, it’s pretty 

easy for the public to conclude that the inability to manage has 

become a trait of this government. And we can almost by 

extension think back over, why would that be happening? To a 

certain extent, it’s inexperience. To a certain extent, it’s the fact 

that members who are now sitting in the seats of government 

have not spent a lot of time in those seats on that side of the 

House. But the Premier, the Government House Leader, even 

the Deputy House Leader, and certainly the Deputy Premier 

have a lot of experience in rules of procedure, rules of 

procedure. 

 

And there’s no reason whatsoever for those individuals in a 

position of leadership in government, no reason whatsoever for 

those members to feel that the agenda of the majority has to be 

bullied into place as opposed to being coaxed into place through 

the normal processes of legislative procedure. 

 

You know, we first saw this motion, this motion that’s in front 

of us on the change of hours, Mr. Speaker . . . I forget what day 

we’re at now. Where’s my, where’s my daily here? Yes. I forget 

how many days we’ve been sitting now since we came back 

from time in our constituency to begin this session. Back on 

March the 8th, I believe is when we opened up. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Just five days into the opening of this spring session, Mr. 

Speaker, this motion was put on the order paper. This isn’t new 

today to the members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. This 

government had made the decision before the first week of 

sitting had concluded that they needed to push their legislative 

agenda on to the members of the opposition. This was not 



April 14, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4847 

something that has just developed over the last few days 

because, oh my goodness, members of the opposition are 

actually debating the legislation in front of us. 

 

We are asked to debate it by the public, by the way, Mr. 

Speaker. We are asked to debate because the public brings 

information for us, and they need that information 

communicated to the public. 

 

But for some reason this government, the Government House 

Leader felt it necessary before the first week of debate had 

concluded, before the budget was brought in, Mr. Speaker, 

before debate on the budget or even most of these pieces of 

legislation had begun, the Government House Leader felt it 

necessary to bring forward this rule to ensure that there was less 

transparency, less accountability, less scrutiny, Mr. Speaker. 

And in order to keep track of what’s going on here, Mr. Speaker 

— not just for the members that are here but for the public, Mr. 

Speaker — a great deal of more effort is required to understand 

what’s going on in this place. 

 

If members of the Assembly are only given a few hours notice 

as to what’s going to be debated in committees, how are 

members of the public supposed to know what’s going on and 

can respond to it? If somebody in North Battleford, Mr. 

Speaker, wants to attend one of the committee meetings that’s 

being held tomorrow, they can’t be here, Mr. Speaker. They 

can’t. They can’t be here for that because, number one, this 

information won’t even be communicated out to them unless I 

get on the phone and call them, which you know I’m more than 

happy to do if I have a couple days to phone the thousands of 

people who live in the constituency. But we’re going to debate, 

actually even tonight, Mr. Speaker, The Milk Control Act, one 

of the first Bills I referred to earlier in the day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are going to go into committee tonight to deal with The 

Milk Control Repeal Act. I have a lot of dairy producers in 

northwest Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, dairy producers who are 

interested in this piece of legislation. Now I got notice this 

morning that that’s what’s being called tonight. I admit the 

Government House Leader said earlier there was some not 

specific notice but an indication that committees would be 

called on Wednesday night, outside of normal hours. But I 

didn’t know what was on the agenda, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I didn’t — standing here — I didn’t know how to prepare 

for that. Now members of the public have no opportunity to 

prepare whatsoever. This government is trying to keep the 

public in the dark about what is taking place within the walls of 

this building and by doing so, Mr. Speaker, are making this 

place less accountable to the public, less accessible to the 

public, is restricting the ability of the public to participate in 

this process. 

 

And by extension, Mr. Speaker, are ensuring that members of 

this Legislative Assembly, 58 members elected to serve their 

constituents, Mr. Speaker — 58 members — are in fact being 

denied the opportunity, therefore, to speak for and on behalf of 

the people who elected them, us, to be here. This is an affront 

on democracy, Mr. Speaker. There’s just no two ways of 

looking at this. There’s no other way to look at this process, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It’s an affront on democracy. It’s the government saying we’ve 

failed to understand what we need to do to achieve our 

legislative agenda. We’ve failed to recognize the public’s need, 

in fact their right, to participate in this process. It represents a 

massive misunderstanding of what it means to provide good 

government on behalf of the people who elected us here. 

 

We have members elected to this Chamber who seem to have 

forgotten that they are here to represent the interests of their 

communities and their constituencies and not just represent the 

interests of their government. We have members who are 

quietly supporting this affront on democracy, Mr. Speaker, 

members who will have a hard time explaining why this is 

necessary to the public that they represent. 

 

And I’m hoping that every single member representing a 

government constituency, Mr. Speaker, when they are asked by 

members of their constituency why, why these rules had to be 

changed unilaterally, will copy the remarks that I’m making 

tonight and hand them over to their constituents, Mr. Speaker, 

because the remarks that were made by the member from 

Meadow Lake do not demonstrate any understanding of what it 

is that this motion has done to us. 

 

Just for a refresher before the time allotted to me in this regard 

expires, Mr. Speaker, the public has to know that what this 

motion does. It changes the hours that we sit in this place and 

debate the interests of Saskatchewan people, when in fact that 

was completely unnecessary. The rules previously agreed to by 

both sides . . . and the Government House Leader was part of 

that change, Mr. Speaker, that happened years ago by 

agreement. The current rules allow the government agenda to 

go beyond the agreed-upon calendar. 

 

The calendar says we will adjourn on May the 20th, and on 

May the 20th all matters in front of us that have gone through 

that certain process will be dealt with. So in other words, on 

May the 20th the government can assume that the majority of 

. . . or the way they’ve managed their agenda, the majority of 

their legislative agenda will be passed. But if that fails, Mr. 

Speaker, the rules allow for an extra five days for this 

legislature to sit. And there’s no disagreement on this side of 

the Chamber, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If we need more time to ensure that good legislation is reviewed 

and dealt with in a good way, we’re happy to provide the extra 

time. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to shy away 

from continuing to do what needs to be done, i.e., debate the 

legislation in the legislature and in committee. 

 

With the extended hours, Mr. Speaker, if anyone watches — 

this is an interesting point, and the public’s got to understand 

this — anyone who watches the proceedings of the legislature 

will know that when a Bill is presented in the Chamber, and the 

stats prove it out, it’s primarily members of the opposition who 

debate it. When the matter goes to committee, it is primarily 

members of the opposition who ask the questions. Mr. Speaker, 

that responsibility that the members of the opposition have will 

continue, whether these hours are till midnight or around the 

clock. So we’re not shying away from our responsibilities. We 

will debate the legislation. We will ask the proper questions. 

We will hold the government to account. 

 



4848 Saskatchewan Hansard April 14, 2010 

But the fact that the public’s participation or ability to 

participate in it changes with these hours . . . and the onus is on 

the government, not the opposition, Mr. Speaker. The onus is 

on the government to achieve what they wish to achieve with 

full public participation at the end of the day. And the 

opposition is standing today in opposition to this motion to 

ensure that the public understands exactly what it is that has 

taken place here today. 

 

This government concluded on the first week of this session 

that they were going to bully their way through, that they were 

going to make sure that their agenda passed, no matter what. 

And this opposition is as committed today as it was at the 

beginning of the session to ensure that the public’s voice is 

heard in this Chamber and in the committee rooms, regardless 

of where they are, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We were there when the rules changed before. We have agreed 

to rule changes in the past. We aren’t adverse to rule changes. 

We do it in consultation, and ultimately we do it in agreement. 

This motion does everything unilaterally. It does it in a manner 

in which the rule of the majority takes advantage of those who 

sit in the minority. 

 

But lest the government think that it has this figured out, let 

them not forget that because they enjoyed the majority in 2007 

that because of their actions they will still enjoy the majority in 

2011. Don’t let . . . Members opposite should not make that 

assumption. The actions that they are taking today will have an 

influence over the actions of the public in 2011. And when the 

public sees mismanagement of finances, mismanagement of 

programs and policy, and mismanagement of the legislative 

agenda, Mr. Speaker, the public has less of a desire to trust the 

members elected in ’07 and — one would assume — have a 

greater trust in those who are defending the interests of the 

general public. 

 

Whether those members of the general public are represented 

by municipal leaders or visit chiropractors or support heritage 

designation for habitats or are concerned about West Nile 

disease or are concerned that they can’t find housing or, more 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, those communities right across this 

province who have been told on several occasions that seniors 

living in those communities in long-term care homes that need 

to be replaced will see those facilities replaced . . . On two 

occasions now, Mr. Speaker, this government has announced 13 

new long-term care facilities. And on two occasions, Mr. 

Speaker, the public has been told, well don’t trust us on that; 

it’ll get done when it gets done or when there’s money 

available. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this government has unprecedented 

revenues. It has unprecedented . . . 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Being near the hour of adjournment 

and prior to the hour of adjournment in order to respond to the 

point of order that was raised earlier this afternoon, I would like 

to respond to the point of order that was raised earlier today by 

the Opposition House Leader concerning the operation of the 

standing committee of the Assembly. 

 

At the heart of the member’s argument is that the present rules 

governing the operation of committees did not contemplate the 

meeting of committees outside regular Assembly hours to 

conduct business on estimates and Bills. 

 

Under regular circumstances, standing committees conform to 

the regular Assembly sitting hours to conduct business on Bills 

and estimates. This is prescribed by rule 125(2) of this 

Assembly’s rules. The rule reads as follows: “On days when the 

Assembly is sitting, standing committees shall follow the 

Assembly’s recess and adjournment times, except as otherwise 

ordered by the committee.” I want to emphasize the last clause 

of the rule which I repeat: “. . . except otherwise ordered by the 

committee.” 

 

[17:00] 

 

If the rule had a full stop, period before this last clause, the 

member would have raised a valid point of order. The 

interpretation of the rule is that committees are able to sit 

outside of the Assembly hours if they so decide by order. What 

is meant by order is the adoption of a motion by the committee 

to meet on a specific date and time. This is something for the 

committee to decide, not the Speaker. 

 

Committees are masters of their own procedures. It is a 

longstanding practice of this Assembly and Speakers have 

consistently ruled that Speakers do not exercise procedural 

control over committees. Procedural difficulties which arise in 

committees are settled in the committees and not in the 

Assembly. Speakers have not intervened to settle disputes that 

arise in the committees, and this is stated explicitly in paragraph 

822 of Beauchesne’s, 6th Edition. 

 

The sitting hours of a committee are a procedural issue that 

each committee can decide for itself. Only the Assembly can 

override this, not the Speaker. For this reason, the point of order 

is not well taken. 

 

Being now past the time of adjournment, the Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:01.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4817 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4817 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4817 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4817 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4817 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4817 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4817 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4818 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4818 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4818 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4818 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4818 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4819 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4819 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4819 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4819 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4819 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4820 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4821 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4821 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4823 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4823 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Parkinson’s Disease Month 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4824 

 Prince Albert Students Win Law Day Competition 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4824 

 Child Abuse Prevention Month 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4824 

 Rosemont/Mount Royal Family Fun Day 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4825 

 Terry Fox’s Marathon of Hope 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4825 

 Legislative Assembly Members 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4825 

 76th Annual TheatreFest  

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4825 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Rulings on Points of Order 

  The Speaker ................................................................................................................................................................... 4826, 4848 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4826 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Personal Health Information 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4828 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4828 

 Finance and Electoral Issues 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4830 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4830 

 Support for Film and Television Industry 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4831 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4831 

POINT OF ORDER 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4832 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4832 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4834 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 Hours of Sitting 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4834 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4836 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


