




















































Hansard: December 09, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 25A  THURSDAY, DECEMBER 9, 2010, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6467 

 December 9, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the Premier, if I could just 

have a moment just to introduce. We‟ve been joined today by a 

number of staff members from the communications and 

technology service branch of the Legislative Assembly Service. 

With them we have staff member Meghan Trenholm who 

recently joined the ranks in the role of help desk analyst. I ask 

members to welcome the staff members to their Assembly 

today. 

 

I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 

evening in Regina, for the constituency of Regina Lakeview, 

there was a nomination meeting for the Saskatchewan Party. 

And so it‟s an honour to introduce to you and through you, to 

all members of the Assembly, someone that members of the 

Assembly will know quite well. He‟s a former president of the 

U of R [University of Regina], Bob Hawkins, currently a 

professor of law at the Johnson-Shoyama Graduate School of 

Public Policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously Mr. Hawkins has been involved in 

public life in a number of places across our country. He is 

currently the vice-president of the Children‟s Health & Hospital 

Foundation of Saskatchewan and was honorary lifetime director 

of the Children‟s Hospital Foundation of Western Ontario. He‟s 

a Doctor of Canon Law, St. John‟s College, University of 

Manitoba. 

 

Here back in the province, past board member of the Regina 

Symphony, the Wascana Centre Authority, the Regina regional 

economic development board, Communities of Tomorrow, and 

the Saskatchewan advisory council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he‟s received teaching excellence awards at 

Queen‟s and the University of Western Ontario. 

 

He‟s married to Marie-France Menc who‟s here as well. And, 

Mr. Speaker, they have three sons, Nicolas, Pierre, and 

François. We‟re very much looking forward to having Mr. 

Hawkins join us here on the floor of the Assembly some time 

late next year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s my pleasure today to 

introduce to you Pat Maze who‟s seated in your gallery. Pat 

Maze was recently nominated to run for the New Democratic 

Party in Regina Wascana Plains. 

 

Pat and his wife Belinda have been very involved in the 

community here in Regina. Pat was born and raised in Regina 

and currently the president of the Regina public school 

teachers, and also a member of the executive or past executive 

of the Teachers‟ Federation. 

 

He holds a Bachelor of Arts degree, a Bachelor of Education, a 

Master of Education degree at the University of Regina. He also 

has served on the senate and board of governors of the 

University of Regina, and works with the elementary and high 

school levels in terms of teaching and coaching, and former 

level 6 international and WHL [Western Hockey League] 

hockey referee. 

 

The list goes on, Pat, so you have to forgive me if I don‟t read it 

all. But one of the outstanding things of course, he and Belinda 

have four children and I just want to point out that his oldest is 

captain of Campbell Tartans. I say that only because that‟s 

where my son in grade 9 goes and he aspires to join that 

football team. But they were in fact the provincial champs this 

year. 

 

And I want to congratulate Pat for taking on the task and I 

know that in a few months you‟ll join us here in the Assembly. 

So welcome and enjoy today‟s Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Silver 

Springs, the Minster Responsible for First Nations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I want to introduce through you to this Assembly, 

three very special guests seated in your gallery: Arthur and 

Elaine Anderson from the George Gordon First Nation, and 

their grandson Nigel. Would you stand, please? Nigel‟s here 

from Calgary and visiting grandma and grandpa. 

 

Reverend Anderson was the recipient of the male Citizen of the 

Year Award at the 12th annual Circle of Honour Awards in 

First Nations. Reverend Anderson served in Germany, Cyprus, 

and Africa during his 29 years with the Canadian Forces, later 

finding his calling as an Anglican priest. He has dedicated his 

time to bridging the gap between First Nations and non-First 

Nations cultures while working tirelessly to improve the lives 

of First Nations youth. 

 

I recently had the opportunity to speak with Reverend Anderson 

at the Saskatchewan First Nations Veterans Association dinner 

last month. We chatted about the grave markers program. We 

chatted about the great contribution that First Nations people 

have made to our safety. His sacrifice and dedication for the 

country and his people have impacted both lives here at home 

and abroad, and I look forward to having the opportunity to 

speak with him after question period. 

 

Colleagues, please join me in welcoming Arthur and Elaine 

Anderson and their grandson Nigel to the Saskatchewan 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

join with the minister in welcoming Arthur Anderson and 

Elaine and Nigel to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The last I saw Arthur it was at the funeral for the past grand 



6468 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2010 

chief, Howard Anderson, where Arthur was guiding the 

community through grieving the loss of a great warrior for the 

province of Saskatchewan. And certainly Arthur is one of those 

warriors for the people in Saskatchewan. 

 

In addition to being an Anglican priest, he was a paratrooper, 

Mr. Speaker, and completed 265 jumps. I don‟t know if he can 

still do the one-handed push-ups, but we‟ll see about that 

perhaps out in the rotunda. 

 

But certainly I want to join with the minister in welcoming 

Arthur and Elaine here and commending them on the 

tremendous work that they‟ve done over the years and 

congratulating them on the Circle of Honour Award and the 

continuing to work with the community, but also with the First 

Nations Veterans Association. So ta wow. Ēkosi. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if I may do one more 

introduction to members of the Assembly through you . . . And 

he won‟t be pleased about this at all because he prefers to be 

not introduced. But he‟s a long-standing friend of mine and 

many on this side of the House and is . . . Maybe this is not 

necessarily a good thing, but is in part responsible for my early 

interest in politics, in my early employment here in this 

building. He served this province for many, many years, he and 

his wife Margot, and is now living back in Ontario but is 

visiting here for the . . . has been here for the last couple of 

days, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟ll just tell you a very brief story about how we used to make 

fun of a briefcase that he used when he was working here in the 

building, a lot of us. It was seemingly quite tattered and didn‟t 

look very good, frankly, at the time. And we made fun of him 

until he pointed out that it was actually his step-grandfather‟s 

briefcase, the Rt. Hon. John George Diefenbaker. 

 

Ladies and gentlemen, to you and to all members of this 

Assembly, John Weir, a friend of Saskatchewan. We welcome 

him back here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to join the Premier 

in welcoming John Weir here to the Assembly in 

Saskatchewan. Of course, in the 1980s, John worked in 

government and carried out the duties of a staff person in the 

government, I think in a very diligent way. And I know we had 

a short chat in the hall yesterday, and I really appreciate the fact 

that you‟re back here in Saskatchewan, and I hope your 

endeavours here in the province, whether it‟s trying to enhance 

the economy of the province, that that goes well. And I want to 

join with the Premier in welcoming you here to the Assembly 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like 

to welcome a group of Aboriginal students from the U of R 

who are enrolled in their first year of university. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to try and do my very best to do the name, 

nitocipamin oma student success program, and that‟s Saulteaux, 

you know, for the record. And these students, Mr. Speaker, are 

here to watch the Assembly today, and they‟re accompanied by 

the student success facilitator. And I‟ll try my darndest to say 

this name right, and it‟s Ms. Osawa Kiniw Ihkwe Kayseas. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the oma success program helps Aboriginal 

students from all across the province transition from high 

school to the U of R. And I want to say in my own language of 

Cree. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

In my own language, Mr. Speaker, I have indicated I‟m glad 

they‟re here and there‟s a lot of room. And I‟m very, very 

pleased that we see the effort of the facilitator at the U of R and 

these students making the transition because the renaissance of 

the Aboriginal people have begun many, many years ago. And 

you are complementing that rebirth of our Métis and First 

Nations and other Aboriginal people throughout the province. 

So I‟d ask all members of the Assembly to welcome these 

champions of the renaissance of the Aboriginal people to their 

Assembly today. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, the Minister Responsible for Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I‟d 

like to join the member opposite in welcoming these students to 

their legislature. We know how significant the University of 

Regina is, especially when it comes to helping to support, 

foster, and facilitate greater inclusion and access, especially for 

First Nations and Métis students right across the province. 

We‟re delighted to have students from the U of R for the 

second time this week. And so I would ask all members to join 

me in welcoming these students to their legislature, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you to all 

members of the Assembly, it is my honour to introduce some 

grade 12 students from O‟Neill High School in the constituency 

of Regina Coronation Park. These are social studies students, 

and it‟s the, depending how you count it, it‟s the second or 

fourth group from O‟Neill that‟s been here this session. And I 

know you might wonder if I can‟t count, but we actually had 

three groups from O‟Neill one day just a couple of weeks ago. 

But it‟s nice to see the interest that is taken by that great high 

school in Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a chaperone, Ms. Antonio, and there are 

two teachers here today. One is Mr. Neumann and the other one 

is, of note, is related to one of our members here, in fact a 

daughter. So please join me in welcoming Deanna Yates and all 

of the grade 12 students, teacher Mr. Neumann, and chaperone 

Ms. Antonio to the legislature. I hope you enjoy this day and I 

very much look forward to meeting with you a little bit later 

after question period. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



December 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6469 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are 

concerned with the safety conditions of our highways. Mr. 

Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the Government of Saskatchewan to construct 

passing lanes on Highway 10 between Fort Qu‟Appelle 

and the junction of Highway 1 in order to improve safety 

of Saskatchewan‟s motoring public. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from Fort 

Qu‟Appelle, Cupar, Balcarres, Regina, and Dysart, 

Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition on behalf of hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of 

people from the province of Saskatchewan who wish to bring to 

our attention the following: that Saskatchewan Seniors 

Association has approximately 180 senior centres throughout 

the province, with the vast majority of them being in rural 

Saskatchewan; that these centres provide much-needed 

recreation and social activities as well as important health 

clinics and workshops which contribute to an enhanced quality 

of life for many of the seniors who use them; and that due to the 

skyrocketing costs of utilities, insurance, taxes, etc., many of 

these face closure in the next few months, and that the closure 

of these centres will lead to the deteriorating mental and 

physical health of seniors, which will lead to additional stress 

on long-term care facilities and hospitals: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the Government of Saskatchewan to provide the 

much-needed funding to assist seniors‟ recreation centres 

to remain open and active within their communities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these hundreds of signatures are from the 

communities of Chitek Lake, Leoville, Milden, Big River, 

Hodgeville, Herbert, Morse, Saskatoon, Swift Current, Blaine 

Lake, Hepburn, Wynyard, Debden, Hanley, Dundurn, Tisdale, 

Hudson Bay, Consul, Nipawin, White Fox, Porcupine Plain, 

Zenon Park, Gull Lake, Rosetown, Fort Qu‟Appelle, Lemberg, 

Indian Head, Lipton, Canora, Kamsack, Preeceville, Wakaw, 

Alvena, Biggar, Meadow Lake, Shellbrook, Shaunavon, Crystal 

Lake, Stenen, Kerrobert, Spiritwood, Mistusinne, Mistatim, 

Melfort, Marcelin, Watson, Govan, Nokomis, Duval, Livelong, 

Macklin, Leask, Tadmore, St. Walburg, Choiceland, Regina, 

Rosthern, Unity, Lloydminster, Luseland, Flaxcombe, Kelliher, 

Kindersley, Leross, Balcarres, Marshall, Hazlet, Edgeley, Lone 

Rock, Sturgis, Denzil, Prince Albert, and Holbein. I so present. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of eliminating poverty in Saskatchewan. 

And we know that freedom from poverty is an enshrined human 

right by the United Nations and that all citizens are entitled to 

social and economic security. And we know that 

Saskatchewan‟s income gap between the rich and the poor 

continues to grow, and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. And too often when 

governments cut spending, supports for social programs are cut 

first. I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to act as quickly as possible to 

develop an effective and sustainable poverty elimination 

strategy for the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that calls for the expansion of the graduate 

retention program, a call for fairness for post-secondary 

Saskatchewan students. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to immediately expand the 

graduate retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Regina and the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present another petition 

on behalf of Furdale residents who are looking for a permanent 

solution to their situation and not just a delay of a response, Mr. 

Speaker. A government ministry has directed SaskWater to cut 

off supplies of water for domestic use to Furdale customers. 

The government ministry has directed that customers may no 

longer treat non-potable water using methods approved by Sask 

Health. 

 

Furdale residents, in dealing in good faith with SaskWater for 

over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their domestic 

systems and in-home treatment equipment as well as for 

livestock and irrigation lines. And the alternative water supply 

being referred to by a government ministry is a private operator 

offering treated, non-pressurized water at great cost with no 

guarantee of quality, quantity, or availability of water, Mr. 

Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 



6470 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2010 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

cause the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Nipawin, Furdale, and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again to present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented financial 

mismanagement of the Sask Party government. They allude to 

the two consecutive deficit budgets, the billions of dollars of 

debt growth, both now and into the future, Mr. Speaker. Over 

the next four years alone, Mr. Speaker, a damaging $4.2 billion 

of debt being added to our balance sheet, all as a result of this 

government‟s mismanagement, and at a time I might say of 

unprecedented highs . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member is entering into 

debate. I ask the member to go to the prayer. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask 

Party government for its damaging financial 

mismanagement since taking office, a reckless fiscal 

record that is denying Saskatchewan people, 

organizations, municipalities, institutions, taxpayers, and 

businesses the responsible and trustworthy fiscal 

management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Regina. I 

so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

The Gift of Christmas 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today in honour of the 

season that is upon us now, the Christmas season of warmth, 

light, thanksgiving. And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a paradox that 

because of this time of the year the sun rises late, low in the sky 

throughout the day. It seems to hug the southern horizon for 

warmth and set early, bringing on long, cold winter nights. 

 

But we know, Mr. Speaker, that in a few short weeks a different 

cycle will begin, and as now the long, slow shift begins towards 

the new light, new warmth, and new life in the spring. Even 

here in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, the routine cycle of media 

scrums takes on a different feeling in the shadow of the 

rotunda‟s Christmas tree, and the marble palace takes on a 

magical glow in the dark of night when it‟s lit by spotlights full 

of colour. 

 

As we think about this building, Mr. Speaker, we should take 

the opportunity to thank all of those who help us in our routines 

and the daily work in the House — the Pages, the tour guides, 

the media, the security staff, the cafeteria crew; the 

maintenance, library, office, and the administrative people who 

work in the building; the caucus staff, as well as the staff in the 

ministers‟ office; and as well, the people who come every day 

from the House of Prayer, in particular Richard and Joanne 

Lepp who are with us here today, I believe. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we in this province are blessed with many gifts — 

gifts of peace, of freedom and prosperity — that I believe we 

should strive to share with all. But perhaps the greatest gift we 

share, Mr. Speaker, is the gift of Christmas. And this time of 

year we can give thanks for all the blessings of the past year 

and hope for the new year to come. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Weyburn Golfer Completes Successful Tour 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

I‟m pleased to rise in the Assembly to recognize Weyburn‟s 

own Graham DeLaet, who just completed a successful rookie 

year on the PGA [Professional Golfers‟ Association] tour. The 

Weyburn area is known for its rich history of athletic 

accomplishment and, Mr. Speaker, Graham is a part of that 

proud tradition. With the season complete, Graham has finished 

among the top 125 money winners in the PGA tour, which has 

secured him a spot in the 2011 PGA tour. 

 

With earnings of just over $950,000, Graham was the highest 

Canadian on the PGA tour this year, and his accomplishments 

have been nothing short of remarkable — tied for third at the 

Shell Houston Open, tied for fifth at the Viking Classic, tied for 

sixth at Frys.com, tied for 18th at the Bob Hope Classic, and 

tied for 18th at the Justin Timberlake Shriners tournament, Mr. 

Speaker. At the end of the season, Graham ranked sixth in 

driving, sixth in greens and regulation, and 49th in all around 

ranking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Graham was born in Weyburn where he attended 

school and excelled in his academic endeavours and also 

hockey, golf, and volleyball. He graduated from the Weyburn 

Comprehensive and then went on to attend Boise State 

University where he went on a golf scholarship. After turning 

pro in 2006 and with his success in the 2010 season, it‟s a 

testament to his hard work and dedication. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Graham is truly the pride of Weyburn, 

Saskatchewan. He has been a tremendous ambassador for our 

province and our city. And I would ask all members to join with 

me in recognizing Graham DeLaet on a successful 2010 PGA 

tour. 



December 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6471 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Poverty in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This year we‟ve seen 

a Salvation Army report which indicates Saskatchewan is tied 

with Manitoba for the top spot in the country in terms of 

homelessness. Twenty per cent of Saskatchewanians say 

they‟ve been homeless or at risk of being homeless. That means 

one out of five people we pass on the street are in danger of not 

having a place to sleep at night. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the face of poverty is homelessness. And housing 

and access to affordable and good food are key factors for good 

health and well-being. It‟s a sobering reality when many 

individuals and families are only one paycheque away from 

being on the streets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s getting harder for too many people to get by in 

this province. They are paying more and getting less, and this 

government continues to ignore this problem. This year we‟ve 

seen drastic cuts to employment and literacy programs and 

community-based organizations. We saw people losing their 

jobs, and front-line workers and social services were among the 

casualties of these government cuts. The only increase we see is 

the growing number of people receiving social assistance and 

the public housing waiting lists. 

 

The cycle of poverty must be stopped. And as we, the members 

of this legislature, turn our focus to family and the holiday 

season, I would ask that we don‟t forget those who are losing 

their voice in this province, those who feel the many effects of 

poverty including hunger, homelessness, disease, malnutrition, 

drug and alcohol abuse, gambling, and crime. We can and we 

must do better by these people. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Breast Friends Inspire 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the House we heard of a 

very special group of Saskatchewan women. Breast Friends 

from Foam Lake, Saskatchewan, is comprised of Patti Hack, 

Cecile Halyk, Linda Helgason, Darlene Cooper, Jeannie 

Johnson, Val Helgason, Anne Reynolds, Nat Dunlop, Charlene 

Rokochy, and Jacquie Klebeck. Mr. Speaker, I‟m proud to say 

that Jacquie Klebeck works here in our legislature in my 

ministerial office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday we heard how these women have 

self-published national bestselling cookbooks to raise funds for 

many cancer causes including $100,000 for our children‟s 

hospital. Well, Mr. Speaker, last night these women took their 

cause to a national television audience in a big way, appearing 

on a very special edition of Dragons’ Den, a CBC television 

show involving entrepreneurs pitching their ideas to the 

dragons in order to raise investment capital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the highlights of last night‟s show was 

when Patti Hack from Breast Friends told the dragons that the 

group was initially started to raise $3,000. When Patti Hack 

indicated they raised over $1 million to date, the look on the 

face of the dragons was priceless. Brett Wilson, one of the 

dragons, commented, well you surpassed the $3,000 and you 

forgot to stop. Well, Mr. Speaker, these women were inspired 

to act due to the loss of close friends and relatives. They have 

turned tragedy into triumph. Breast Friends made Dragons‟ Den 

history last night when all five dragons bought into their 

proposal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 10 women from Saskatchewan have inspired their 

province and their country, and for that we say thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

The Logic Box 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, let‟s review a few 

numbers, a few financial facts. This Sask Party government‟s 

spending has increased more than 35 per cent over just three 

years. Even at mid-year, with spending at all-time highs, this 

government is adding an additional $443 million in spending, 

proving another budgetary miscalculation. 

 

The result of this spending is two consecutive deficit budgets 

and a massive increase to public debt — $4.2 billion over the 

next four years, a shameful increase of 55 per cent. This 

number excludes the hundreds of millions of dollars of public 

debt hidden off balance sheet by this government. And of 

course this mismanagement comes at a cost to Saskatchewan 

families and communities now and into the future. 

 

But it is the holiday season — a season of giving, Mr. Speaker. 

So I have a gift for the Minister of Finance. It is from the 

citizens of southeast Saskatchewan who have asked me to gift it 

to the minister. The gift, Mr. Speaker, is called the logic box. I 

quote from its packaging: “Discover the beauty of math. 

Mentally invigorating. Get lucky with probability.” And most 

importantly: “Think sharp and be nimble with numbers.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish the Minister of Finance a Merry Christmas, 

and on behalf of some fine rural citizens from southeast 

Saskatchewan, I gift him the logic box. I will send it across the 

floor momentarily. May its teaching serve us all well in 2011. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I‟d just . . . Order. Order. Order. 

Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I must remind 

the member of the rules of the Assembly 46(g) about exhibits 

on members‟ desks and 50(p). And I ask the Page to pick up the 

gift and bring it to the Speaker‟s dais. 

 

Thank you. Next statement. I recognize the member from 

Yorkton. 

 

[10:30] 

 



6472 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2010 

Christmas Blessings  

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As this fall 

session comes to a close and we make our way back to our 

constituencies and homes, friends and families, it allows us to 

prepare for the approaching Christmas season and to reflect on 

the many blessings we enjoy in our province. We have come to 

be aware of the fact that by divine providence, Saskatchewan is 

blessed with a strong economy and resources of biblical 

proportions. And because of this, we enjoy one of the best 

qualities of life anywhere. 

 

However, we should keep in mind those in need and going 

without, not only during this time but throughout our year. As 

this Christmas season approaches, my hope and prayer is that 

even though we celebrate in our own individual ways, and the 

focus of Christmas tends to be on gifts, we still remember the 

essence of Christmas, the giving of the most important gifts we 

can give: the gifts of love, hope, and charity; and those we can 

receive: those of freedom, faith, family, and friends. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the most important gift ever received, the gift 

of the Christ child. As Isaiah foretold of the coming Messiah, 

the Lord himself will give you a sign. The Virgin will conceive 

a child. She will give birth to a son and will call him 

Emmanuel, which means God is with us. 

 

As the Christian community celebrates the birth of Jesus Christ 

and the year draws to a close, to everyone, especially our 

service members here and abroad, Merry Christmas and may 

you be blessed with a prosperous, safe, healthy, and Happy 

New Year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Gifts 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is 

the time of year when we remember the three kings who are 

famous for the gifts they brought: gold, frankincense, and 

myrrh. These gifts are celebrated today, Mr. Speaker, but things 

have changed a lot in 2,000 years. 

 

And in our province, we see the Sask Party government giving 

gifts to the public that are nothing to celebrate: coldness, 

arrogance, and indifference. We see the coldness, Mr. Speaker, 

in the government‟s decision to freeze any increase in minimum 

wage even as they reward their friends and donors with 

construction contract gold. We see the arrogance, Mr. Speaker, 

in this government‟s refusal to heed the will of the public on the 

release of private health information. The public has been 

incensed, Mr. Speaker, at this violation of their privacy, but the 

minister has stated frankly that he knows best and their personal 

information will be given away. We see the indifference, Mr. 

Speaker, on a range of files, from education funding to 

contracts from doctors or more appropriately, the lack of 

education funding and the lack of contracts for doctors. 

 

The murmurs of discontent are growing, Mr. Speaker, because 

the people aren‟t happy with what this government‟s been 

giving them. That‟s why it‟s beginning to look a lot like the 

people of Saskatchewan are hoping Christmas comes early next 

year when they give themselves the gift of a new government. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Contract Negotiations and Supply of Physicians 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a week ago the doctors in 

the Cypress Hills health region withdrew their service in an 

attempt to bring attention to the fact that they haven‟t had a 

contract for 19 months. Also that it‟s getting more and more 

difficult to attract and retain doctors in the province. The 

doctors are trying to make a statement to the government, and 

today they‟ve withdrawn their service in Five Hills Health 

Region, which includes Moose Jaw, Gravelbourg, and a number 

of other communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is, when will this 

government realize that their inaction when it comes to getting 

contracts for doctors and other health care workers is leading to 

a very difficult time in retaining and attracting doctors and 

health care workers to this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well obviously, 

Mr. Speaker, everybody in the province of Saskatchewan would 

like to see resolution to the contract talks. We‟re hopeful and 

optimistic that that‟s going to happen very, very soon, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And in the meantime, we continue to make progress in terms of 

attracting more doctors to the province, training more doctors 

here in Saskatchewan, training more residents in Saskatchewan. 

These were campaign promises that this party made, and in 

government we are keeping those promises, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There‟s now 6 per cent more physicians in rural Saskatchewan 

than there were in 2006. There are 8 per cent more physicians 

overall across the province of Saskatchewan. Eight hundred and 

thirty nurses, more nurses now practising. 

 

And the results are in, Mr. Speaker: the number of people 

waiting 12 months has been reduced by 25 per cent. The 

number of people who‟ve been waiting 18 months — far too 

long for surgery — it‟s down 50 per cent in just three years, and 

more progress to come, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier can brag about 

how great things are in the province as it relates to health care, 

but the fact of the matter is that the situation is grave in many 

areas. A 40 per cent increase in doctor vacancies in the 

province by their own analysis. That‟s their study. If you go to 

their website, you‟ll find that there‟s a 40 per cent increase in 

doctor vacancies. 

 

Waiting Your Turn report says that wait times have actually 

increased from 25.2 weeks to 26.5 weeks and that we have the 

lowest number of doctors per capita of any province in Canada, 

and that in fact 46 doctors last year left the province and only 



December 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6473 

23 came. These are the facts. 

 

How can the Premier be proud of that record as it relates to 

health care in the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well it‟s interesting, Mr. Speaker. We do 

now know in the province of Saskatchewan the number of 

vacancies in terms of doctor positions in the province. Do you 

know why we know that now? Because this government 

actually produces that information for the public. 

 

Those members in, those members in government, they refused 

to tell anybody anything about what was a chronic shortage of 

doctors. And while we were short doctors, they refused to train 

more at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan]. They refused 

to fund more residency positions, Mr. Speaker. They refused a 

physician recruitment strategy. 

 

Now in this province all of those things are being addressed — 

more training seats for doctors, more residency positions, Mr. 

Speaker, physician recruitment in Saskatchewan. Seventy-four 

per cent of Saskatchewan patients now have their surgery 

performed within three months because we are slowly dealing 

with the years of NDP [New Democratic Party] neglect of the 

need for front-line health care workers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Wait times are being reduced. More progress needs to be made. 

We believe the contract will be settled soon. And we hope the 

NDP understand that this problem, their problem, is now being 

dealt with on this side of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier makes the 

point, but the problem is the trained surgeons and doctors that 

we‟re training in this province are moving out of Saskatchewan 

to other provinces where they‟re respected. That‟s the problem. 

In fact the doctors, the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical 

Association] issued a press release yesterday in which they say, 

and I quote, “A timely contract resolution would demonstrate to 

physicians and patients that the government is serious about 

health care in Saskatchewan.” 

 

When will the Premier stand up and defend families‟s right to 

timely health care in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the member‟s question was 

about timely health care. When we took over from his party, 

Mr. Speaker, from his party in power for 16 years neglecting 

nurses, neglecting doctors . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 

they‟re asking, what have we done? We‟re going to get that. 

But when we took over, 2,878 people waited 18 months for 

surgery or longer, Mr. Speaker. What have we done? In . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — What have we done, Mr. Speaker? In three 

short years we‟ve cut that number in half, Mr. Speaker. That‟s 

what we‟ve done for timely health care in this province. What 

have we done? We‟re funding more doctor‟s training seats. 

We‟re funding more residency positions. We‟re recruiting more 

doctors, Mr. Speaker. There are 8 per cent more physicians 

practising today than there was in 2006. There is more work to 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Premier can complete his 

comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the College of Medicine is no 

longer under probation as it was when those members were in 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That‟s what we‟ve been doing. There‟s more work to be done, 

but in three short years we see significant progress. That‟s why 

more Saskatchewan people are satisfied with health care than 

any other province in the country. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Children in Care 

 

Mr. Forbes: — All right. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Day after day more concerns emerge about the state of the child 

protection system in our province, and day after day the 

minister refuses to act to address this very important crisis. 

 

First the Provincial Auditor said that the minister doesn‟t even 

know how many children are in her care or where they live. 

Then a former senior Social Services official raises serious 

concerns about the policies and procedures not being followed, 

and children are being put at risk. Now a family has come 

forward to state that three foster children were placed in their 

home without any background checks being done. 

 

My question is this: after all this, does the minister still deny 

there are massive problems in her ministry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the 

members and everyone in this province that we take child 

safety very, very seriously. The members opposite know that 

we can‟t speak directly to any cases because of confidentiality, 

but removing children from their homes is only done in 

emergency situations, Mr. Speaker. I‟m hoping that the 

members opposite hear me clearly when I say children are only 

removed when the level of risk and the immediacy of risk is 

unacceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the work that we are doing within our ministry is 

very, very important. That‟s why we engaged a panel of people 

who cared very much about children to look at the child welfare 

review system. And that will be released before Christmas. I‟m 

hoping the members opposite will be looking at those 

recommendations as well and realizing these issues didn‟t 

happen overnight. It‟s been years and years in the making, and 



6474 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2010 

we will be addressing the issue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well we are curious about how long the 

minister has had this report and how long she‟s been sitting on 

it. But we know three foster children were placed in a home that 

was under construction, and absolutely no background checks 

were done on the foster parents. And it‟s fine for the minister to 

say she takes this very seriously, but the problem is that she 

hasn‟t been taking any steps to ensure that proper policies that 

were designed to protect children are now being followed. 

 

To the minister: when can we expect action to address these 

serious problems will be addressed in her ministry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ve had the opportunity to 

speak to many people that work in this ministry in the last four 

months — people not only from Regina, but from Saskatoon 

and Prince Albert and Yorkton and The Battlefords — and they 

all talk about the system that they believe requires some 

change. And that‟s why our government in 2009 undertook to 

have a panel look at the whole system. This is the first time any 

jurisdiction has looked at not just part of the welfare system, 

but the entire child welfare system. 

 

The report interviewed 1,200 individuals. They interviewed not 

only people that are in the system, but people that work in the 

system. Everybody agrees that there‟s a need for change, and 

we are working on it. I‟ve had the report for about six weeks. It 

will be released before Christmas. When Alberta did their 

report, they had it for about six months. We‟re working quickly 

because we know something has to be done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we find it alarming that she 

sat on this report for six weeks. That‟s an outrage when we 

could be talking about it here. And they think it‟s funny. This is 

alarming. 

 

It‟s been a week of alarming news about the children not being 

protected, families being torn apart unjustly, and a minister 

incapable or unwilling to do anything about it. And yesterday 

she said, and I quote, “I don‟t want to be a parent to 4,800 

children.” So it‟s no wonder that Saskatchewan people have 

lost faith in this minister and in the Sask Party government 

when it comes to child protection in our province. 

 

To the Premier: after all this alarming news, will he finally 

agree that more oversight is needed in the child protection 

system? And will he agree today to establish a special all-party 

committee so that we can take the urgent steps to fix this 

system and better protect children? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

talked about six weeks being too long. How about 16 years of 

knowing that there was an issue, and there wasn‟t anything 

accomplished? 

 

Under the NDP they had 21 children in one foster home, Mr. 

Speaker. For 16 years their child welfare budget was at a 

standstill. We‟ve increased it by 106 per cent in three years. 

The NDP left a wait-list of 440 people with intellectual 

disabilities on a list. And did they address that issue? No they 

did not. We have addressed the issue. We‟ll have 70 per cent of 

those people off the list in two years. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve 

reduced the number of children living in homes with more than 

four children by a third. 

 

We‟ve increased budgets. We‟ve created over 150 residential 

spaces. We‟ve looked at the automatic tracking system, and 

we‟ve launched a new foster home database. Mr. Speaker, we 

know that there are issues there, and we are dealing with them 

because 4,800 children deserve to be able to call somebody 

mom that they know. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party promised in 2007 

election platform to stabilize greenhouse gas emissions by 2010 

and reduce them by 32 per cent by 2020. A promise made, a 

promise broken. 

 

This week leaders from around the world are in Cancun trying 

to reach a new agreement to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 

when the Kyoto accord expires in 2011. 

 

To the minister: will Saskatchewan use this opportunity to 

finally outline a plan for addressing the climate crisis, or will 

they continue to make future generations pay the price for their 

inaction? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to see, that 

after 25 days and roughly 307 questions, that that member has 

finally been upgraded from tersely worded member statements 

to a couple of questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that member will know that it was this 

government that put in place legislation that would provide for 

a framework to legislate, or to regulate the greenhouse gas 

emissions in this province, Mr. Speaker. That legislation has 

been passed. It was passed by this government. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of this province and the Ministry of 

Environment are working very hard to put in place a regulatory 

framework to put this plan into action, Mr. Speaker. Meetings 

have been held over a number of months to put in place the 

regulations that we would need in order to move forward on 

this file, Mr. Speaker. 

 



December 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6475 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, after 25 days here‟s a news 

flash for the members opposite. Government corruption . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Apparently they find this funny, Mr. 

Speaker, but government corruption always trumps government 

complacency, and that‟s where the questions are coming so far 

in the last 25 days, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, climate change is having a big impact here on the 

prairies. Farmers‟ incomes are taking a big hit due to the 

extreme weather, excess moisture in some areas and drought in 

others. So far this government has let Ottawa take the lead, 

going so far as to base their new lower targets on Ottawa‟s. But 

earlier this week Canada‟s environmental auditor — this is 

something they‟ll want to listen to — said that this country has 

no real plan to deal with climate change. 

 

To the minister: why is this government hitching its wagon to a 

horse, in this case the federal government, that‟s clearly going 

nowhere? Why are they making Saskatchewan farmers, 

families, and future generations pay the price for their inaction? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I‟d just remind the 

member to be mindful of the words and terms that would be 

used in speaking about members or individuals or government. 

Temper the comments. 

 

I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, if the member wants to 

talk about inaction, I think that she should probably start with 

the fact that emissions rose by 70 per cent under 16 years of 

NDP government. Talk about inaction on this file. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Management and Reduction of Greenhouses 

Gases Act was passed in this House, Mr. Speaker. Regulation, 

the consultation process on the regulations have been taking 

place over a number of months, Mr. Speaker. In fact I can tell 

the member opposite that nearly 200 people have taken part in 

eight plenary sessions over the last number of months. 

Twenty-five bilateral meetings have taken place with nearly 

100 individuals, Mr. Speaker. Several focus group sessions 

have taken place as we move forward in drafting these 

regulations, consulting with the people of Saskatchewan, 

including, Mr. Speaker, including the NDP candidate for 

Saskatoon Greystone. I hope they‟re not saying that that has 

been a waste of time because certainly Mr. Prebble has found it 

a worthwhile experience. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — The time wasted, Mr. Speaker, is they put in 

their document, in their election platform, promises to the 

people of Saskatchewan that the people of Saskatchewan voted 

for, and this government has done nothing on that file so far. 

 

There are no targets in legislation, none whatsoever. No legally 

binding commitment to reduce emissions. Instead we‟re 

supposed to take the Sask Party‟s word for it. Given that they 

have already broke their promises numerous times, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s just not good enough. If the Sask Party were 

serious about meeting its climate change commitments, if they 

were serious about protecting farm incomes in future 

generations, it would be prepared to make its greenhouse gas 

reduction targets legally binding. 

 

To the minister: will the government amend its greenhouse gas 

legislation to include binding greenhouse gas reduction targets, 

or are they leaving some room, wiggle room to break yet 

another promise? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, if the member was serious 

about this topic, maybe she would have waited before day 25 to 

actually raise it, Mr. Speaker, prior to the Christmas break, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The member talks about saying that the government has done 

nothing on this file, Mr. Speaker. It was this government, the 

Saskatchewan Party government, that brought forward 

legislation, something that wasn‟t done by the previous NDP 

government, Mr. Speaker. Sixteen years of inaction by that 

government that saw emissions rise by 70 per cent. 

 

We passed the legislation, Mr. Speaker. We are working on the 

regulations. If the member opposite believes that nothing has 

been taking place, I have a hard time explaining that to the 200 

people that have attended plenary sessions, Mr. Speaker, to the 

84 individuals that have attended the bilateral meetings, Mr. 

Speaker. Those individuals don‟t believe that they have been 

doing nothing on this. They are working with the Government 

of Saskatchewan, the Ministry of Environment, Mr. Speaker, 

after many, many years of inaction by that former government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Out-of-Province Medical Care 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over a month ago, we 

raised the issue of Christopher, a man who went out of the 

country to have a brain tumour removed because he couldn‟t 

get diagnosed in Saskatchewan. The Ombudsman 

recommended that Christopher‟s medical expenses should be 

covered by the province. At that time the minister said, and I 

quote: 

 

We are certainly taking a look at it because we think there 

are some issues there around the case that may need 

clarification. We‟re taking the Ombudsman‟s 

recommendations very, very seriously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: this case has been on his desk for 

over a month. The Ombudsman‟s report has been on his desk 

for over a month. Christopher has had the surgery. He‟s 

incurred the costs. Is the minister covering Christopher‟s 

out-of-country costs, yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m very aware of this 



6476 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2010 

case and the situation. In fact I had a meeting with the 

Ombudsman to hear his concerns with the way this case was 

handled through the Ministry of Health, Mr. Speaker. I‟ve 

certainly had the opportunity to talk to officials in the Ministry 

of Health and hear the reason why they had denied the coverage 

at that time. Mr. Speaker, taking that all into consideration, 

we‟ll be looking at this case. We haven‟t made a final decision 

on it, but it is working its way through the process, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But what I will say is, that‟s why it was so important for us, as 

of yesterday, to set up the health services review committee that 

will look at decisions that are made by government, made by 

the Ministry of Health. And if it is a denial for example, Mr. 

Speaker, before, citizens of our province had no recourse, no 

place to have a second opinion if it was a denial. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this committee will be up and running in the new 

year. Certainly they‟ve been looking at cases such as this one, 

Mr. Speaker, and making recommendations to government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m glad the minister 

brought up his health services review committee because it‟s 

just another hoop that patients have to jump through to get no 

answer. 

 

They‟re not going to get coverage because it‟s going to enforce 

the policies that are there. The minister has said that none of the 

rules around the coverage are going to change. So all this 

committee is going to do is make sure the current policy has 

been followed. There will be no exceptional circumstances 

received and no second look. 

 

To the minister: Christopher needed this surgery. He wasn‟t 

able to be diagnosed in Saskatchewan. The Ombudsman 

recommended that his expenses be paid. The minister‟s had the 

file for over the month to look at and look at and look at. This 

committee is retroactive . . . There‟s no retroactivity in this 

committee, so Christopher‟s not going to get any decision 

unless it‟s the minister‟s. Yes or no, Mr. Minister? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the oversight 

committee, the health services review committee is an arm‟s 

length away from government, Mr. Speaker, that will look at 

certain denials. But it‟s interesting, Mr. Speaker, when the 

member from Saskatoon Eastview in 2008 was asked about this 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I would ask the 

member to allow the minister to respond to the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview‟s question. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when the member 

opposite was asked about out-of-country travel a couple of 

years ago she said the policy was put in place so there would be 

medical oversight, so there wouldn‟t have political interference, 

so that who you got to know, Mr. Speaker, would not have any 

bearing on it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, two years ago she didn‟t want political 

interference, today she‟s asking for it, Mr. Speaker. She‟s all 

over the map. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, 16 years look in the mirror is no 

comfort to people who are coming to this legislature to get their 

issues dealt with. Christopher, Christopher needs an answer. 

He‟s had the surgery. He‟s incurred the cost. The minister has 

given him nothing except he‟s going to look at it. Well we‟ve 

seen what looking at it does with this minister. Nothing 

happens. Is Christopher going to get his money? Yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I said earlier that a final 

decision has not been made on this. I‟ve looked into it from 

both sides and will be moving through, Mr. Speaker, both sides 

— the Ministry of Health and what the Ombudsman had to say. 

And we‟ll be moving forward, Mr. Speaker, and just making a 

decision on this shortly. 

 

But the member opposite says that we‟ve done nothing, Mr. 

Speaker. In three years of this government we have done more 

than they did in 16 years. They looked at Avastin, and they 

couldn‟t make up their mind on Avastin, Mr. Speaker. They 

looked at the nurses‟ issue. Oh, we wouldn‟t want to set targets 

because we‟d never meet them, Mr. Speaker. They never 

looked at the position recruitment issue, Mr. Speaker. In fact 

under their government we saw the College of Medicine under 

probation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under this provincial government, Mr. Speaker, 

we‟re getting things done, and we‟ll continue to get things done 

many years into the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, a quick review. This minister has 

failed kidney transplant patients. He‟s failed to protect patient‟s 

privacy in this province. He‟s failed to negotiate with health 

providers, both doctors and other health providers like 

represented by Health Sciences. 

 

He‟s failed to provide rural health care. We‟ve been out there, 

seen there‟s no services, no doctors, no ambulance, no lab. He‟s 

failed to provide transparency in contracts like the Amicus deal. 

And he‟s failed people in exceptional circumstances. He‟s 

provided daily inadequate and inaccurate information to this 

House. Will the minister, Mr. Speaker, just admit he is a failure, 

he can‟t do his job, and resign? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to thank the Minister of Health 

because I‟m pretty sure he wanted to hit that ball over the fence, 



December 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6477 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I hope he has no intention of 

resigning, not any time soon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because under his leadership, under his leadership, we‟ve 

started to address the shortage of nurses in this province. Under 

his leadership, we‟re finally starting to train enough doctors in 

this province. Under his leadership, we‟re increasing the 

residency program for doctors. Oh, and we‟re actually 

expanding it to rural areas. Under his leadership, people waiting 

for surgery longer than 18 months has been cut in half in three 

years. Under his leadership, we have made the improvements to 

the out-of-province approval for those who seek health care, 

Mr. Speaker. And under the leadership of the Minister of 

Health, Saskatchewan people feel more satisfied with their 

health care system than any other place in the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know there‟s more work to be done on wait 

times. With respect to the doctor issue in this province, we‟re 

going to continue to do the work. And here‟s why I think we‟ll 

be successful — because of the member for Indian 

Head-Milestone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I‟d ask members to come to order. Order. I 

realize we‟re getting close to the end of session, but we have a 

bit of business we have to deal with yet. Order. 

 

[11:00] 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

SaskPower Demonstration Project 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

honoured to rise today for the first ministerial statement I‟ve 

made since assuming responsibility for SaskPower. I‟m 

delighted to draw attention to an exciting new SaskPower 

initiative, the demonstration project to explore the benefits of 

self-generated power projects at urban and rural municipal 

rinks. 

 

We all know how vitally important rinks are to the community 

life across our province. They are more than just recreational 

facilities. Rinks are where Saskatchewan children learn the 

value of teamwork and co-operation, of working together, quite 

literally, for a common goal. Rinks are where captains are 

made, where leadership is not taught so much as nurtured and 

seen. Rinks are where parents and grandparents cheer our 

children to the very best of their abilities. And rinks are 

gathering places, where on any given weekend you can find 

friends, and family, and neighbours. 

 

Running these rinks, we know, isn‟t easy. They take an 

enormous amount of time, mostly volunteer time, to operate. 

They also take a fair amount of money. Keeping the ice in good 

condition for skating, for hockey, or curling can be costly. 

 

That‟s why we want to see if we can help offset the power bills 

that rinks face. Under this demonstration project SaskPower 

will install wind turbines at two community rinks. Those 

turbines and the rinks will be monitored and evaluated to see 

how well this program works. 

 

Wind resources in Saskatchewan are usually at their greatest 

during the late fall and winter months when the demand for rink 

operations reaches its highest mark. Rinks could benefit from 

self-generating electricity during the operating season or other 

high-use times and receive credit for excess power during 

periods of reduced demand in the offseason. 

 

We‟re inviting all interested communities to apply by mailing 

or faxing in their expressions of interest. And they can also do 

so online at www.saskpower.com. The deadline for applications 

if January 14th, 2011. 

 

SaskPower estimates that the cost of this wind turbine 

demonstration project will be about $1.6 million. To qualify, 

the rink needs to be within the good energy area or a high 

energy area. There‟s a map online that shows which 

communities fall within these zones. The rink must also have an 

artificial ice surface, must use more electricity in the year than 

the selected wind turbine will generate, and must have a useful 

remaining life of five years or more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I conclude, I want to take a moment to 

offer my sincere thanks to the MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] for Last Mountain-Touchwood for his leadership 

and dedication and hard work in helping with this important file 

for our government. Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I 

offer my thanks. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

want to say thanks right off the top to the minister for providing 

me an advance copy of the remarks to better inform my 

comments and response. This is a good announcement and 

certainly it‟s I‟m sure one that will be quite useful in terms of 

the communities that are able to take this on. 

 

It‟s a demonstration project, Mr. Speaker. And I guess one of 

the questions that we have in the opposition is that the projects 

are expected to be up and operational in the summer of 2011, 

and there‟s a three- to five-year monitoring period attached to 

that. So in terms of being a demonstration project and then 

being available for uptake across the rest of the province or 

through the high energy or good energy areas, three to five 

years would seem to be a fair amount of time for others that 

don‟t get accepted in this first round for the two community 

projects. 

 

So we‟d like to see if there isn‟t a way to perhaps truncate that 

period of time to make it . . . We suspect this will be a very 

popular and successful project. And is there a way to get this 

out the door faster and further, is something that we‟ll be 

watching very closely, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I guess another question I‟d have is, will this be available to 

First Nations communities? And certainly we had Arthur 

Anderson here today from George Gordon‟s. George Gordon‟s 

of course has had a larger proposal around wind power, 



6478 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2010 

something which the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood 

is also well aware of. That project to date has not met with the 

kind of co-operation that I believe Gordon‟s was hoping for 

from this government. 

 

So in terms of the broader question of engagement with First 

Nations on wind power, that‟s one thing that we‟re watching 

very closely. But in particular as it relates to this program, will 

First Nations be able to apply to this program? So we‟d urge the 

minister to make that clear in the information surrounding this. 

 

Again this is a good project. But it‟s, in the grand scheme of 

things, not to make light of $1.6 million of expenditure, but 

there‟s a great interest in wind power across the province. And 

certainly I can think of the rinks at Balcarres or Southey or 

Strasbourg — you know, while we‟re fixated on Last 

Mountain-Touchwood here, Mr. Speaker, you know — three 

rinks that are very much the pride of those communities and 

three rinks that have been very well supported by the 

communities over the years. Those would be three rinks that I 

think would be interested in this right off the bat. 

 

So again two demonstration projects with a three- to five-year 

monitoring process attached to it. We think that this is possibly 

something that should be going a lot further and a lot faster. So 

again we‟ll be watching on that. 

 

We‟re also interested to see how this complements or works in 

concert with the uptake around the municipal rink program in 

terms of retrofitting and making the cost more affordable for 

local communities. And again as the minister has talked about 

in his remarks, rinks are very much the heart of the community. 

You know, be it . . . I can think of my own neighbourhood, the 

different sort of hearts that beat and that are well attended 

throughout the season. And certainly I know that‟s true again 

for places like Strasbourg or Southey or Balcarres or throughout 

the province. So if the municipal rink program just has the 

uptake that we think it should, that‟s one thing. But we‟re 

interested to see how this goes in concert. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, in the opposition, we think this is a 

good step. We‟d like to see it be a larger step but we‟ll be 

watching closely to see how this works out. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 618 — The Municipal and Public Employees’ 

Pension Plans (Amendment) Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 618, The 

Municipal and Public Employees’ Pension Plans (Amendment) 

Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 

has moved first reading of Bill No. 618, The Municipal and 

Public Employees’ Pension Plans (Amendment) Act be now 

read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the member from Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: — I remind the member . . . Why is the member 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Forbes: — To seek leave under rule 59 to move a motion 

of urgent and pressing . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I‟ll ask the member to hold that. We have His 

Honour here for Royal Assent, and we‟ll do that after. 

 

I remind members that His Honour is here for Royal Assent. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

[At 11:09 His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills.] 

 

His Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly in its present session has passed several Bills which 

in the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 

which Bills I respectfully request Your Honour‟s assent. 

 

Clerk: — Your Honour, the Bills are as follows: 

 

Bill No. 905 - The Sisters of the Presentation Act, 2010 

Bill No. 152 - The Commissioners for Oaths Amendment Act, 

2010 

Bill No. 151 - The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies Amendment Act, 2010 

Bill No. 158 - The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 

2010 

Bill No. 148 - The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 2010 

Bill No. 156 - The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act, 

2010 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty‟s name, I assent to these Bills. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 

government to defray the expenses of the public service. 

 

In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 

 

Bill No. 163 - The Appropriation Act, 2010 (No. 2) 

 

to which I respectfully request Your Honour‟s assent. 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty‟s name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 



December 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6479 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 11:12.] 

 

The Speaker: — Please be seated. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I have a statement in 

response to the point of order that was raised yesterday, and I‟d 

like to share it right now. 

 

I‟m prepared to rule on the point of order raised yesterday by 

the Opposition House Leader with regards to the ministerial 

statement given by the Minister Responsible for the Status of 

Women. 

 

First I would like to remind members of previous rulings 

relating to clarifying acceptable ministerial statements on 

March 24th, 2010; March 17th, 2009; April 23rd, 2008; April 

15th, 2008; and December 19th, 2007. Members will appreciate 

the difficulty faced by the Speaker in determining the 

appropriateness of a ministerial statement as it is being 

delivered. Often it is only once a statement is well under way, 

or has been announced, that the Speaker may be able to discern 

whether the statement is in order. 

 

The Speaker does not monitor government announcements and 

does not always know if a statement relates to something 

previously announced or the timing of announcements. 

Compounding my difficulty in making an immediate ruling is 

the need to ensure fairness to the opposition by affording an 

equal opportunity to respond to the statement. 

 

In previous rulings, Speakers have . . . And the information put 

forward by both House leaders . . . I wish to clarify for the 

guidance of members the acceptable guidelines for ministerial 

statements. Several rulings have outlined that ministerial 

statements should not comment on matters that have been 

previously announced, must refer to a new government 

direction, policy, or program, and must be made at the earliest 

opportunity. 

 

I find that the ministerial statement provided by the Minister 

Responsible for the Status of Women relating to women 

building a Habitat for Humanity program in Regina contained 

information that was announced by the government earlier in 

the day. As outlined in my ruling on March 24, 2010, a new 

announcement is one that is made in the Assembly at the 

earliest opportunity. In this situation, the minister made a new 

announcement earlier in the day. It is not unreasonable for the 

minister to make a new announcement in the morning and later 

the same day make a ministerial statement in the Assembly. 

Therefore I find the point of order not well taken. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

[11:15] 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 

Children in Care 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I seek 

leave under rule 59 to move a motion of urgent and pressing 

necessity in light of the findings of the Provincial Auditor late 

last week, the revelations brought forward by a former senior 

Social Services official, and the news yesterday that children 

are being placed in foster homes without background checks 

and without proper approvals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to move a motion that will propose the 

establishment of a special all-party committee to examine this 

important issue, and I‟ll briefly read the text of that motion 

now. The motion: 

 

That this Assembly immediately establish a special 

all-party committee to consider the Pringle report and to 

review the situation of children in care in Saskatchewan 

and to make recommendations to the Legislative 

Assembly; and 

 

That that committee have the power to sit during the 

intersessional period; and 

 

That the committee have the power to send for persons, 

papers, and records, to examine witnesses under oath, to 

receive representations from interested parties and 

individuals, to engage such advisers and assistants as are 

required for the purposes of the inquiry, and to hold 

meetings away from the seat of government in order that 

the fullest representations may be received without 

unduly inconveniencing those who desire to be heard; and 

 

That the committee be instructed to submit its report to 

the Legislative Assembly on March 7th, 2011, on the first 

day of the spring period of the fourth session of the 

twenty-sixth Legislative Assembly. 

 

I ask that leave. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre, under 

rule 59, has asked for leave to move a motion of pressing and 

urgent debate. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has not been granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 635 through 645. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers to questions 635 through 645 have 

been tabled. I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 646 through 649. 

 



6480 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2010 

The Speaker: — Questions 646 through 649 are tabled. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 650 through 657. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 650 through 657 . . . Pardon me, 

was that tabled? 

 

Mr. Weekes: — No, answered. 

 

The Speaker: — Answered. Okay. I believe earlier I should 

have said ordered. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Health Care Wait Times  

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

stand in the Assembly and speak to the 75-minute debate. I will 

be moving this motion at the end of my remarks:  

 

That this Assembly recognize the efforts of the 

Government of Saskatchewan in reducing wait times 

through publicly funded health care in collaboration with 

Surgicentre and Omni medical centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after assuming government in 2007, quite frankly 

our government was left with a crisis in medicare left over by 

16 years of NDP rule. We inherited the longest waiting lists in 

the nation at 27.2 weeks. Saskatchewan had in 2007 the longest 

waits between specialists and treatment in Canada at 16.5 

weeks. And as I said, quite frankly medicare was in a crisis 

because of the NDP‟s mismanagement and underfunding of 

medicare. 

 

It‟s quite amazing, Mr. Speaker, that through the NDP‟s 16 

years that they closed 52 rural hospitals. Actually it‟s incredible 

to see that the College of Medicine had nearly lost its 

accreditation under the NDP. Can you imagine a government 

allowing something like that to happen? It was an 

embarrassment to our health professionals and to our university 

in Saskatchewan to have something like that nearly happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know we, in opposition, we would ask 

questions about wait times and we‟d ask about what . . . You 

know, obviously we needed more health care professionals, 

doctors in rural Saskatchewan and urban Saskatchewan. We 

needed obviously a lot more nurses and health care 

professionals. And when we asked the member from North 

Battleford when he was the Minister of Health, well they didn‟t 

believe in setting targets for increasing the number of nurses 

and health care professionals because, well the comment was, 

what if they didn‟t meet them? Well, Mr. Speaker, certainly our 

government has set targets, and we have met and exceeded 

those targets, Mr. Speaker. Our target was to have 800 more 

nurses, and we now have 830 more registered nurses in this 

province.  

 

Contrast that terrible scenario that the NDP government left the 

new Saskatchewan Party government in 2007 to what we have 

done in government, Mr. Speaker. Since our government took 

office, the number of people waiting 18 months for surgery has 

been cut nearly in half from 2,878 to 1,446. The number of 

people waiting 12 months has been reduced by nearly 25 per 

cent, from 5,425 to 4,152. The number of people waiting six 

months has been cut by nearly 14 per cent, from 11,347 to 

9,795. And the source of the rest of the information came from 

the Saskatchewan surgical patient registry, September 30th, 

2010 compared to September 30th, 2007. Seventy-four per cent 

of Saskatchewan patients now have the surgery performed 

within three months, and our government‟s goal is to have 100 

per cent of surgeries done within 3 per cent by 2014. 

 

We‟re making great progress, Mr. Speaker, but, you know, 

we‟re not done yet. Obviously having any waiting times in our 

surgical procedures is not right. We‟re going to continue to 

reduce those numbers and improve our health care and our 

medical system in this province. Mr. Speaker, our government 

has committed to improving surgical services for all residents. 

We know that some patients wait too long for surgery, and 

we‟re taking action to address those concerns. Our Patient First 

Review report clearly identified surgical wait times as a major 

priority for Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Through the Saskatchewan Surgical Initiative, we are working 

to improve patients‟ access to surgery and diagnostic 

procedures. We want to improve the surgical care experience 

by patients and ensure that within four years no one in the 

province has to wait longer than three months for surgery. And 

obviously the answer, part of the answer is, to reducing those 

surgical wait times, is to have a third party delivery of selected 

day surgeries that we all know has been introduced to improve 

the access. Regina‟s Omni Surgery Centre and Saskatoon‟s 

Surgicentre Inc. are providing procedures within the health care 

system. This innovative initiative will help us serve patients 

more quickly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have to speak from a personal point of view 

about wait times and surgeries. My wife has now had both her 

knee replacement operations done. In July of 2008, she was put 

on a waiting list, and even in 2008, in eight months she was 

able to have the first knee replacement operation. Six months 

after that, in August of 2009, she had her second. And from a 

personal point of view, I know the kind of, you know, suffering 

that she went through. Because her issues with the knees didn‟t 

develop overnight. They progressed or became worse over, 

really, a decade. And her quality of life wasn‟t very good at all 

in the last few years — terrible pain, taking enormous amounts 

of drugs, and having to deal with not only the pain, the side 

effects of drugs. 

 

But she‟s a wife and a mother, and she works as an EA 

[educational assistant] in Biggar. And it was very difficult for 

her to cope. Now just think if she had to wait two years longer 

than what she did. She only waited eight months to get the 

procedures done. What if she had to wait another two years 

before she got in? That would be, you know, it really would 

take a tremendous physical toll on her and really add to her 

suffering that she had to endure for many years. 

 

We see people in communities that . . . There‟s another lady, 

Cathy, in our church that now has gone through the pre-op 

sessions, the education sessions at the Saskatoon City Hospital. 



December 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6481 

And she expects to have her surgery done in a matter of a few 

months. And I‟m sure with the improvements that we‟ve made 

that she will have completed her knee replacement operations 

as well. 

 

Because it‟s just not a matter of dollars and cents. It‟s just not a 

matter of statistics that we look at wait times. It‟s a matter of 

the quality of life and the suffering that people are put through 

waiting to have surgeries done. And under 16 years of NDP 

government, these wait times became worse. They became so 

bad that so many people were going out of the province, 

spending their own money to have surgery done. I know this 

fellow in Biggar did that. He went to California to have his 

knee replacement operation at his own expense. He was 

fortunate enough to have the money that he could do that, but 

not everybody does. 

 

I know the NDP talk about two-tier systems, and they always 

bring up the mediscare every election. They talk about 

mediscare, what‟s going to happen if they‟re not in power to 

protect medicare in the province. And, Mr. Speaker, under their 

rule, there was a two-tier system. If you had money, you went 

to United States to have your operations or you went to Alberta 

or British Columbia to a third party clinic to have your 

operations at your own expense. 

 

And it‟s interesting to know when we debate these issues, under 

Workers‟ Compensation, under the NDP and today, Workers‟ 

Comp sends their patients out of province or wherever they can 

get their operations done the fastest. Why? Well first of all it is 

an economical thing to do to get these patients operated on and 

up through rehab and working so they can go on with their lives 

and work. So it‟s a savings to Workers‟ Comp and SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] to have their patients 

looked after quickly and promptly. But look at the lessening of 

the human suffering of these patients when they can get timely 

surgeries out of province or wherever they can get the 

procedures done. 

 

So it‟s, Mr. Speaker, it‟s been a long uphill battle to get these 

surgical wait times down, but we are certainly doing some very 

good work. The Minister of Health, as the opposition was told 

in question period, has done outstanding work to get the 

surgical wait times down. 

 

Talk about lack of doctors. Under the Saskatchewan Party 

government, there‟s 6 per cent more rural doctors practising in 

this province, 8 per cent overall. That‟s a huge improvement to 

what the NDP has done in the past. 

 

And I already talked about targets of 800 new registered nurses 

in the province, and we‟ve exceeded that by 830.  

 

Talk about opening up training seats in the province, training 

more doctors, more residencies being trained in the province. 

We have some residents working in Swift Current at that 

hospital on a pilot project to increase the number of potential 

doctors that will stay in the province and work and live in our 

communities and to improve our health care. We‟ve come a 

long way, and we certainly intend on continuing to reduce the 

surgical waiting list. 

 

There‟s a number of other things, Mr. Speaker, that we have 

done in health care since coming into government in 2007. 

We‟ve committed 3.5 million for physician recruitment strategy 

and the establishment of the physician recruitment agency 

which will address the shortage of physicians in the 

communities. And we can see that it‟s working. We‟ve got 6 

per cent more doctors practising in rural Saskatchewan and 8 

per cent more overall in the province as I mentioned. 

 

Also 300 registered nurse education seats have been created to 

train Saskatchewan nurses. And if we train our own people in 

Saskatchewan, they‟re more likely — nurses and doctors and 

all health care professionals — they‟re more likely to stay in the 

province and work rather than leave. And we have gone from 

the worst nurse retention rates in Canada, a few years back, to 

the best retention rate in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‟ve provided $200 million for the construction of the 

children‟s hospital in Saskatoon. That was something that was 

long sought, long needed in the province. And under the 

Saskatchewan Party government and our Minister of Health, 

this has been accomplished. 

 

[11:30] 

 

We have announced $143 million for 13 new long-term care 

facilities to replace 13 outdated facilities in the province, and 

one of those will be built in my hometown of Biggar. That will 

create more than 540 long-term care residents that will benefit 

from this investment. A hundred million dollars in the 

2008-2009 budget was provided to regions to address urgent 

health facility maintenance and repair requirements. This was a 

record amount of funding provided for one fiscal year. 

 

Six point five million dollars in capital funding and 1.1 million 

in annual operating funding to the Regina Qu‟Appelle Health 

Region to support the development of a 45-bed integrated brief 

and social detoxification facility in Regina. More good news, 

Mr. Speaker: $3.8 million operating funding increase for the 

Irene and Les Dubé facility for the mental health facility, and 

the new building houses 54 beds for adults plus 10 beds in a 

separate section for children and youth, including a dedicated 

adolescent unit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I was saying, there‟s many improvements going on in the 

health care system in Saskatchewan since the Saskatchewan 

Party achieved government. And we only need to look at the 

polls that are being done that fully 50 per cent of the people of 

Saskatchewan are finding good results in our health care 

facilities. And it‟s interesting, 50 per cent you might not think 

is good, but that‟s the highest polling numbers in Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we‟re not content to stay just with 50 per 

cent. We‟re hoping to have much higher numbers than that in 

the future as we proceed along to improve the surgical wait 

times and other areas that we‟ve had to deal with since 

assuming government. And if we have more doctors and more 

health care professionals, Mr. Speaker, our health care system 

will improve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to read that motion and make that 

motion: 

 

That this Assembly recognize the efforts of the 



6482 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2010 

Government of Saskatchewan in reducing wait times 

through publicly funded health care in collaboration with 

the Surgicentre and Omni medical centres. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Biggar has moved a 

motion. Will the members take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s kind 

of interesting, this whole debate, but really when it gets right 

down to it, it‟s not rocket science. The member opposite in his 

closing comments said if we have more doctors and health care 

professionals, our health system will improve. That really 

wraps it up, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s what we really need to aim 

for, is providing not only more doctors and more health care 

professionals but also facilities for them to work in. 

 

The member opposite also began his comments talking about 

what they had inherited from the NDP, well previous NDP 

government. And, Mr. Speaker, there is a couple of things that 

he forgot. One of the things that they did inherit was the 

immigration and recruitment program for nurses which was 

begun by my colleague, the member from Nutana who was then 

the minister responsible for Immigration. Her and a group of 

health professionals and representatives from the Department of 

Health had been to the Philippines, had signed the initial 

agreements to get the program off the ground. So the member 

opposite forgot to mention that they also inherited that. 

 

They also inherited, Mr. Speaker, $33 million that in the ‟06-07 

year was dedicated and committed to two surgical care centres, 

one in the city of Regina and one in the city of Saskatoon. 

Planning had begun. There was a fair bit of it done for the 

centre here in Regina. And the whole idea, Mr. Speaker, was 

that day surgeries would be done in surgical care centres which 

would alleviate the stress on the surgical theatres in hospitals. 

The day surgeries could be done in the surgery centres; the 

more complicated cases that required longer term care for those 

patients in recovery could be done in surgical theatres within 

the more traditional hospital setting. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when this government was elected, they 

conveniently ignored the planning that had been going on for 

the surgical care centres owned by the province of 

Saskatchewan, run and managed by the Department of Health 

at the time. They ignored the planning that had gone on. They 

in fact disbanded the team that had been assembled to do the 

planning. While this team waited to see what was going to 

happen with their planning, they were left in limbo and were 

finally disbanded, Mr. Speaker, and the whole idea for surgical 

care centres just kind of disappeared. There was no talk of it by 

this government. There was no talk of that by the Minister of 

Health, and that whole idea just lingered out in never-never 

land and was never moved on or maintained by this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then we went through their first budget where it 

was again ignored. The $33 million that had been dedicated to 

the surgical care centres was spent elsewhere, utilized in other 

ways. And then we came to a point where they again 

announced surgical care centres to be initiated in Saskatoon and 

Regina. But, Mr. Speaker, that was the absolutely disastrous 

year where we‟d seen what had been an anomaly with the 

income to the province and revenues to the province from 

potash had just skyrocketed. And this government expected that 

those never-ending dollars were just going to continue on into 

the future, and they built their budget accordingly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know that even though the kind of 

worldwide recession was taking hold, we were seeing 

everything begin to slow down in other places in the world, this 

government just ignored that, said no, we‟re going to get $2 

billion out of potash. And they initiated a budget that even 

though the revenues weren‟t accounted for — on paper, but not 

actual revenues — they continued to spend that money, and 

mid-term we hit another brick wall when we‟d seen the lack of 

resources. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we‟d seen then was again reductions in 

spending. The minister pulled back funding to a number of 

initiatives. Long-term care centres, surgical care centres again 

just disappeared off the map. We never heard anything more 

about them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, after question period today when the Minister 

of Health . . . He has someone reviewing this. He‟s putting in 

place a committee to make decisions on something else. You 

know, he needs to look at his door when he walks into his 

office. It says, Minister of Health. When we are introduced as 

the minister in this House, Mr. Speaker, when you introduce 

people . . . you may introduce the Minister of Health or the 

Minister Responsible for Health. And that‟s the fact. Mr. 

Speaker, as ministers we are responsible. The buck stops at our 

desk. 

 

And these decisions do land in our lap because we have the 

final say and final input on them, Mr. Speaker. So even though 

this $33 million that was intended for provincial surgical care 

centres was spent elsewhere, it has flip-flopped back and forth 

between going ahead, not going ahead, going ahead, just 

disappearing off the map, to where we get to a point now where 

the government made the decision to move ahead and use 

private surgical care centres for these simpler day surgeries. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the government‟s own data 

on the Saskatchewan surgical initiative document, we can see 

quite clearly that over the past four years the number of people 

waiting for more than 12 months for surgery has dropped by 51 

per cent. So, Mr. Speaker, all you have to do is look at that, 

look at the number of programs that have been initiated over the 

past number of years that set the stage for better service, better 

utilization of resources — which could be the operating theatres 

themselves but also the important resource of our medical 

professionals, doctors and the teams that are in place — to 

utilize these facilities. We have seen a substantial drop in wait 

times right across the province. And clearly the number of 

people waiting for more than six months has dropped by 27 per 

cent over this period of time. 

 

Now the members opposite say here, well you know you need 

to do something to be able to take credit for it, and we haven‟t 

really seen anything being done on that side of the House. Mr. 



December 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6483 

Speaker, obviously more can be done and should be done 

within the public health care system. And the government‟s 

claim that the public system is really running at full force and 

there is absolutely no capacity, is simply not true. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can talk to people that currently work in this 

system. They can always point out areas of efficiencies, areas 

where we could be utilizing resources better. And yes, there is a 

need for an investment. But, Mr. Speaker, think of the money 

that is going to these private surgical care centres. Why would 

not that money be invested into our health system to build and 

maintain long-term assets and services that could be utilized by 

the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Speaker, and to say that these surgical care private centres 

are only being used to reduce wait times, then what happens? 

Do we just drop the service, Mr. Speaker? I think everyone 

realizes that once these services are there, it‟s very difficult to 

switch and invest that money back in the public sector. And 

that‟s why we‟re seeing a huge push back on this whole idea of 

privatizing Saskatchewan‟s health care system and making 

some fairly big inroads into it that we have seen from this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why was not the investment made in the surgical 

care centre or ambulatory surgery centre for the Regina 

Qu‟Appelle health district? Well, the first time this government 

announced it, it was $3 million in funding for this new surgery 

centre for the Regina Qu‟Appelle health region. And while it 

was cut and it was rather short-sighted and not a lot of vision on 

behalf of this Minister of Health, now they‟re spending 5.5 

million on a contract with a private, for-profit company. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question is still there. Why would you 

not invest this in provincial services? Mr. Speaker, we can look 

at the changes that have happened over the years, but there is 

capacity within the public sector within our system that we 

cherish here in the province of Saskatchewan. And the 

government needs to quit making purely ideological changes to 

it and really address the needs within the system to adequately 

fund it. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, this government‟s latest in a long line of health care 

improvements was the Patient First Review. In the Patient First 

Review, Mr. Dagnone made a profound statement. He said 

residents are “. . . proud of this province‟s health care heritage, 

but they want to see the „care‟ restored to „Medicare‟.” The 

Patient First Review included young and old, rural and urban, 

rich and poor, with special emphasis on including First Nations 

and Métis voices. 

 

Over 4,000 Saskatchewan residents shared their experiences 

and ideas and opinions. From this research, problems, possible 

causes and solutions, as well as recommendations were 

identified. Three themes emerged as guiding principles for the 

report. Patient First must be embedded as a core value in health 

care. Health care in Saskatchewan needs to function as a 

cohesive system, and front-line providers must be empowered 

to deliver patient and family-centred care. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is through the implementation of these 

and other recommendations of Mr. Dagnone and his team that 

our government has resuscitated a health care system that‟s 

been neglected for 16 years by the former government. 

 

There are many differences between the governments of past 

and the Saskatchewan Party government. First of all, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I‟ll speak to the MS liberation trials. Our 

government is following through on our commitment and is 

investing $5 million to fund clinical trials on multiple sclerosis. 

Ours is the first province to move forward, initiating clinical 

trials of liberation procedure. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Liberation procedure is a potentially groundbreaking discovery 

for treatment of MS [multiple sclerosis]. We are aware that it‟s 

still in the trial stages and is not yet proven as a scientifically 

valid therapy, but this funding will help determine its validity 

as a treatment. And this research is extremely important to the 

people of Saskatchewan, and our government is moving 

forward in searching for a cure for this deadly disease. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the surgery piece, if I for a moment 

just speak about the Saskatchewan surgical care initiative, this 

is another way to put patients first. It‟s supporting our efforts to 

reduce surgical wait times. Too many patients in Saskatchewan 

have waited too long for surgeries and diagnoses and our 

government is looking to fix that through an ambitious plan to 

improve surgical care in Saskatchewan. One of the innovative 

strategies contained in the plan is the use of third party 

outpatient surgery and specialized diagnoses. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan patients will pay no fee. 

They will be booked through the health region and will not be 

able to jump the queue. Third party strategies for surgeries and 

diagnostic tests will be performed through the publicly funded 

and publicly administered system. Services will only be 

contracted to third party facilities if they are at or below the 

RHA [regional health authority] cost and can meet all the 

quality and safety requirements. 

 

Contracting outpatient surgical and CT [computerized 

tomography] services will not result in any loss of employment 

for any employees. Moreover, Mr. Speaker, it‟s expected that 

increases in capacity within the health region as part of the 

four-year surgical plan will result in added employment in the 

public system. 

 

The previous government was well aware of the continuous 

increasing surgical backlog which in turn created longer 

waiting lists, yet they did nothing. Our Saskatchewan Party 

government heard the people and they‟re satisfied with the 

quality of the health care system. They are unhappy with the 

wait times for surgeries, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We heard what 

the people were saying and moving forward to alleviate those 

concerns. The Patient First Review is going to allow us to take 

the appropriate steps going forward. These steps will ensure 

that the people of Saskatchewan are receiving the highest 

possible health care. 

 

Another difference between the previous government and our 

Saskatchewan Party government is doctor recruitment. While 



6484 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2010 

the former government failed to form a plan to recruit more 

doctors, this government has implemented an aggressive 

physician recruitment strategy. Our strategy will increase the 

number of physicians working in the province. The strategy 

will include a new and improved assessment for foreign-trained 

doctors. The assessment will ensure physicians are screened 

with sufficient rigour to ensure patients receive safe, 

high-quality care while meeting the needs of communities and 

health regions in more efficiently recruiting international 

medical graduates. This will be another big step forward for 

physician recruitment and retention, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Our government will remove the barriers that previously 

existed based on international medical graduate country of 

training. Other benefits of this new assessment process will 

include the orientation of the Canadian practice environment 

IMGs [international medical graduate] will receive prior to 

assessment. This will assist IMGs‟ assessment in the province 

and increase their chances of success. 

 

Another benefit will be the elimination of the current group 

practice requirement. This will mean that IMGs can go directly 

into their community to which they were recruited to practise 

independently once they have passed their assessment. 

 

There will be a larger volume of IMG graduates that could be 

assessed throughout the year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This new 

assessment process will closely align Saskatchewan with 

national licence standards currently under development, 

allowing for full labour mobility between provinces. Along 

with increased physicians comes an enhanced access to health 

care for all the people of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the issue of efficiency, our government also 

strives for further efficiencies within the health system. 

Saskatchewan health regions are finding significant financial 

efficiencies by reducing overtime and sick time. In the first six 

months of 2010-11 fiscal year, the number of hours worked at 

premium rates per full-time employee is down 20 per cent in 

the same period a year before. This is a saving of $8 million, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Health regions and the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency are doing 

a good job of reducing overtime which is at considerable cost to 

the system. The introduction of the primary health care 

information technologies solutions at West Winds Primary 

Health Centre means improvement to patient care, more 

efficiencies, and better decision making at the point of care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this technology will improve patient care by 

allowing the health care professionals at West Winds to assess 

their patients‟ records electronically. The doctors and nurses 

that care for patients will now have access to the files to see 

what procedures and tests they have had or may need, and will 

result in better overall health care for their patients. Our 

government is working with all our health care partners to make 

the change needed to strengthen and sustain our health system 

into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to read some excerpts from an article in 

the Saskatoon StarPhoenix. The article is titled “Surgicentre 

serves 100. Health region keeps cutting wait times.” 

 

During its first two months of performing surgery cases 

for the public system, the Saskatoon Surgicentre has seen 

more than 100 patients. 

 

In an agreement with the Saskatoon Health Region, the 

Surgicentre is performing three specific surgery 

procedures two days each week . . . 

 

The Surgicentre performed 50 such surgeries in October 

and 61 in November and expects to do between 60 and 65 

each month going into the future. 

 

That subsequently frees up space in hospital operating 

rooms . . . [and as] Jenny Bartsch, director of surgery 

services with the Saskatoon Health Region [has 

indicated]. 

 

“Even though they are . . . doing cases that are having 

excessively long wait times, it provides us with the 

opportunity to do those (other) procedures in hospital, so 

it gives us additional capacity . . . [within the system]. 

 

The health region is continuing to reduce wait times from 

last year, according to the most recent surgical data from 

Sept. 30. It‟s made progress in reducing wait [times] for 

hip/knee replacements, recording a 50 per cent drop from 

12 months ago in people who have wait times more than 

six months, and a 60 per cent drop in those waiting more 

than one year. 

 

Saskatoon was the first health region to implement a new 

clinical pathway for hip and knee surgery patients, which 

streamlines the patient‟s movement through the system 

from pre-operative to post-operative stages. 

 

The region has seen such success with the hip and knee 

surgeries that those procedures no longer have the longest 

wait times. 

 

. . . During the first six months of this fiscal year . . . a 

total of 16,278 surgical procedures have been performed 

in the region. 

 

The increased capacity in the region due to the agreement 

with the Surgicentre means the region is expecting to see 

more procedures in the second half of the year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know the job isn‟t complete, but our 

government is moving forward in the right direction. There 

seems to be a common theme, Mr. Speaker. The former 

government was very good at closing hospitals and creating 

huge infrastructure deficits within the health care system. 

However our Saskatchewan Party government believes in 

building hospitals, investing in future infrastructure, addressing 

long-term care issues for seniors, and most importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, putting all patients first. Mr. Speaker, we put the care 

back in the medicare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ll be supporting the motion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 



December 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6485 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m happy to rise 

today and enter into this debate. I think my remarks are going to 

start with what‟s the current situation in the province right now 

and is that the doctors are out in Moose Jaw. This is certainly a 

damning reflection on this government‟s initiatives. 

 

They can talk about all the new seats they put in the medical 

college, but if they can‟t keep the doctors who are here — 

either residents or interns or practising physicians — it isn‟t 

going to matter. And having travelled rural Saskatchewan this 

summer, the key issue in rural Saskatchewan in many, many, 

many communities is whether or not we have a doctor. And 

right now we‟re seeing doctors saying, if you don‟t get the 

contract settled, doctors will leave, and you won‟t have doctors. 

 

Right now we‟re seeing more doctors leaving the province than 

are coming here. That‟s a pretty good statement on what 

doctors see in Saskatchewan from this government. They don‟t 

see any respect. Two years negotiating a contract? No, I don‟t 

think so, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t think doctors are going to . . . 

Well they‟re certainly not putting up with it, obviously. 

 

And this is an unprecedented action that doctors are taking — 

last week in the Swift Current area and today in Moose Jaw, for 

heaven‟s sakes. I mean we haven‟t seen this sort of action from 

doctors for decades. And it‟s a definite reflection on the Sask 

Party and the way they deal with people, especially in the 

health sector. 

 

They have had absolutely no success until they got the essential 

services to ram down people‟s throat with the 25,000 health 

providers. That‟s how they did that two-year contract. Now 

Health Sciences is out with all our support people. And the 

professionals, they‟re out still looking for a contract. PAIRS, 

our Professional Association of Internes and Residents, they‟re 

out waiting for a contract. Now doctors. Teachers are waiting in 

the wings. There is no success in that government at all with 

negotiating. They don‟t know how to do it. 

 

And when your Premier says, I‟m going to go to war with 

working people, well that sets the stage for what we‟ve got 

right now. And doctors are definitely questioning the Sask 

Party‟s commitment to health care and are saying, and I quote 

their president: “A timely contract resolution would 

demonstrate to physicians that the government is serious about 

health care in Saskatchewan.” 

 

They‟re not. I mean the government isn‟t giving them . . . 

Settling a contract soon: the Premier said that last week; now 

he‟s saying it this week. Soon is a pretty loose definition while 

the people in Moose Jaw are facing cancelled surgeries, while 

the people in Swift Current had surgeries cancelled, let alone 

the daily appointments that are needed in all the clinics in 

Caronport and Assiniboia and Gravelbourg and Moose Jaw. 

And it‟s just going to get worse, Mr. Speaker, until the 

government gets serious. 

 

You can talk about reducing wait times, which the Fraser 

Institute hasn‟t given them credit for at all because wait times 

have not been reduced. And we‟re not going to see those wait 

times reduced unless we can keep our doctors, because the 

doctors perform the surgeries. I mean that‟s an interesting 

connection but it obviously hasn‟t been made. And we see that 

our wait times have increased by over a week in Saskatchewan. 

I mean that‟s nothing to crow about. It isn‟t a success story. 

And we‟re losing doctors. 

 

And people are calling my office. In fact yesterday I‟ve talked 

to somebody who works in an operating room. And the way 

that the operating rooms are being told now is to focus on the 

high-profile surgeries like the hips and knees. Other surgeries 

are being set aside or really, really put back on the back burner 

and delayed — very complex surgeries and surgeries that 

concern people. But they don‟t reach the radar of the Sask 

Party. 

 

So doctors in those specialities like plastics, they‟re not going 

to stay here because they‟re only getting one hour every two 

weeks to do surgeries. This is a situation that is percolating, that 

we‟re only going to see it get worse because this is not a 

government who knows how to actually manage anything. 

 

And as I said in question period in my last question, this 

minister has failed, he has failed in so many areas. And to latch 

on to giving nurses a contract . . . That‟s his only, the only place 

he can go to look for a compliment. And to get a standing 

ovation on that is pretty, pretty lame. When we see more . . . 

We see 120 vacancies in the province; that‟s not anything to 

crow about. 

 

And I‟m happy that the member from Saskatoon read out his 

comments because I know he hasn‟t done any research, doesn‟t 

really know any of the situation. But he did talk about 

Saskatoon. And when Saskatoon in the spring, in May, actually 

did increase their surgical output, they did more surgeries in 

Saskatoon in the spring. They demonstrated in Saskatoon that 

with changing the processes of how the surgeries were booked 

and how things were done in the operating room, more 

surgeries could be done. 

 

So it certainly begs the question, why aren‟t we funding the 

health districts to do the surgeries that are clearly there? They 

have the capacity to do them. So Saskatoon demonstrated that 

clearly, and the member from Northwest in Saskatoon read it 

out and validated that. Saskatoon can do it. So why would you 

cancel the surgery centre in Saskatoon and give it to the private 

sector? 

 

The Sask Party has told the public that the public system can‟t 

afford or can‟t do the surgeries that we need to have done. 

That‟s simply not true, Mr. Speaker. Saskatoon demonstrated, 

yes they could. Give us the correct amount of money; we‟ll do 

the surgeries. We have capacity. 

 

And as my colleague from Moose Jaw said, a lot of health 

providers are telling us the CAT [computerized axial 

tomography] scanners are sitting dark, the MRIs [magnetic 

resonance imaging] are sitting dark, the O.R. [operating room] 

theatres are not being used properly. There are still all those 

things to be dealt with, and yet we see this government turn 

around and give the surgeries to the private sector. 

 

Private sector clinics are going to want to make a profit. That‟s 

what they‟re there for. So where‟s that profit going to come 

from? It‟s going to come from the patients and the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. And we had in our 2007 budget money to build 



6486 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2010 

two surgery centres for the public system — one in Saskatoon, 

one in Regina. We see the Sask Party took that away, as the 

member from Moose Jaw talked about, took it away — took the 

planning, took the committee away, took that away — and 

turned around and tried to convince the public that the public 

needs to have this parallel for-profit system, that that‟s going to 

serve you better. 

 

Well anybody who‟s had this happen, provinces who have 

actually done this, Mr. Speaker, have found it doesn‟t work. 

There are provinces who have had private clinics in Calgary, in 

Ontario, in BC [British Columbia], where it has turned out that 

those private clinics have not been cheaper for the public‟s 

money. And the public has in some cases even had to take over 

those clinics where it isn‟t . . . I mean the clinics weren‟t able to 

manage because they couldn‟t make a profit, so now the public 

system has to take them over. 

 

So I don‟t know why we think it‟s going to be different in 

Saskatchewan, where it‟s been unsuccessful in Calgary; it‟s 

been unsuccessful in BC; it‟s been unsuccessful in Ontario. We 

think we should try it and think that we can make a success of 

it? I don‟t think so, especially with the lack of experience, the 

lack of knowledge, the lack of commitment, and the lack of any 

connection to the health community that this government has, 

and in particular this minister. 

 

If you‟re looking at health providers, 25,000 of them, two years 

to get a contract — and a very unsatisfactory contract as it is — 

they feel disrespected. That is a message to the whole health 

system. Because those people are the underpinnings of the 

system. We need to have special care aids and long-term care 

aids and dietary people and maintenance and housekeeping. All 

of those people keep the system running. 

 

To hang your hat and all your success on making sure nurses, 

there‟s enough nurses in the province . . . It‟s a good thing to 

have enough nurses. We definitely need enough nurses, but you 

can‟t stop there. And now nurses are phoning and telling me 

what else is wrong in the system. So that isn‟t going to last very 

long, Mr. Speaker, because nurses do know what‟s going on 

and they‟re going to tell us, and all the other health providers in 

health sciences — all the professionals, the technicians, all of 

those people are left without a contract right now too, Mr. 

Speaker. How is that going to work to help wait-lists? 

 

[12:00] 

 

Those are the people who actually provide the service. If you 

don‟t respect the people who provide the service, how would 

you expect the service to be done? And if you‟re going to put 

the patient first you better actually look at the whole system that 

the patient‟s in. If the patient isn‟t getting surgery in Moose 

Jaw, how can the patient be first today? If the patient didn‟t get 

any services in Swift Current last week, how can they be first? 

It‟s pretty hypocritical I think, to say those things and then not 

to do them. If you‟re going to say them, you should actually 

deliver on what you‟ve said. 

 

And the lack of experience that we see from this government in 

actually dealing with issues, many of the things that are coming 

to this legislature, people have to come to this legislature with 

their issues to get any movement. They have to let the cameras 

shine in their mouth to get the dental therapy that they need. 

That‟s a pretty serious thing to ask people, to have to come here 

to get their issues dealt with. 

 

I think there should be some way that people actually can trust 

that the government and the minister in charge of whatever 

portfolio . . . Be it Social Services, where people are looking to 

the minister now to take care of our vulnerable children. And 

she has said she doesn‟t want to be their mother, so basically 

doesn‟t really care to do the job. Those are things that 

demonstrate to people that this government is not serious about 

fixing the issues that are wrong in the system. Particularly in 

Social Services, the light‟s being shone on that right now. 

 

But the issues in the health system are equally as grave. And the 

thing with not signing a contract with doctors and with interns 

and residents, you aren‟t going to be able to have the 

procedures done. That‟s a fundamental. You have to have your 

health providers to be able to provide your services. And I don‟t 

think the government has made that connection and has 

certainly sent the message to health providers that we do not 

care about you. We do not value what the services you deliver. 

And in the workplace you‟re not a key part of it. You‟re not a 

key part of the health services because we don‟t respect what 

you do. 

 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Regina Wascana Plains. 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I begin I have to 

comment on the members opposite and their diatribe with 

respect to an issue and problems with respect to our health care 

system. You know, the thing is about our health care system, as 

with any complex organization where all the pieces of the 

puzzle have to start to fit together, is that status quo . . . I‟ll 

speak about the status quo. And it isn‟t about maintaining a 

status quo with our health care system, a publicly funded health 

care system. It is about moving beyond the status quo and using 

that as a benchmark, a springboard to moving us forward. And 

this government is absolutely committed, absolutely committed 

to a health care system that serves the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

In 2007 after 16 years under the NDP, Saskatchewan had the 

longest total waits in the nation. Saskatchewan had the longest 

waits between specialist and treatment in Canada at 16.5 weeks, 

Mr. Speaker. Today, 2010, today in Saskatchewan, total wait 

times are down to 26.5 weeks. Saskatchewan has the shortest 

waits in Canada for GP [general practitioner] to specialist 

consultation at 6.7 weeks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we understand. We know we have work to do. We 

have work to do to bring the health care system, to move the 

health care system with our partners, with the health care 

workers, with the physicians. We know we do. But the direction 

comes from the top. The direction comes from government. 

And this government has communicated and has taken action in 

the direction of excellence in health care in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Latest Saskatchewan Surgical Care Network data, Mr. Speaker, 

that I‟m referring to, more surgeries performed and fewer 

people on the wait-list this quarter compared to last quarter, 

which means 85 per cent of surgeries are done in six months, 94 



December 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6487 

per cent in one year. Hip and knee pathway showing results: 69 

per cent of hip replacements done in six months, up from 63 per 

cent; 60 per cent of knee replacements done in six months, up 

from 48 per cent. Nearly 90 per cent of invasive cancer 

surgeries done in six weeks; 87 per cent of slow-growing 

cancers done within three months. 

 

Let me speak a little bit about the third-party delivery of health 

care services in the province of Saskatchewan. Omni in Regina 

and the Surgicentre in Saskatoon are seeing patients and 

helping the government, helping the people of Saskatchewan 

cut into the wait times. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, I am not satisfied where Saskatchewan 

ranks with respect to wait times, rankings we‟ve held for way 

too long. That‟s why our government is committed to 

improving surgical services for all residents. We know that 

some patients wait too long for surgery. We get that; we know 

that. And this government is prepared to lift up the rock of our 

health care system and deal with what we find underneath and 

look and get a true picture of what we‟re dealing with. Hence 

the Patient-First Review, all of those types of activities that 

have been undertaken by this government to really get to the 

root of the problem that we‟re facing in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We‟re taking action to address it. 

 

The Patient-First Review, as I spoke about earlier, clearly 

identified surgical wait times as a major priority for 

Saskatchewan residents. Through the Saskatchewan surgical 

initiative, we are working to improve patient‟s access to surgery 

and diagnostic procedures. We want to improve the surgical 

care experience for patients. And, Mr. Speaker, you can look at 

. . . We hear of patients that have had not a great experience 

within our health care system, but then, Mr. Speaker, you hear 

of people telling stories about the positive experience that 

they‟ve had with our health care system. There is more work to 

do, to be sure. 

 

Third party delivery of selected day surgeries has been 

introduced to improve access. Regina‟s Omni Surgery and 

Saskatoon‟s Surgicentre are providing procedures within the 

public health care system. This initiative, innovative initiative 

will help serve patients more quickly. We are also building and 

expanding our health workforce to better meet Saskatchewan 

residents‟ need for health care services. This includes training, 

recruiting, and retaining more doctors and nurses and 

improving health care environments. 

 

I must speak a little bit about what the members opposite are 

saying with respect to the residents‟ — I don‟t know how to 

call it — study session that‟s happening today. Contracts, 

negotiations — and I speak from experience on this, Mr. 

Speaker — contracts taking a term or a time to get resolved, to 

get to bring successful resolution and a win-win for both 

parties, it does take time. And in no way, and in no way does a 

negotiation or one that is taking some time, Mr. Speaker, does 

that indicate a lack of respect. And in fact this government has 

an incredible amount of respect for the health care workers, for 

the residents, for the physicians in this province. 

 

We value opportunities to review other organizations‟ survey 

information about health care systems. The Fraser Institute‟s 

report is one perspective, a part of a bigger picture. The report 

shows information from a small number of Saskatchewan 

specialists. And this information is supplied of course on a 

voluntary basis and is largely opinion. However, the institute‟s 

data does provide insight about the experiences of surgeons and 

patients in various surgical specialties. We can learn some 

valuable things from the report. The more information sources 

we have at our disposal, the more informed our decisions will 

be. 

 

Our Patient First Review and the subsequent Saskatchewan 

Surgical Initiative is helping us make changes based on patient 

input and patient experiences. The goal, Mr. Speaker, is to 

transform our surgical care system. In other words, status quo is 

not on. 

 

Just a few of the projects under way, Mr. Speaker: third party 

delivery of day surgery within the public system, again 

provided by the Omni Centre in Regina and the Surgicentre in 

Saskatoon. Specialist directory — this is intended and 

hopefully this is exactly what patients will find — helping 

patients work with family doctors to see who has the shortest 

wait times for referral and surgery and identify the most 

appropriate surgeon. 

 

Patient pathway streamlines care for people considering hip or 

knee replacements. Surgical safety checklists provide 

province-wide implementation. Surgical information system 

computerizes hospital, operating room scheduling process, and 

supply management. Releasing the time to care, and we know 

we are hearing this from health care providers across the 

province, frees up ward staff to spend more time with patients 

by improving efficiencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have committed $5 million in funding to the 

SHRF [Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation]. It will be 

used specifically to fund clinical trials focusing on the 

liberation procedure. And I know my colleague, in the 

presentation that he made a few minutes ago, spoke quite 

extensively about that. But I want to move on from that. He has 

covered most of what I would want to cover. 

 

We have committed 3.5 million for physician recruitment 

strategy and establishment of physician recruitment agency, 

which will address the shortage of physicians in many 

communities. And this is but one part of it, Mr. Speaker. We 

have hired Edward Mantler, CEO [chief executive officer], for 

the physician recruitment agency. 

 

Three hundred registered nurse education seats have been 

created. Sask trained nurses are more likely to stay and work 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my time is coming to an end. I want to wrap up by 

saying we will hold steady and help bring unprecedented 

positive change for the benefit . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the members opposite 

brought this motion today especially for me, because this week 

is the ninth anniversary of the announcement of the action plan 

for Saskatchewan health which has formed the framework for 



6488 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2010 

the health system over the past nine years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of new members, 

especially on the government side, who don‟t actually know the 

history of that action plan. And so, Mr. Speaker, if they go back 

and look, many of the things that they or the Minister of Health 

crows about actually come out of the plans that were laid and 

the foundation that was laid. And in this legislature and in this 

province, it‟s much more important to look back and work with 

what governments have done, whether they‟re of your 

persuasion or not, and build on that. What we‟ve seen for the 

last three years is a direct attack on all kinds of things, which 

has not helped, but especially in this area. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I was taking a look at this particular 

motion, I thought it would be informative to take a look at the 

2007 budget. Now we were being very careful. We had a 

budget of $7.8 billion, and we had to sort of step back and not 

do a lot of things that we wanted to do. But one of the things 

that we had in that budget was the surgical information system 

— which the Premier was crowing about, you know, an hour or 

so ago — which was to automate the delivery of surgical 

services within the province. And, Mr. Speaker, much of what 

has been talked about by the Minister of Health as it relates to 

the surgical initiative comes directly out of that work, which 

then previously comes out of the action plan. 

 

Now what we know is that in the next year there were huge 

amounts of revenue, and so that the budget actually increased to 

$10 billion in one year. But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan haven‟t seen the benefit of that money, 

and they‟re not certain where it goes. 

 

Now one of the issues then becomes, what is the problem 

dealing with surgical issues in Saskatchewan right now? Well 

one of the issues frankly, if you talk to the people involved in 

the system, is that the government has spent way more money 

than they‟re taking in. And so they‟ve gone back and tried to 

budget and cut back. 

 

[12:15] 

 

But one of the ways that you cut back is you hold the line on 

the regional health authorities. You hold the line on various 

contracts. And what do we get? Well we get situations where 

contracts aren‟t being signed with the workers. We get regional 

health authorities that have to effectively manage within their 

means. We get money being borrowed, but borrowed in 

agencies and other places. We get the Amicus deal, which is off 

line borrowing which is going to show up in other places. 

 

Now I‟m especially curious listening to the Minister of Health. 

And I have a great deal of difficulty understanding a lot of his 

comments. But I thought it would be helpful to take a look at 

the 2007 budget and the four-year capital plan, and what the 

plans were in that budget. 

 

Basically in that year the Cypress Regional Hospital — that‟s in 

Swift Current — was to be built. It was completed. The 

Outlook integrated facility was to be completed; the 

Ile-a-la-Crosse integrated facility was to be completed. And 

they were. The maternal and newborn care centre was 

continued budget to be completed, and this was just completed 

in October of 2010. The Moosomin facility was to be 

completed. That‟s been done. The ground floor development at 

Royal University Hospital, that‟s been done. 

 

The Maidstone integrated facility — I know the member from 

that area will be pleased about that — it was scheduled to be 

completed. The Preeceville integrated facility was scheduled to 

be completed. The Humboldt integrated facility was on 

schedule to go ahead. The Saskatoon mental health, which has 

now been completed; that was in this one. The Oliver Lodge, 

which we just heard about a few weeks ago, it was in here to be 

completed. The addition at Hudson Bay, that was to be dealt 

with and completed. And the moving of the MRI into the new 

Academic Health Sciences building, the initial work on that 

was to start. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when I go through that list and compare that 

with the Minister of Health and all of the announcements that 

he‟s made about work that he‟s done in the health care system, I 

think this covers it all. So it was all part of the four-year plan 

before the government that we have now was in place. 

 

Then I start trying to figure out, well are there other projects 

that have been completed or started? And the answer is, not 

many. There‟s a few places where there‟s some dirt been dug, 

but other than that there aren‟t anything that‟s not on this list. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a government that had a balanced budget 

presented to them, with cash in the bank. They ended up trying 

to meet the needs of a number of different groups. They spent 

all the money, increased our budget from the $7.8 billion to the 

$10 billion level, and now they‟re still operating in a deficit 

situation. I think this year we‟re already up at the $10.5 billion 

expenditure. 

 

And what‟s happening is that they didn‟t budget and plan to 

deal with the health contracts, with the health services people, 

all of the people who provide the main structure, support — the 

cleaning and the cooked food and those things — within the 

health care system. And they haven‟t provided for the doctors. 

They haven‟t provided for the interns and residents. 

 

And so what we have, Mr. Speaker, is a situation where they 

went with great optimism, with lots of plans to sort of continue 

with the work that we laid out nine years ago this week, and 

frankly I think we were quite pleased that that was their 

intention. But all of a sudden, by making an arrangement with 

the nurses, they‟ve satisfied one small group, maybe even given 

them a little more money than might have been necessary at 

that point, and effectively caused problems right across the 

board. 

 

What do we hear this week, Mr. Speaker? The teachers are 

having a hard time getting a contract because of, once again, of 

this nursing contract and the standard that it set there. All these 

things come back on to this whole issue of surgical care and the 

kind of work that‟s being done. 

 

Now in 2007 we had the money set forward in a mid-year 

statement that would allow for the building of a surgicentre in 

Saskatoon, a surgicentre in Regina. And these things would 

have been within the regional health authorities‟ management 

and would have provided the kinds of services that are being 



December 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6489 

now contracted out by this group. When you talk with the 

people within the regional health authorities, they say they 

would prefer that method. 

 

What we know is in the city of Winnipeg, they ended up — and 

quite a number of years ago — with a surgical centre, a 

privately run one. Eventually it was purchased by the Winnipeg 

Regional Health Authority and now is run as part of their 

system. It ends up working very well in providing the day 

surgery support. 

 

So the concepts are there, but it‟s important that they be 

managed and run within the system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we see the kinds of problems that arise, it 

also reflects a certain attitude by some of the members who are 

now in government who were too many years in opposition. 

And I know one of my colleagues talked about . . . It‟s very 

similar to a situation where you have people who are involved 

in very difficult management decisions around how we use the 

people‟s money, and you have a three-year-old who‟s playing 

with the matches of management, and they start a fire, and they 

don‟t know how to put it out. And instead of sort of owning up 

and saying, well I started the fire, they point fingers around at 

their 16-year-old brother and say, well they should have, you 

know, prevented me from doing this. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve been trying hard to tell these people 

that it takes a very careful management of the funds and making 

sure you don‟t do things unless you know you can pay for 

them. And, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to surgery and health care, 

many of the people in the province are realizing that the funds 

have disappeared, and these people in government are not able 

to manage. 

 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

listening very attentively to the member opposite talk about the 

three-year-old with matches . . . Well if he‟s equating that with 

the current Sask Party government, I would suggest their 

16-year-old government or brother was an arsonist that went 

around burning down 52 hospitals around rural Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. That‟s the kind of respect they had for health care 

in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The member for Saskatoon Eastview says, the nurses tell us 

everything. Well they would have told them before 2007 and 

the NDP did nothing about that message. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The 65-minute debate has 

elapsed. I recognize the member from Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Moose Jaw Wakamow recently wrote that the 

issue of private versus public health care is not the actual issue. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we couldn‟t agree more. To the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow: if the private versus public is not 

the actual issue, then why does your party lobby hard against 

any and every innovation that would improve the delivery of 

health care services for the people of the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, you can 

go back a number of years and look at Five Hills Health Region 

in the city of Moose Jaw, my community, Mr. Speaker. So I‟ve 

paid close attention to it, and the member from Moose Jaw 

North should also. 

 

There has been year after year where the professionals and the 

health care people and professionals in the city of Moose Jaw 

have worked hard to manage the resources, initiated a number 

of new programs to do with rearranging workplaces, 

rearranging time schedules that have paid dividends not only to 

the patients in Five Hills, but we have picked up extra surgeries 

from the city of Regina. Mr. Speaker, there is ample 

opportunity for the public system to address the issues that are 

out there if this government will quit hog-tying them, give them 

the proper resources, and let them do the job they‟re trained to 

do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 

member from Northwest. He read an elaborate statement on 

how much work the Saskatoon Health District had done on 

reducing their surgical wait-lists and wait times. And they had 

done that. This was in May. They had shown that with the 

proper amount of money, the correct funding, they could 

actually do more surgeries. There is capacity in the public 

system. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, my question to the member from Saskatoon is, 

you‟ve cut the funding for the health district this year — they 

got less than they needed — and you‟re telling them zero 

growth for next year. What‟s your message to the public 

system? Don‟t bother doing it? We want the private system to 

do it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, recent 

poll came out that Saskatchewan was leading the country, 

leading the country in health care satisfaction. We‟ve provided 

more doctors, more nurses, more health care professionals, and 

more residents into the system, Mr. Speaker. The government 

opposite when they were in power closed 52 rural hospitals, 

Mr. Speaker. This government‟s committed to advancing health 

care in Saskatchewan. We inherited a huge deficit which we‟re 

addressing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The College of Medicine, the College of Medicine almost lost 

its accreditation. I‟ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, my father immigrated to this country in 1952 to 

become the new first head of the department of anesthesia. And 

in 2002 when that college almost lost its accreditation, the 

people that built the college . . . It was disrespectful to the 

people that built that college and disrespectful to the people of 

Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, this government has worked very, very 

hard to help advance the interest of health . . . 

 



6490 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2010 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member from 

Saskatoon Eastview just said today in her speech, study 

sessions unprecedented and haven‟t happened in decades. Well 

in the Regina Leader-Post on May 15th, 2003, it states: 

 

“We are going back to the negotiating table with a 

creative final solution for this situation. What happens 

will depend totally on the department‟s response and 

Health Minister John Nilson and cabinet‟s response to the 

proposal,” said Saskatchewan Medical Association (SMA) 

president Dr. Joel Yelland. 

 

The SMA, which claims it didn‟t orchestrate the study 

sessions, said the doctors were acting independently. 

However, Yelland promised “further political action will 

unfold Friday morning depending on the government‟s 

response.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the member from Saskatoon Eastview: will she 

rise and take back her earlier remarks now that they have been 

found to be false or will she . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time. Time has elapsed. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, doctors are organizing rotating 

study sessions in this province which we have not seen for a 

very long time. They are actually initiating these study sessions 

in response to the lack of response from the Sask Party 

government, the disrespect they are feeling. 

 

And their quotes are pretty clear. Every time they have been 

talked about, about this, they are very clear about why they‟re 

doing it. This is about the Sask Party‟s response to no contract 

for two years. And this is what they‟re doing. They‟re actually 

bringing their members out into study sessions; surgeries are 

being cancelled; visits are being cancelled. This is something 

that the doctors have felt necessary to do, and it hasn‟t been 

seen for a very long time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the member 

from Biggar. Has the member from Biggar informed his 

constituents about the special deal that his government has 

made with the people at Amicus and how it affects the project 

that they have locally, where they have to raise their 35 per cent 

of their hospital project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The citizens of 

Biggar constituency‟s so happy and proud that they were given 

one of the 13 long-term care homes that was announced. And as 

I mentioned in my member‟s statement yesterday, there was a 

fundraiser. Knights of Columbus held a fundraiser, and there 

were thousands of dollars that were raised to go towards the 

community‟s share of the long-term care facility. 

 

The member opposite refers to a pilot project that‟s being done 

in Saskatoon and the issue around that. There‟s going to be 100 

beds. The pilot project also includes the spouses are going to be 

able to live with their spouses regardless of what level of 

dependency they‟re on, live with their spouses in the new 

facility in Saskatoon. It‟s a pilot project. By our accounts it‟s 

going to be a great success, and we‟re looking forward to 

having all 13 new long-term care homes being built in the near 

future. 

 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow dismissed the very real increased cost of 

health care as merely an appearance. In her infinite wisdom, she 

went to suggest that the solution to health care can be seen in 

jacking up personal and corporate income tax rates for 

Saskatchewan. To the member from Regina Lakeview: do you 

believe that the solution to the Saskatchewan health care is an 

increase in personal and corporate income taxes? 

 

[12:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, that member, the only answer to 

everything is to reduce taxes. Give me a break. There is a role 

for government, and there is a role for people in this province to 

contribute to health care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 

member from Wascana Plains. Given the fact that the 

surgicentre that they promised after the election in ‟07 was 

scheduled for Regina and now Regina has no ability within the 

public system to do any more surgeries, so they say . . . 

Although I‟m hearing that there‟s capacity within their system 

as well. This year‟s budget from the Sask Party government has 

decreased funding to Regina Health District, and they‟ve been 

told zero growth for next year. So you‟re actually starving the 

public system to let the private system take over. What is the 

member telling her constituents about that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to draw to the 

member‟s attention that health care spending in the province 

has received a bump up of 3 per cent in this fiscal year, Mr. 

Speaker, more surgeries performed and fewer people on the 

wait-list. Mr. Speaker, we are, as I said earlier, we‟re taking 

that status quo and using it as a springboard to moving forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have lots more work to do. But I‟m going to 

speak again to the hip and knee pathway showing results — 69 

per cent of hip replacements done in six months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are moving our health care system forward, 

and the people of Saskatchewan in the Angus Reid poll 



December 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6491 

obviously agree with us. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

know why the NDP keep complaining about more doctor 

training seats, 120. Mr. Speaker, they keep complaining about 

more residency training, 120 seats; more nurses training, Mr. 

Speaker, 565. It‟s because they didn‟t get the training done. 

They left training for doctors at 60 seats. Nurses, they cut back 

to 165, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they succeeded . . . This government is . . . They 

failed. This government has . . . They succeeded in cutting the 

training seats, Mr. Speaker. This government is succeeding. 

When, to the member of Regina Lakeview, when will the NDP 

get over their envy of success of this government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m happy to answer this as the 

minister of Health, which the member still thinks I am. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the plans for the medical school were to be increased 

over a number of years, the nursing ones — all of those things 

were being done. The money . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Time for the 

75-minute debate has elapsed. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 615 — The Seniors’ Bill of Rights Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very pleased today 

to rise and do second reading on An Act Respecting Seniors’ 

Rights. The Bill actually, given that a private member‟s Bill can 

have no money attached to it, this Bill is based on principles. 

And the Bill says, whereas freedom from poverty is a human 

right enshrined by the United Nations, and citizens are entitled 

to social and economic security, many seniors live on fixed 

incomes, and many seniors are victims of abuse — physical, 

emotional, and financial. 

 

Therefore the Bill is asking that we enact a seniors‟ bill of 

rights. And the definition of senior is any person 65 or older. 

But the bill of rights says that: 

 

Every senior in Saskatchewan should have the following 

rights: 

 

the right to freedom, independence and individual 

initiative in planning and managing their own lives; 

 

the right to access viable, affordable and cost-effective 

services and programs that are molded by the principles 

of strengthening independence, affirming dignity and 

expanding choice; 

 

the right to be able to remain in their communities and in 

their homes with a support of community-based, 

long-term care services; 

 

the right to a system where long-term care needs are met, 

regardless of income, in a culturally and linguistically a 

sensitive way as those needs change over time; 

 

the right of access to public and private services, allowing 

aging in place where possible; 

 

the right to transition between the various forms of 

long-term care with minimal disruption and maximum 

attention to quality of life; 

 

the right to an opportunity to choose a healthy lifestyle 

and be supported in this choice by effective, culturally 

appropriate programs designed to foster health and 

wellness without regard to economic status; 

 

the right to protection from abuse, neglect and 

exploitation in the community and in health care settings; 

 

the right of consumer empowerment to make informed 

quality of life decisions; 

 

the right to be fully informed of all programs and 

benefits, financial and otherwise, available to seniors 

including the criteria, amounts and conditions of the 

programs and benefits. 

 

In accordance with The Tabling of Documents Act, 1991, 

the President of Executive Council or designate shall 

account to the Legislative Assembly each year the 

number of seniors who are not able to access the rights 

set out in . . . [this Bill]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many seniors‟ associations have written and 

contacted me about the Bill. It‟s been out since last spring, and 

they are very, very pleased with this Bill. They understand that 

the money cannot be put into a Bill, but they do want the 

principles of the Bill enshrined in legislation. There‟s the 

Council on Aging, the Seniors Mechanism, the Saskatchewan 

Seniors Association. All have an opinion on what this 

government needs to do to address the needs of seniors, and 

those needs are very, very significant, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟ve been rising every day, bringing petitions in this last little 

while from the Saskatchewan Seniors Association that runs the 

seniors‟ centres around the province. And as I‟ve said, most of 

them are in rural Saskatchewan, and I visited many of them, 

Mr. Speaker. And their concern is that without some influx of 

money from the government . . . And they have asked. They‟ve 

asked last year, and they‟re asking again now that some amount 

of money is put forward for these associations to keep open. 

 

And as I said in my petition and again today, most of them are 

in rural Saskatchewan. Seniors have a place to gather to either 

have health programs or workshops or other initiatives that 

keep them busy. It‟s a place to socialize. It‟s a place to have 



6492 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2010 

some of the health programs that the district can run through the 

seniors‟ centres, like foot care. And many of the seniors rely on 

those for their outings. 

 

Now the ones we visited, Mr. Speaker, some of them are saying 

they can‟t turn the heat on. Well if you can‟t turn the heat on, 

you‟re not going to have seniors coming. You can‟t provide any 

services there if you can‟t have heat. Right now they‟ll all be 

shut if they can‟t have their heat on. And rising heat costs, 

rising taxes, rising maintenance costs — a lot of those centres 

are not being able to raise the money because a lot of the people 

that are in those centres relied on money from initiatives that 

seniors would do themselves, say bake sales or other activities. 

Many of them, the seniors, are not able to do that any more. 

 

So we still need the services in rural Saskatchewan, but we‟re 

not getting any funding for it. So they‟re asking for about three 

hundred-and-some thousand dollars a year to keep the 180 

seniors‟ centres open, which will in fact benefit the main health 

system because those seniors will be healthier longer, and they 

will not come into the long-term care system. They may not 

need home care. So I think it‟s a very good investment in our 

seniors. 

 

The thing that the Council on Aging . . . They have presented a 

brief, and I think many of their recommendations capture pretty 

much everything that we need to see done for seniors. A lot of 

seniors are . . . they‟re living independently, and they want to 

continue to live that way. We don‟t have adequate home care 

services. In fact when Nokomis . . . It was announced by the 

Saskatoon Health District that Nokomis would lose its lab 

services. And the doctor there said if Nokomis loses their lab 

services, he can‟t practise. So the health district said they would 

revisit that, and they would probably continue their lab services 

there. But they were going to have to look at home care services 

because they have to find the money somewhere. So home care 

is going to be looked at, and I would assume there‟ll be 

reductions in home care. 

 

Well that isn‟t going to help the objective of keeping seniors 

living independently and in their homes. Many, many seniors 

prefer of course to live in their homes, but they need the 

supports that the government and the community can give them 

so they can do this. 

 

We do need a shift in priorities because many seniors are telling 

us, we‟re not really all that interested in the illness model. We 

need to have something that looks at how do we keep healthier 

longer. And that‟s what the senior centres are doing. That‟s 

what home care will do for them. 

 

That‟s what walking paths . . . There‟s one in Eastview. There‟s 

a walking path. There‟s a primary health centre in Eastview that 

deals with a lot of seniors‟ issues. Seniors can walk into the 

primary health centre. It‟s attached to Scott, Forget tower, so 

seniors can go down to the primary health centre in their 

housecoat and slippers if they have to. And the nurse from 

there, the nurse practitioner, she visits all the seniors‟ 

complexes around there with appointments on certain days so 

that she can actually service that whole area. 

 

That is a model that is working extremely well, and seniors are 

very happy to see that. It keeps them close to their community. 

It has services close to their community. It limits the necessity 

for them to get on the bus or in a taxi and travel to a doctor‟s 

office somewhere or to a clinic somewhere where they would 

have to have tests and procedures done. 

 

And I think that, as the Council on Aging talks about, we need 

to talk about what keeps seniors healthy. And seniors at 65 

aren‟t the ones we‟re talking about or hearing the most about 

from the government. We‟re hearing most about the long-term 

care. And the seniors that the Council on Aging represent and 

the Seniors Mechanism and the Saskatchewan Seniors 

Association, these are active seniors who want things in place 

so they can continue to be active and continue to contribute to 

society and continue to participate in many of the things that 

they enjoy. 

 

So just to focus on long-term care needs in the province is a 

very narrow view of what seniors need. And they do feel as if 

they‟ve been abandoned. They do feel that no one‟s paying 

attention, and we‟ve heard that quite clearly. We need to have 

some policies in government that actually reflect this 

independent living, the ability of seniors to participate in their 

communities, the ability to enjoy living in their own homes, and 

with affordable housing. 

 

The issue of affordable housing is significant for seniors. Many 

seniors are living on fixed incomes. And the increase in utility 

rates which is happening on a regular basis, I‟ve had seniors 

come into my office and tell me that they don‟t turn on their 

stove, so they don‟t cook. They don‟t turn on their lights. 

They‟re choosing to take their medication half of what they 

should take or every second day instead of every day. I‟ve even 

heard them say they‟re starting to sell their grave plots. 

 

Like this is a serious issue for seniors who don‟t have the 

ability to afford living in a home that they‟ve had for 40, 50 

years. They can‟t afford the taxes any more. We‟ve done 

nothing to address the issue of how seniors are able to afford to 

live in their own homes, let alone the whole issue of where do 

they go next — into affordable housing. We don‟t have . . . We 

have long-term care. We have some seniors‟ low-income 

housing, but not enough. 

 

But there‟s a gap in there where the seniors in affordable 

housing or low-income housing can‟t get into long-term care, 

and the criteria for long-term care, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely 

ridiculous. People who simply can‟t even move, who are a 

danger to themselves and their spouses and anybody else in 

their complex are being left in their homes because they can‟t 

qualify. They don‟t qualify to meet the definition of long-term 

care that this government has put in place now. And people that 

are left in those situations, they have one option. They can go 

into personal care, and the personal care homes costs them 

money, and they don‟t have that money. 

 

So they‟re coming and saying, what do we do? We don‟t have 

the money. Are we going to end up sleeping outside? They‟re 

going to be homeless. We‟re going to have seniors who are 

homeless. And I don‟t know, Mr. Speaker, how we‟re going to 

deal with that because that is becoming an issue that people 

simply cannot . . .They‟re wandering. They need to have 

24-hour attention but they can‟t afford it. So how are we going 

to deal with seniors who we see sleeping on park benches? 



December 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6493 

We have an issue of seniors who are gambling, who are 

gambling away their life savings because no one‟s watching 

them. We have banks who see seniors taking out vast amounts 

of money on a daily basis, and there‟s no way to trigger a look 

at this or trigger the family to be notified until there‟s no 

money. And the family comes because there‟s no money, and 

mom or dad can‟t pay their rent. Now the family gets to look at 

it. But what are we doing to protect seniors from that kind of 

abuse? 

 

The seniors who have been diagnosed with dementia have been 

told they don‟t qualify for long-term care but have spent all 

their money at a VLT [video lottery terminal], and nobody‟s 

watching. There‟s no way to actually police this or to empower 

banks to ask the family to step in and look. 

 

We have privacy laws that are put in place to protect people‟s 

privacy, which is understandable. But once somebody‟s been 

diagnosed with dementia or is displaying symptoms like that, 

there should be some way to be a bit flexible so that we can 

protect some of the people from losing their money like this. 

There‟s been suggestions that we use some of the money that‟s 

collected from these VLTs to help seniors in their affordable 

housing because they are a lot of the ones who are losing the 

money. And that‟s an interesting suggestion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we do have in Saskatchewan, in fact I‟ve been told I have 

the highest concentration of seniors in the country in my riding. 

I have many, many, many seniors‟ complexes and nursing 

homes and a lot of seniors still living in their own homes. So I 

do feel a real affinity to seniors‟ issues, and I do spend a lot of 

time talking to seniors. 

 

And the ones who are in the care homes or the affordable 

housing that‟s in Eastview area, they‟re quite happy. It‟s the 

ones who can‟t get in there, the ones who are now coming with 

these issues of affordability, of issues about how come they 

can‟t meet the criteria for long-term care when they clearly 

cannot stay on their own — they‟re a danger to themselves and 

to people around them. 

 

[12:45] 

 

And what the Council on Aging also says is that we really do 

need to have a better image of seniors, and this ageism is sort of 

an underlying theme. When people only talk about long-term 

care, then we see people thinking of seniors as needing care and 

having to go in and have all these things done for them. They 

forget to see the senior from 65 on who‟s active, who wants to 

stay active, who wants to stay in the community, wants to stay 

in their home. So there is that issue of ageism that the Council 

on Aging is very, very keen that we do something to deal with. 

And they call it an almost outright discrimination that strips 

people of their rightful place in society based on their age 

alone. So I think this is something we should not ignore. 

 

When we talk about seniors, we have to talk about a wide 

variety of issues that face seniors from 65 on. That‟s our 

definition. So we should look at what affects them all and not 

just when they finally can qualify for long-term care, which 

many of them don‟t even qualify, end up not being able to get 

into long-term care ever. They‟re actually falling through the 

cracks in the system, Mr. Speaker. 

We don‟t have a secretariat any more, a seniors‟ secretariat 

where we had specific attention paid to seniors‟ issues. We 

actually had a policy lens that would look at seniors‟ issues and 

policies that are developed around seniors‟ programs. We don‟t 

have one point of intake so that people can go to one place and 

know that they can get the information. We‟ve lost all that. And 

I think that that‟s another thing that seniors are very concerned 

about and would like to see addressed. 

 

We do not have, as I said, any way for people who have high 

needs to get into personal care homes. There is that huge gap in 

the system where we don‟t have any assistance for people who 

simply can‟t afford to go there. And it really creates an extreme 

hardship for people on low income. Now they‟re starting to 

decide they can‟t afford to turn on their lights and they can‟t 

afford to turn on their stove. Heaven only knows what they‟re 

buying for groceries. And I certainly know the damage that‟s 

going to be caused in the way they take their medications. 

 

So we really have to have some attention paid to what we do, 

what we offer seniors in that gap between assisted living and 

long-term care, especially if our criteria for long-term care 

continues to get tighter and tighter and tighter. And as I said, 

most people want to live in their own home. 

 

Another interesting thing that the Council on Aging brought up, 

and I hadn‟t actually thought of this, there is no shelter for 

abused older adults. There are no shelters. The shelters that we 

have in this system deal with mostly women and children 

leaving abusive situations, and they‟re not viewed by older 

women as anything that meets their needs. So the Council on 

Aging says there are also no shelters accessible to older women 

with functional limitations — so anybody who‟s disabled or 

needs walkers or wheelchairs. And there is no provision for any 

personal care or assistive services in those shelters. 

 

And there are no resources whatsoever for abused older men. 

There is nowhere for them to go. And I visited recently, Mr. 

Speaker, the Salvation Army shelter or home in Saskatoon on 

Avenue B or C. Very interesting to actually see how men are 

living in Saskatoon and what they‟re living with. So I found 

this an extremely interesting comment, that there are no shelters 

for abused older men. 

 

And I‟m not talking physical violence. The abuse that happens 

to seniors, many times it‟s financial; many times it‟s emotional. 

And I know the federal government is doing some work with 

advertising about trying to encourage people to report it, to 

actually not tolerate it. So the abuse of older men is not what 

we traditionally think of as physical. For women usually it‟s 

physical, but there‟s certainly a lot of women who are being 

targeted by phone scams and even by relatives that they should 

be able to trust. But for older men, there is nothing. And that‟s 

actually a very interesting comment. 

 

Now seniors also have no . . . There‟s no assistance for seniors 

in their property tax. We‟re one of the few provinces who do 

nothing for that. And I think seniors with the goal of staying 

home in their own home . . . Seniors have owned those homes 

for many, many years, have paid them off, but their property 

taxes keep rising. And there‟s nothing that meets those needs. 

So we really do see that there are several, several things that 

need to be done. 



6494 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2010 

What we do have is . . . Like I said, the abuse of the older adult 

is something that is extremely, extremely disturbing. When I 

hear the story about the person who‟s gambled all their, all their 

money away, and no one‟s been able to get in there, I wonder 

what you can do to protect people from these sorts of things. 

And that is a financial abuse in itself. 

 

And I know there‟s all kinds of other abuse that‟s happening to 

older adults from their family members, from telephone scams. 

Many of the things that we have seen on TV, hopefully that will 

help raise public awareness and stop, at least stop the telephone 

scams if not stop the families from abusing the adults. And I 

know Nova Scotia has done a lot of work on seniors. They‟ve 

got a policy handbook and a guide for developing and 

evaluating policies and programs. 

 

We have lost all of our ability to look at seniors‟ programs. We 

had an advisory committee for seniors. Actually when I was the 

minister responsible for seniors, we had an advisory committee 

compiled of older persons that would look at different issues 

and then advise the minister. We don‟t have any of that any 

more. We don‟t have any ability to hear from seniors. They can 

present briefs, but I know one group was told by the Minister of 

Health that he was pretty busy and so hadn‟t had time to be 

doing this. That‟s a pretty dismissive thing to say to people and 

it certainly does speak to how much importance this 

government puts on seniors‟ issues. 

 

So the purpose of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, was to raise the 

awareness of all of us about seniors‟ issues and the rights that 

we think, certainly as the NDP opposition think, that seniors 

should have enshrined in law, that these rights are theirs. And 

then we think that policies should be developed that strengthen 

or promote or enhance those rights. So all of our policies that 

are developed from the government should be, should be dealt 

with, looking at what is best for the senior. We should look at 

having a central part, a central place in government where 

seniors‟ issues can be dealt with specifically to their issues and 

to their population. 

 

We also need to have, like I said, a seniors‟ lens, which I 

thought was interesting. We talk about that in women‟s issues, 

a gender lens. Now we‟re looking at a seniors‟ lens and I think 

that that‟s a very . . . a seniors‟ policy lens. And I think that‟s a 

very good thing to be looking at because we‟re having, as I said 

before, a huge increase in seniors coming in our population — 

not only in Canada, but in Saskatchewan in particular. And I 

think many of the issues facing seniors about income, about 

housing, about utility rates, about property taxes, about 

accessible programs, about ability to find out what‟s going on 

and what‟s available for them, as well as adequate and 

appropriate long-term care facilities, we need to have all of that, 

all of that into our policies. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think looking at this Bill, the intent as I said 

was to put in principle, put into legislation the principles that 

we have, that we all agree on and all believe in, and that we 

find some way to actually give seniors a voice in saying, I am 

not getting this; I am not being served well. And have some 

way of recognizing that they do have legitimate concerns and 

they do have the right to all the things I read at the beginning of 

my second reading speech. 

 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, my time is getting short and I do 

have to read the motion at the end and make a motion to one . . . 

It is, the Bill is 610. So I want to make sure that we have time 

for that because many seniors . . . I‟m going to speak actually in 

a few minutes at a seniors‟ Christmas party. They‟ve had the 

seniors‟ bill of rights for a few months. They‟ve passed it 

around to all of their members and people who come in there. 

The Saskatchewan Seniors Association, as you‟ve seen in the 

many, many, many hundreds of people from all over the 

province — I‟ve read so many of their communities — that 

they‟re all really very interested in this. 

 

The seniors‟ centres are a key part of the health of the seniors, 

especially in rural Saskatchewan. People really do want to see 

this government act on that, and they need to have some 

indication that that‟s a serious concern. 

 

They were turned down last year when they asked, and now 

again they‟re asking for I think it‟s around $300,000 that would 

keep the seniors‟ centres open. And that I think is pretty cheap, 

Mr. Speaker, considering all the things that will happen to 

seniors who won‟t have this access to programs, workshops, 

and a place to socialize and to visit with their friends. 

 

A lot of times seniors are victims of loneliness and isolation. 

And seniors‟ centres are a very, very good place for them to go 

to visit with their friends, to keep abreast of what‟s happening 

in the community, and to also have some of the programs that 

the health districts run through them. 

 

Now I think that when we talk about loneliness, we also have to 

talk about transportation. Many times we heard about how 

seniors are isolated and how they can‟t get out and what they 

need in transportation. That‟s something I haven‟t even talked 

about, Mr. Speaker. But many of the things that we have and 

would expect to see for seniors come through these very good 

agencies who work on behalf of seniors, like the Council on 

Aging in Saskatoon, the Seniors Mechanism here in Regina, 

and the Saskatchewan Seniors Association working on behalf 

of seniors‟ centres. 

 

Those people are all volunteers, pretty much all volunteers, but 

they‟re active seniors who are very, very interested and 

concerned about the lives of seniors and making the lives of 

seniors better. The work that they do is amazing, and I think 

that we can‟t thank them enough. Their volunteers are truly 

amazing, and they have a wide, wide base of volunteers. And 

I‟m looking forward to meeting many of them this afternoon 

when I go to speak to them at their Christmas party. 

 

And I think that I would like to be able to tell them — I‟m 

certainly going to be showing them the Hansard — I certainly 

would like to be able to tell them when this Bill comes back 

again that all of the members of this House supported a seniors‟ 

bill of rights; that we all agree in principle with the principles 

that were defined in the Bill; that seniors do have a right to all 

the things I read in at the beginning of my speech. 

 

So I think that we really do need to make sure that as the 

legislature here, as members of this legislature, we send that 

message to seniors, that despite what we do disagree on in this 

House — we have valid and legitimate disagreements — we do 

have a common concern about the rights and privileges of 



December 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6495 

seniors; and that we do have a concern for them and that we do 

have a commitment to actually work to make their lives better 

and recognize the many, many years of service and 

commitment that they‟ve given to Saskatchewan; and that they 

really do deserve our respect and our attention, and they do 

really deserve the commitment that this Bill will give them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, given that, I now move second reading of Bill 

No. 615, The Seniors’ Bill of Rights Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Eastview has 

moved second reading of Bill No. 615, The Seniors’ Bill of 

Rights Act. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize 

the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure 

to rise on this particular issue because it is an important issue. 

The member opposite talked about seniors sleeping in the 

streets. If that is the case, Mr. Speaker — and I‟ve seen no 

evidence of it — that‟s because those members did not provide 

any additional long-term care beds. It seems to be a surprise to 

them that people actually aged and became seniors. 

 

I have a lot more to say about this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, 

and I will at a later date. So at this time I would move that we 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cannington has moved 

adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the member 

from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be rising 

to move adjournment, but before that I would ask leave to make 

a brief statement to the House concerning our recess. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cannington has asked for 

leave to make a statement regarding the Christmas season and 

adjournment. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

House Adjournment 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

before I move adjournment of the House, I would like to take 

the opportunity to wish all members of the Assembly and all 

residents of this province a very Merry Christmas and a Happy 

New Year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The conclusion of the fall sitting of this legislature gives us an 

opportunity to express our gratitude to the many people that 

make it possible for the members to carry out their duties in this 

legislature. First, Mr. Speaker, our spouses and our families for 

their support, their patience, and their perspectives, Mr. 

Speaker, which they often provide to us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a thank you to our respective staffs, both here in 

the legislature and our staff in the constituency office, Mr. 

Speaker. Without their support, without their due diligence, our 

work as elected members would be significantly restricted. And 

they allow us to talk and meet with the constituents across the 

province. 

 

[13:00] 

 

I‟d like to also thank and wish a Merry Christmas to the staff of 

the legislature, Mr. Speaker; Journals and Hansard; the 

Speaker‟s office; the Clerks and their staff; the Pages, who did 

an excellent job; the Sergeant-at-Arms; visitor services; and the 

various other staff around the building, financial services; 

maintenance; and the cafeteria, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On behalf of the government members I would also like to take 

the opportunity to thank the Opposition House Leader and the 

opposition members for their co-operation in this session. We 

managed to complete and pass a number of significant pieces of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to thank the 

opposition for their co-operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to also wish Merry Christmas and a thank 

you to our constituents and thank them for the honour of being 

able to represent them in the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

As the new year approaches and we reflect on the year that has 

passed, we know that 2010 saw significant progress within our 

province, but also some hardships, Mr. Speaker, especially the 

many farm families in rural Saskatchewan that were affected by 

flooding and the people across the province with all the storms 

whose homes and businesses were also flooded, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the next few weeks we shall share in the joy 

and fellowship of this Christmas season, and we will keep those 

families and all the families in our province in our minds, of 

those who are less fortunate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In closing, I would like to once again thank you, Mr. Speaker, 

and all the members of the Legislative Assembly and wish them 

a very Merry Christmas and a healthy and Happy New Year, 

2011. With that, Mr. Speaker, I move that the House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Before placing the question, I 

would recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would ask 

leave to just make a few comments about Christmas as well, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has asked for 

leave to make a few comments regarding the season. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like 



6496 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2010 

to join with the Government House Leader in wishing a Merry 

Christmas to all members of the Assembly and our families, 

Mr. Speaker, but more importantly, to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. This is a very special time of year 

for families, a time when families get the opportunity to get 

together to share some special time and of course, Mr. Speaker, 

to reflect upon the meaning of Christmas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d be remiss also if I didn‟t thank the many 

people who make our jobs easier — those who work in our 

offices, those who work in the Legislative Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, those who work at various roles in support of doing 

our jobs, Mr. Speaker. And there are some that spend long 

hours and are very flexible to meet the needs of the members — 

those who work in the office of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, those who work in Hansard, and those who are Pages 

who go out of their way to make our lives easier, Mr. Speaker. 

There are many, many people in this building who work very, 

very hard on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to ensure 

that this Assembly operates and functions and delivers for the 

people of Saskatchewan the policies and procedures that 

provide the services to them across our province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this has been a very fulfilling session in 

many ways. We‟ve had the opportunity to debate very serious 

issues to the people of Saskatchewan, the opportunity to look 

and examine the services of which the people of Saskatchewan 

rely upon, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s our role as members of the 

legislature. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to just take the 

opportunity to thank all members and those staff who work in 

this building for their hard work over the last several months 

and to wish everybody a very Merry Christmas across the 

province of Saskatchewan and all the members and employees 

of this Assembly. And have a very happy holiday season. 

 

The Speaker: — Before acknowledging that we‟re now past 1 

p.m., the Speaker would like to as well extend his wishes and 

greetings to the members. But first of all, a thank you to the 

Clerks who serve us at the table: Mr. Putz, Ms. Lang, and our 

Law Clerk, Mr. Ring. Acknowledging the work of the Pages 

who‟ve served us this fall session: Laura, Alana, Sydney, 

Kayla, Quinn, and Tristan, we want to say thank you so you. To 

the staff in the Speaker‟s office who certainly have been an 

asset to the Speaker as well: Irene, Kathy, and Anna, thank you 

so much. 

 

And without going through the full list, as well acknowledging 

the work, as both the House leaders have already mentioned, 

the staff of the Legislative Assembly, those staff members who 

make our job and our duties much easier to perform. As well I 

would like to say a special thank you to the House leaders, the 

Whips, and the caucus Chairs, and the leaders of the two 

political parties for their involvement, their support, their words 

at different times of just bringing the Speaker to attention. I 

think by co-operating together it makes it a lot more easier for 

the Assembly to work together. So I thank you for your 

thoughts and your input. 

 

At this time I want to extend my best for a Merry Christmas and 

a Happy New Year. And we look forward to seeing you in the 

spring. And being past the hour of adjournment, this Assembly 

stands adjourned until 1:30 p.m., March the 7th, 2011. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:06.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6467 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6467, 6468 

  Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................... 6467, 6468 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6467 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6467 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6468 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6468 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6468 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6469 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6469 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6469 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6469 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6469 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6470 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 The Gift of Christmas 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6470 

 Weyburn Golfer Completes Successful Tour 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6470 

 Poverty in Saskatchewan 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6471 

 Breast Friends Inspire 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6471 

 The Logic Box 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6471 

 Christmas Blessings  

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6472 

 Gifts 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6472 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Contract Negotiations and Supply of Physicians 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6472 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6472 

 Children in Care 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6473 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6473 

 Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6474 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6474 

 Out-of-Province Medical Care 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6475 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6475 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6476 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 SaskPower Demonstration Project 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6477 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6477 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 618 — The Municipal and Public Employees’ Pension Plans (Amendment) Act 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6478 

ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6478 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Point of Order 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6479 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 Children in Care 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6479 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6479 



 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Health Care Wait Times  

  Weekes ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6480, 6490 

  Higgins ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6482, 6489 

  Wyant ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6483, 6489 

  Junor .............................................................................................................................................................................. 6485, 6489 

  Tell ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6486, 6490 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6487 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6489 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6489 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6490 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6490 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 615 — The Seniors’ Bill of Rights Act 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6491 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6495 

MOTIONS 

 House Adjournment 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6495 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6495 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6496 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


