




















































Hansard: May 11, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 59A  TUESDAY, MAY 11, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5469 

 May 11, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

great privilege for me to introduce to you and to all members of 

this Assembly a great group of grade 5 students from the city of 

Swift Current, from École Oman Elementary School on the 

south side of my hometown. 

 

Mr. Speaker, joining the 48 grade 5 students today are teachers 

Kim Thomliston and Deb Linklater; also chaperones with the 

group today, Pam Kritzer, Marnie Kay-MacMillan, Dana 

McCallum, and Pam LeBelle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a tradition for École Oman Elementary 

School to bring students to the legislature so students can learn 

a little bit more about this place and maybe about government, 

and then it’s the tradition for the MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] to get to meet with them, which is 

always a highlight of the day. 

 

An Hon. Member: — And buy a Blizzard. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And members around me are saying that the 

tradition is also that I would buy all the kids a Blizzard. How 

very, very helpful my colleagues are. I don’t know if we’ll get 

to that, but I think there’s probably juice and some other things 

waiting for us. And then we’ll have a little bit of a meeting a 

little bit later on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge the teachers who bring this 

group every year, bring the grade 5’s every year, and I also 

want to ask if members will help me welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I have a couple of introductions to make. First of all 

are three distinguished gentlemen sitting in your gallery. The 

first gentleman is Dave Dutchak who is the president and CEO 

[chief executive officer] of MD Ambulance. He’s also the 

former provincial chamber of commerce president, worked 

diligently through that organization to get the province on a 

growth agenda. We thank him for that work as well as the great 

work that he does in the Saskatoon area delivering probably a 

first-class EMS [emergency medical services] system for the 

citizens of Saskatoon. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’d also like to 

introduce Bruce Farr who is the president and the EMS chief of 

Canada. He runs the Toronto EMS service, Mr. Speaker. He is 

one of the keynote speakers at the SEMSA [Saskatchewan 

Emergency Medical Services Association] convention and trade 

show taking place in Prince Albert on May the 11th to 13th. His 

speech is on “Mobile Health Care in Saskatchewan: Making the 

Vision a Reality.” And I think he’ll be talking an awful lot 

about the health bus that we’re so proud of here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And as well, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I’d like to 

introduce Ken Luciak. He is the director of the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region emergency medical services and is 

responsible for the overall supervision of 11 emergency medical 

services and the regional emergency communications centre for 

the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. He does a great job in 

that area too, a great service that we all enjoy in the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region. So I’d like all members to welcome 

those three, and I have one more introduction once we’re done 

welcoming those three. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery is Zeba Ahmad. Zeba 

is the former Chair of the Royal University Hospital 

Foundation. They have done absolutely marvellous work, that 

foundation. I had happened to be able to witness some of that 

work that they have put in over the last number of years. 

 

The foundation has been in place for many, many years, but one 

of their projects most recently was the Irene and Les Dubé 

Centre for Mental Health on the shores of the Saskatchewan at 

the University of Saskatchewan, of course. It is a beautiful 

facility, and that foundation did amazing work, raising over $10 

million for mental health and that particular facility in 

particular. So I’d like all members to welcome Zeba to her 

Legislative Assembly and thank her for the great work that she 

has done through the foundation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 

Minister of Health in welcoming our guests. I can’t actually see 

Dave behind the clock there, but I know he’s up there and I do 

want to say that the Dutchaks have a long family history of 

delivering emergency medical services to Saskatchewan, and 

they’ve done a wonderful job. 

 

I also want to welcome Mr. Farr to Saskatchewan. And I know 

he’ll probably be very interesting at the SEMSA convention. 

And also Mr. Luciak from Regina. They all do a wonderful job 

in delivering EMS. And Zeba. Hi. Zeba and I are friends. I’d 

like to welcome her here today too. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 

all members of the Legislative Assembly I’m pleased to 

introduce, in the west gallery, Heather Malek who is a member 

of a group of citizens concerned about this government’s 

decision to privatize SCN, the Saskatchewan Communications 

Network, without consultation or actually any sense of what 

they were actually doing. 

 

Heather today had an opportunity to hand in to the Premier a 

petition in support of SCN with close to three . . . well, 2,500 

signatures, 2,451 signatures from 80 different cities and towns 



5470 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2010 

across Saskatchewan, everywhere from Assiniboia to Yorkton 

and everything in between. So she’ll continue with her group to 

help the government see the error of its ways. So please join me 

in welcoming Heather to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens of 

Saskatchewan who are concerned over the condition and the 

safety of our highways. This petition pertains to Highway No. 

10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and the junction of Highway 1. 

The petition goes on to state that this portion of the highway is a 

main traffic route to a year-round tourist destination as well as 

this portion of the highway serves three major inland grain 

terminals. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and the 

junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety to 

Saskatchewan’s motoring public. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from Fort 

Qu’Appelle, Kamsack, Theodore, and Yorkton, Saskatchewan. 

I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of the protection of wildlife habitat 

lands. Mr. Speaker, we know that The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act protects 3.4 million acres of uplands and 

wetlands, or one-third of all wildlife habitat lands in 

Saskatchewan in their natural state, and that citizens are 

concerned that the government is repealing the schedule of 

listings of these designated lands. And the prayer reads, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately and 

without delay recognize the importance of the protection 

of wildlife habitat lands and immediately withdraw the 

proposed amendments that will negatively affect the 

protection of wildlife habitat lands; 

 

And in so doing cause the provincial government to 

commit to meaningful and adequate consultation with all 

stakeholders that will be affected by future legislative 

changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by citizens from 

Redvers, Storthoaks, and Moose Jaw. I so present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition on behalf of citizens of the province who are 

concerned that seniors who live on fixed income, about seniors 

who live on fixed incomes and are victims of physical, 

emotional, and financial abuse. They also know that seniors 

have, or believe that seniors have a right to social and economic 

security and a right to live free from poverty. And they also say 

that seniors should have a right to protection from abuse, 

neglect, and exploitation: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors Bill of Rights which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

The people that have signed this, Mr. Speaker, are from Climax, 

Frontier, Val Marie, Saskatoon, and one other place, Kenaston. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

present another petition in support of maintaining educational 

assistants in the province. Mr. Speaker, as we all know, the 

Ministry of Education published a document in November of 

2009 looking at the ratios for educational assistants in the 

province. What this petition calls for in the prayer is: 

 

That the government provide funding for the required 

number of educational assistants to provide special needs 

students with the support they need and maintain a 

positive learning environment for all Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

I so present. And these signatures are from Regina and 

Saskatoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing for Saskatoon. And we know that there’s a shrinking 

number of rental accommodations in Saskatoon and the rents 

are going up. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to develop an affordable housing program 

that will result in a greater number of quality and 

affordable rental units to be made available to more people 

in Saskatoon and Saskatchewan, and that the government 

also implement a process of rent review or rent control to 

better protect tenants in a non-competitive housing 

environment. 

 



May 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5471 

And these people come from the city of Saskatoon. I do so 

present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 

petition in support of the expansion of the graduate retention 

program, a call for fairness for post-secondary students here in 

Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Moose Jaw. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present yet another petition respecting another rural water issue. 

And the residents of Furdale have been directed by a 

government ministry that they may no longer treat non-potable 

water using methods approved by Sask Health. The Furdale 

residents have dealt in good faith with SaskWater for over 30 

years and have paid large amounts for their domestic systems 

and in-home treatment equipment. The alternative water supply 

being referred to by the government ministry is a private 

operator offering treated, non-pressurized water at great cost 

with no guarantee of quality, quantity, or availability of water. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Furdale. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 

present a petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan 

concerned about this government’s disregard for legal, 

constitutional, and human rights. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon and 

Moose Jaw. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 

here today to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 

from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive $1 billion deficit budgets and they allude 

to the billions of dollars of debt growth projected under the 

Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens from 

Preeceville, Pelly, Rhein, Stornoway, and Yorkton. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today to present a petition in support of midwifery here in 

Saskatchewan. This petition is signed by citizens concerned that 

there’s a huge disparity in access to midwifery services and 

that, despite the fact The Midwifery Act was proclaimed two 

years ago, there’s still only seven registered midwives serving 

all of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to keep its promise to broaden the options 

for women and their families and recognize that presently 

this promise remains unfulfilled, as many communities in 

Saskatchewan still do not have midwives employed by 

their respective health regions; 

 

And in doing so, your petitioners pray the honourable 

Legislative Assembly cause the government to support 

midwifery in Saskatchewan by making funding available 

for additional midwife positions in Saskatchewan’s health 

regions as well as independent positions; 

 

And, furthermore, the honourable Legislative Assembly 

cause the government to encourage an increase in the 



5472 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2010 

number of licensed midwives in Saskatchewan by 

extending liability insurance, thereby making it possible 

for prospective midwives to achieve the number of births 

required to successfully apply for a licence with the newly 

formed College of Midwives. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Regina 

today. I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Child Care Centre Opens in Moose Jaw 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this morning I had the great privilege, along with the 

member from Moose Jaw North, of attending the opening of the 

Explore “N” Learn Childcare Centre located in the heart of my 

constituency, Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Approximately 75 toddler, preschool, and school age children 

will be cared for in this newly renovated space. This centre is 

the newest initiative of the Moose Jaw YMCA [Young Men’s 

Christian Association] who now has four child care centres 

around our city. 

 

The YMCA has been doing some great work in our community. 

Last fall the Strong Start Family Centre was opened after many 

years of work to develop a community centre that focused on 

families. The renovated facility brings together a range of 

services to support the parents and children of our city. This is a 

one-stop, single entry point for parenting information, 

community resources, referrals to professional services, 

practical advice, and family and children’s programming and 

events. The family centre offers a parenting and pregnancy 

resource library, a toy lending library, a creative playground, 

and an indoor space, family literacy events, infant, toddler, and 

preschool programs, and will host numerous community and 

family events throughout the year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate and thank Jeff Fox, chief 

executive officer of the Moose Jaw YMCA, and his staff. Also 

to be congratulated is the YMCA board of directors led by 

President Rob Hugg. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join 

me in wishing continued success for the Moose Jaw YMCA in 

all their endeavours. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

National Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May is National MS 

[multiple sclerosis] Awareness Month. Multiple sclerosis is a 

complex disease. It is an unpredictable, often disabling disease 

of the central nervous system which is composed of the brain 

and spinal cord. MS affects vision, hearing, memory, balance, 

and mobility. Its effects are physical, emotional, financial, and 

last a lifetime. While it is most often diagnosed in young adults 

aged 15 to 40, we know that it affects children, even some as 

young as two years old. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize the Multiple Sclerosis 

Society of Canada, notably its Saskatchewan division. 

Saskatchewan’s MS Society offers a variety of services such as 

educational sessions and conferences covering a variety of 

topics related to MS. These services are designed for both 

people with MS and their families. 

 

Saskatchewan’s MS Society offers alternative services. These 

services include Tai Chi, aquatic fitness programs, strength 

training, and social and support group activities. Most 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s MS Society offers 

supportive counselling. 

 

Until we end MS, people affected by the disease will continue 

to face many challenges. I encourage all people in this 

Assembly to keep all those affected with MS in your thoughts 

and prayers. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

International Nurses Week 

 

Ms. Junor: — International Nurses Week was established by 

the International Council of Nurses in 1965. The week begins 

on May 6th each year and culminates on May 12th, the birthday 

of Florence Nightingale, considered to be the founder of 

modern nursing. 

 

The Canadian theme for nursing week 2010 is, Nursing: You 

Can’t Live Without It! And nothing could be more truthful. 

Right now there is a nurse helping a woman become a mother, a 

nurse holding a dying man’s hand, a nurse starting a child’s IV 

[intravenous], a nurse listening to an Alzheimer’s patient tell a 

story, and a nurse missing their family while caring for yours. 

 

The role of nurses are many and varied. They do not only serve 

as staff nurses but also educators, nurse practitioners, 

policy-makers, advocates, and researchers, and even in some 

cases MLAs. Nurses are there for all of us in our ordinary and 

extraordinary times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government has been full of talk 

and rhetoric about their appreciation for nurses. But nurses are 

part of a health care team and, of 25,000 health care workers, 

many of them are licensed practical nurses and they’re still 

without a contract. They would like to see and tell the minister 

and the government that they’ve seen nothing but disrespect and 

insulting job offers from day one. The Sask Party government 

has made a mockery of their collective bargaining process, and 

health care workers and their patients are paying the price. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do ask that all members join with me in 

congratulating the nursing team and celebrating their hard work 

and dedication this week and every week. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 



May 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5473 

Motorcycle Safety Week 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

inform the Assembly that May 8 to 14 is Motorcycle Safety 

Week in Saskatchewan. This safety week serves as a reminder 

for motorcyclists to get training, follow safe riding practices, 

and for all road users to share the road with motorcyclists. It is 

sponsored by the Saskatchewan Safety Council with the help of 

SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Safety Council is an . . . 

[inaudible] . . . non-profit organization. They are determined to 

make Saskatchewan a safer place. Motorcycles aren’t enclosed, 

making their riders much more vulnerable in collisions. They 

are also harder to spot by other drivers on the road, especially 

after a long Saskatchewan winter when they’re not used to 

seeing them. And sadly, Mr. Speaker, there are sometimes 

tragic results. In 2009 there were 202 injuries and two deaths a 

result of motorcycle collisions in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Motorcycle Safety Week serves both to remind 

motorcyclists to drive safely and to remind other road users that 

motorcycles are back on the roads. Mr. Speaker, I thank the 

Saskatchewan Safety Council for sponsoring this important 

safety week. I hope that all motorcyclists can have a safe and 

enjoyable summer. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Two Worlds 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it seems that this Premier 

has been living in his own world. In the Premier’s world, the 

economy is growing because of his divine leadership. In the real 

world, Saskatchewan’s economy shrunk by 6.3 per cent in 

2009, the second worst performance among Canadian 

provinces. 

 

In the Premier’s world, the province will be debt free. In the 

real world, and according to his own budget documents and 

because of his mismanagement, total public debt is set to 

increase 55 per cent by 2014. 

 

In the Premier’s world, he pretends to support our Crowns. In 

the real world, Crown corporation debt is projected to increase 

by 117 per cent by 2014, and 100 per cent of profits and all 

equity has been taken to fund his deficit budget. 

 

In the Premier’s world, Saskatchewan will overtake Alberta in 

oil production this year. In the real world, under the so-called 

leadership of this Premier, Saskatchewan’s barrel of oil 

equivalent has dropped by 44 per cent between 2007 and 2009. 

 

In the Premier’s world, this incompetent government pretends it 

is moving Saskatchewan forward. In the real world, according 

to Doug Elliott, “we just lost all the gains we made in the last 

three years.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan would 

prefer truth and straight talk over the spin and the rhetoric from 

this Premier every day of the week. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mining Operations Receive Awards 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

congratulate Cameco on receiving two safety awards last 

evening at the Canadian Institute for Mining, Metallurgy and 

Petroleum, the CIM awards in Vancouver. Cameco’s mining 

operations which received these prestigious awards were 

McArthur River and the Cigar Lake operations. 

 

The McArthur River operation received the John T. Ryan 

National Safety Trophy in the metal mines category for its 

safety record during the year 2009. The John T. Ryan Trophies 

are presented to a Canadian metal mine, a select mine, and a 

coal mine for maintaining an outstanding commitment to safety 

through obtaining the lowest injury rate per 200,000 hours 

worked. Throughout this time period, it reported an impressive 

one injury for 756,990 hours worked. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Cigar Lake operation received the National 

Special Award certificate for its 2009 safety record. It had an 

equally impressive record, reporting one injury for 717,932 

working hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join with me in 

commending Cameco for receiving these two prestigious 

awards. This was achieved through teamwork by all their 

employees and by a dedicated commitment to employee safety. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Response to Questions 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, perhaps 

it’s understandable why the Premier would get a bit defensive 

yesterday. After all, I’m sure he wants to avoid being put under 

public scrutiny for his record of unprecedented incompetence, 

financial mismanagement of epic proportions, debt that is 

projected to increase 55 per cent by 2014, and a multitude of 

broken promises and mean-spirited cuts. But being ashamed of 

this track record is no excuse for avoiding serious issues. 

 

He can try to rely on his overpaid political staffers to cover his 

tracks and enter into the debate. But perhaps someone should 

tell his staff that if they really wanted to debate in the 

Assembly, they should quit hiding behind the Premier and 

actually run for office. When the Premier was asked serious 

questions about why he refuses to consult with Saskatchewan 

people on anything, the Premier avoided the questions. When 

asked serious questions about the financial mismanagement we 

have seen over the last two years, the Premier avoided the 

questions. 

 

When asked serious questions about the fact that our debt is 

growing under his watch, the Premier again avoided the 

questions. When asked serious questions about the fact that 

Saskatchewan people are paying the price for the Premier’s 

incompetence, he yet again avoided the questions. 

 

That was the pattern yesterday, Mr. Speaker. I guess when you 



5474 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2010 

have a track record to be ashamed of like this Premier does, 

when you’ve broken trust with Saskatchewan people, like this 

Premier has, Mr. Speaker, I guess that’s the best you can do. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Proposed Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, a proposal by Amicus Health 

Inc. to build a 100-bed facility will be presented tomorrow to 

the board of the Saskatoon Health Region and a public 

announcement will be made thereafter. The minister can assure 

us all he wants that no final decision has been made, but the fact 

is this wouldn’t be going to the Saskatoon Health Region unless 

there was a concrete and detailed agreement. To the minister: 

what are the terms of the agreement with Amicus? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said 

yesterday in my response to the questions, is that yes, the 

member opposite is right. The Saskatoon Regional Health 

Authority will be looking at a proposal put forward by Amicus 

to supply 100 long-term care beds within the Saskatoon area. 

 

All the details haven’t been worked out, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a proposal that’s going to the health region that 

will see Amicus build the facility, and the health region through 

the Ministry of Health, for lack of a better term, rent or utilize 

the beds, pay for the bed usage, Mr. Speaker, as well as the 

facility fee. All the details haven’t been worked out. But, Mr. 

Speaker, that is kind of a new look at how to deliver long-term 

care, Mr. Speaker, especially . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Well the member says, that’s for sure. 

 

Because what we saw under 16 years of government, Mr. 

Speaker, was certainly not enough beds. They didn’t do enough 

for long-term care. When you look in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, they absolutely let many, many of the facilities 

deteriorate. They should be ashamed of their record on 

long-term care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if I recall, this 

government just cancelled 13 long-term care . . . [inaudible] . . . 

Now the minister says that neither the government nor the 

health region will guarantee any loans to Amicus. But he was 

less clear on whether the government or the Saskatoon Health 

Region have made an agreement that Amicus could take to the 

bank that would help them secure a $27 million loan. 

 

To the minister: what agreement has been made with Amicus? 

And how much will these commitments cost the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, under the Catholic 

Health Ministry, Amicus — which is a subsidiary of that — is 

proposing to build a long-term care facility in Saskatoon that 

will be really quite revolutionizing, Mr. Speaker, because it’s 

looking at a number of areas such as aging in place, such as the 

opportunities for couples to stay together if one needs level 3 

and 4 care, Mr. Speaker. This is new thinking regarding 

long-term care. As I said, the details are yet to be worked out. 

 

But there will be . . . Amicus will . . . however they raise their 

money, whether it’s probably through a bank, it is an agreement 

between the bank and Amicus, not through the Ministry of 

Health, Mr. Speaker. The agreement would be, as far as 

utilization of those beds, on a cost per bed as well as a facility 

fee, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting because we 

didn’t see any of that new type of thinking under the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] to fix 16 years when we saw deterioration 

after deterioration of our long-term care facilities right across 

the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, currently the government pays 

affiliated health facilities a modest debt service stipend of $3 

per patient per day to offset the cost of any debt they incurred in 

building their facility. That amounts to about $1,095 per year. 

But Amicus is financing 100 per cent of the cost of building this 

$27 million facility. It stands to reason, Mr. Speaker, that their 

debt servicing cost will be substantially higher than facilities 

who have to front the 35 per cent portion, and taxpayers are 

going to be forced to pay a substantial premium to Amicus to 

offset these higher costs. 

 

To the minister: does the agreement with Amicus stipulate how 

much they’re receiving per patient per day in debt servicing 

costs? And how much of a premium will Saskatchewan 

taxpayers be forced to pay, and for how long? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I want to correct 

something that was said, not in this past question but in the 

question before; something that is completely untrue, Mr. 

Speaker, that 13 health care facilities have been cancelled in the 

province. That couldn’t be further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. 

Those communities are working diligently to do the scoping 

around the facility, to also do the raising of their share of the 

capital, the 35 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Government will be there 

with our 65 per cent when that facility is ready to move 

forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Catholic Health Ministry has delivered excellent health 

care in this province for many, many years, in fact probably 

well before when the province was founded. Whether it was the 

Grey Nuns Hospital here in Regina, St. Paul’s in Saskatoon, 

they’ve delivered great health care throughout this province, 

Mr. Speaker. This is another opportunity for the Catholic Health 

Ministry to be involved in health care and provide great care for 

the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 



May 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5475 

Ms. Atkinson: — The minister insisted yesterday that neither 

the government nor the health region was guaranteeing any loan 

that Amicus might be taking out. But if the government or the 

health region has agreed to pay Amicus a substantially higher 

debt servicing stipend than any other facilities like Oliver 

Lodge which is presently raising their 35 per cent, or Sunnyside 

nursing home, then Amicus could leverage that guaranteed 

income to get a loan, 100 per cent financing of a loan. Either 

way, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan taxpayers and patients are 

paying a premium for this deal the government is cooking up. 

 

To the minister: how much of a premium will Saskatchewan 

taxpayers and patients be forced to pay to help Amicus secure 

their loan? And most importantly, will other affiliates that are 

doing walkathons and golf tournaments and bake sales, are they 

going to get the same terms? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous 

answer that the Catholic Health Ministry has delivered health 

care in this province for many, many years. I find it very 

interesting, the opposition seems to feel that we’ve got more 

than enough long-term care beds in the Saskatoon area. They’re 

obviously not in favour of this agreement. 

 

It is a different form of agreement. This agreement takes a little 

different structure, Mr. Speaker. But with the Catholic Health 

Ministry moving forward with the capital cost, we will be 

covering the cost as far as the daily rate and the facility fee, Mr. 

Speaker, as we move forward. The agreement hasn’t been 

finalized. It’s up to the Saskatoon Health Region to have a look 

at the agreement too to see whether it makes sense to them, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But what I do know is what is important to people in this 

province is to ensure that we’ve got modern, new . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I find it interesting observing that one 

member on the opposition side actually putting his earpiece to 

his ear to get a clear response. I ask the Minister of Health to 

wrap up his comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what I would say is that 

what is priority number one for our government is to ensure that 

we have the proper amount of long-term care facilities, the 

proper amount of beds throughout the province that are modern, 

that haven’t seen the deterioration that many of our facilities 

have seen under NDP governments. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Coverage for Dental Treatment 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week in response 

to the Dale Regel dental implant case, the Minister of Health 

said: 

 

This hasn’t worked out the way I would like to see it work 

out. This is one area that should have received far more 

attention than it did. I [meaning the minister] would far 

rather be proactive than reactive. 

 

Ryan Foulston was 17 years old when an aggressive tumour 

was detected in his jaw. He has been without some of his 

bottom teeth for the last six years. Mr. Speaker, is the minister 

going to be proactive rather than reactive, and is he going to 

give Ryan’s case the attention it deserves right now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, many of these policies 

and regulations that govern payment of, for example in this 

case, dental implants, have been in place for a very long time, 

probably through the ’60s, Mr. Speaker. Through many NDP 

governments, Mr. Speaker, they found it not a priority for their 

government to move on it in 16 years of NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have looked at this situation. I have asked the 

ministry to go back and look at the regulation to compare it to 

what other provinces do. We know that some other provinces 

cover this type of implant, Mr. Speaker, so I have asked the 

ministry to look at what we need to do to change the 

regulations. They have instructed to me that they will, through 

me, be bringing something back to cabinet in the very, very 

near future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, Ryan is here today in the gallery 

with his grandmother, Annette, and just wants to tell his story. 

The result of the surgery to remove Ryan’s tumour was the loss 

of nine bottom teeth. Ryan’s oral and maxillofacial surgeon 

writes: 

 

With the resection involving nine teeth, this space is much 

too large for conventional crowns and bridges. Titanium 

dental implants are currently the only option for 

permanent reconstruction of a defect this size. I would 

respectfully suggest to you that our provincial health care 

plan provide coverage for this reconstructive effort. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is clearly a medical procedure as a result of 

the removal of a tumour. And the minister has now announced 

another review, and we do have a history of watching him 

review everything and decide nothing and do less. 

 

Is the minister, the question today to the minister: is he going to 

cover the cost of Ryan’s reconstructive surgery that will include 

titanium implants? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, my sympathy goes out 

to Ryan and any person that finds themselves in this situation 

that, through no fault of their own, whether it’s a tumour that 

has caused the removal of some of their teeth, Mr. Speaker . . . 

Of course Sask Health would pay for the removal of the 

tumour, but that doesn’t replace their, for example, dental work 

back to where it was. 

 

That’s why I’ve asked the ministry to look into this. We’re 



5476 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2010 

comparing what we’re doing to other provinces, and many 

provinces cover this. There is variation from province to 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what I am saying is that they have my, the families of the 

province have my guarantee that not only are we reviewing this, 

we’ll have a cabinet decision item going to cabinet in the near 

future, in the very near future, once the ministry is able to get its 

work done, Mr. Speaker, so that we as a Government of 

Saskatchewan can decide to change some of the programs that 

were certainly antiquated under the former government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, what we’ve also seen from this 

minister when he does reviews, he takes the low road. 

Whatever’s the lowest common denominator across the 

country, he will go down to that standard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another person is in the gallery, Charlene Sullivan. 

And on March 24th, Ms. Sullivan was in the legislature asking 

for coverage for implant-retained prosthesis. Her dentist said 

it’s the only option for Charlene because she’s unable to wear 

any type of dentures due to severe allergies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the question was asked, the Premier 

answered and said, quote, “I’m not familiar with this specific 

case . . . forward it to our office, we can look into it.” Mr. 

Speaker, all the Premier did with Charlene’s case was refer it to 

the Health minister, who had done nothing with it the first time 

he got it and nothing with it the second time when it was sent 

by the Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: both the Premier and the Health 

minister have turned their backs on Charlene. Today, will the 

minister finally take the time to actually look at the case and 

provide Charlene the help she needs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, once again, you know, 

our sympathy goes out to anyone that finds themselves in this 

position, that needs some dental reconstructive work done 

because of no fault of their own because of whether it was a 

cancerous tumour or malignant tumour, Mr. Speaker. The 

removal of that tumour is covered, but of course the dental 

work isn’t under regulation, under regulations that have been 

put in place long before we came to government. These 

regulations need to be reviewed. 

 

And there are some very compelling cases. Certainly Dale, Dale 

Regel last week was a very compelling case. And that’s 

certainly why we have moved in that direction, to look at that 

regulation, to compare it to what is done in other provinces so 

that we can hopefully help as many of these people as we 

possibly can, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting that they would be 

lobbying so hard for a regulation change, when they were in 

government for 16 years, and they ignored that very regulation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, it’s funny because when I was 

talking to the people that are in the gallery before they came in 

here today, I basically told them what the minister would say. 

So he’s basically telling the truth what I said to them. You’re 

right on script. You’re right on script. 

 

And the letters that the people have got, the minister says he’s 

sorry, but the letters that the people have got are basically form 

letters saying, I’m sorry for your situation, but we won’t do 

anything for you. And basically I think someone should tell the 

minister that he is in charge of regulations. He can make them 

change any time, which he’s done in other cases. This one does 

not have to reviewed and studied and looked at across the 

province. It’s just a stalling technique, Mr. Speaker. Every day 

I’m getting phone calls, emails, and letters telling me how the 

minister has turned his back on people asking for help to cover 

the costs of dental implants. 

 

Edward Enequist is a 31-year-old who in March, 2009 had a 

cancerous tumour removed from his jaw. His jaw had to be 

rebuilt and dentures are not an option. Edward needs dental 

implants. When Edward asked the Minister of Health for help, 

he received a form letter identical to the one received by Dale 

Regel, telling him the costs of dental implants will not be 

covered and expressing his sympathy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, where is the sympathy the minister talks about in 

this form letter? Every day that Dale Regel, Ryan Foulston, 

Edward Enequist, and Charlene Sullivan, and others in the same 

situation have to live without dental implants is one day too 

long. Is the minister changing the regulation soon? 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re aware of a number of cases that come forward, 

every year roughly, for this type of dental implant. Roughly 

about 10 per year, has been consistent for many years, Mr. 

Speaker. You know over the last two or three years, roughly 30 

people could’ve been covered that if we had the regulation 

changed. 

 

And if you extrapolate those numbers over 16 years of NDP 

government, 160 people who were in the very same position 

under the NDP government had to pay for those dental implants 

out of their own pockets, Mr. Speaker. That would be 160 

people that that former government turned their back on. No 

doubt those letters were sent at that time too. The only 

difference between that government and our government, Mr. 

Speaker, is we’ve seen this. We’ve reacted, Mr. Speaker, and 

you’ll see that a regulation change coming to cabinet will be 

there in a very short time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Consultation on Changes to Legislation 

 

Ms. Morin: — To the Minister of Environment: did she consult 

with the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] on 

The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act before bringing this Bill to 



May 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5477 

the legislature? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as I’ve stated many times in this House, we had a list of 

stakeholders who were notified of the changes that we were 

going to be making to WHPA [The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act], to the conservation easements, and to the assessment of 

Crown land in our province, Mr. Speaker. There were 

workshops that were organized last summer. People were 

invited to attend. We asked people for feedback, and some 

organizations offered that feedback. Some chose not to, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We had another meeting last Thursday which we invited a list 

of stakeholders to attend. Just about everybody showed up, Mr. 

Speaker. The FSIN was invited to attend. They declined to 

attend, Mr. Speaker. I’ve spoken with FSIN this morning at a 

meeting that we had and assured them that they would be 

included in the ongoing consultations that we’re going to have, 

based on a committee that was asked of us to strike up. And we 

will be putting that committee together, and the FSIN will be 

invited to be a member of that committee. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, those meetings that the 

ministry had in 2009 were not to discuss the legislation that’s 

before the House right now, it was to discuss the tool that was 

going to used to assess those lands. So let’s be clear on what 

those talks were about. 

 

The minister told this House on March 8th that Bill 132: 

 

. . . has been developed in consultation with a wide variety 

of stakeholders such as the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation, the Nature Conservancy of Canada, Nature 

Saskatchewan, Ducks Unlimited Canada, The Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations . . . 

 

According to Chief Lyle Whitefish: 

 

I find these statements extremely troubling since no such 

undertakings have occurred. There has been no attempt by 

your Ministry to enter into a consultation process with 

First Nations people regarding the expansion of the sale of 

Crown lands protected under The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act. 

 

Seems pretty clear, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: why did she 

tell the House that she had consulted with the FSIN when this is 

obviously not true? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t recall 

that the member opposite was invited, nor did she attend the 

meetings that we had about this last June. But I can say that the 

information that was sent out, talked about WHPA. It talked 

about conservation easements. It talked about lands being sold 

with restriction. It talked about land being sold without 

restriction. It talked about land being kept under the protection. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we were so secretive about our plans we 

even said, and I quote, “During the fall 2009 legislative session, 

the government intends to introduce amendments to The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and The Conservation 

Easements Act to reflect this new approach.” That’s how 

secretive we were, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the FSIN was given exactly the same information 

as every other stakeholder. They were given exactly the same 

opportunity as every other stakeholder, Mr. Speaker. And as I 

said, I asked them this morning to have representation on a 

committee that we are going to be putting together so that there 

can be direct involvement between stakeholders and 

government moving forward as we manage these lands. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, of all those stakeholders that 

the minister is referring to the SWF, Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation, released this today: “The SWF opposes dismantling 

The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act.” And they say they 

weren’t consulted. 

 

Nature Saskatchewan says, “We can assure you that no 

meaningful consultation regarding the sale of Crown lands has 

occurred with Nature Saskatchewan.” They weren’t consulted. 

The FSIN says they weren’t consulted. 

 

I can go on for a long time. I’ve a binder full of letters of people 

that she says were consulted that say they were not. Not only 

does this government have a legal duty to consult with First 

Nations and Métis people, they also have surplus funding set 

aside to do just that. The minister’s officials informed 

committee last night that of the $3 million set aside for the First 

Nations and Métis Consultation Participation Fund last year, 

$2,377,600 was unspent. Nearly 80 per cent of this line item 

was available last year, but this government still refused to 

consult with First Nations. 

 

The Ministry of First Nations and Métis Relations has nearly 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask the member to place the 

question. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Of the nearly $2.5 million of unused funds, 

what is the minister doing to consult with First Nations now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier and members 

of cabinet met with the FSIN this morning. We had good 

discussions. And as was pointed out at the beginning of the 

meeting, we’ll agree on a great many things; there will be 

things that we don’t necessarily agree on. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the issue of consultation, 



5478 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2010 

there remains in this year’s budget under the Ministry of FNMR 

[First Nations and Métis Relations], a $3 million Consultation 

Fund which is there for First Nations to access if they require 

the capacity to engage in consultations, Mr. Speaker. That is up 

to the First Nations to apply for that funding and the funding 

remains there. 

 

As for the WHPA legislation and the changes that we were 

making, Mr. Speaker, I have said that I invited the FSIN to have 

representation on the committee that we will be putting together 

to work on land conservation issues as we move forward with 

this legislation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I spoke to the FSIN after this 

meeting this morning as well and they still want to see the Bill 

pulled from the legislature. The only consultation the FSIN was 

offered was a last-minute workshop from the minister in this 

Bill’s final hours in the House. Mr. Speaker, this is not 

considered consultation to the FSIN, to the members on this 

side of the House, or to anyone in Saskatchewan quite frankly. 

According to Chief Lyle Whitefish: 

 

Requesting that the First Nations respond to these 

proposed legislative amendments in one consultation 

session and within a mere week’s notice without adequate 

information is unreasonable and not supported by law. 

 

To the minister: when you have nearly $2.5 million of unused 

funds earmarked specifically for consultation, what is your 

excuse for not consulting? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The FSIN and 

all of the other stakeholders that are involved in this were all 

given exactly the same opportunity to respond. They were all 

contacted in June of 2009, Mr. Speaker. It is my understanding 

that the FSIN did not access the consultation fund housed 

through FNMR for that purpose, Mr. Speaker. But they were 

given exactly the same opportunity as every other stakeholder. 

We contacted them in June of 2009. Some chose to respond, 

some did not, Mr. Speaker. That is their prerogative. I cannot 

speak for those individuals and those groups as to why they did 

not respond. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to note that the changes 

that we are making offer greater protection for land in this 

province than we currently see. Under current WHPA 

legislation, there is only a maximum of a $2,000 fine and very 

little in the way of enforcement, Mr. Speaker. Under the new 

WHPA legislation and the new conservation easements, we 

have increased the penalties to $100,000, Mr. Speaker, and a 

whole myriad of enforcement tools for the government to 

pursue. There is greater protection going forward, Mr. Speaker, 

than there ever was. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Here is what FSIN Chief Lyle Whitefish has to 

say about what the minister interprets: 

 

The program will reduce the amount of accessible lands 

available to the First Nations people who possess treaty 

rights to such land available through the TLE and Specific 

Claims agreements. I wish to sternly express that such 

programs hinder the First Nations people in Saskatchewan 

to exercise their treaty and constitutional right to hunt, 

fish, trap, and gather on such lands. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party didn’t consult on The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act. They didn’t consult on the New West 

Partnership. They didn’t consult when they tore up the 

agreement on chiropractors, and they didn’t consult when they 

pulled the funding from SCN. To the minister: since your track 

record on consultation speaks for itself, how can people of 

Saskatchewan trust you to consult on anything? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to reference 

the meeting that we had last Thursday. It was a very good 

meeting. Almost everybody that was invited attended, Mr. 

Speaker. And I would point out that at that meeting not one of 

the organizations or people that were represented there asked us 

to pull this legislation. They asked us to do some things moving 

forward, Mr. Speaker, and we are committed to doing that. 

 

I’m going to be bringing forward a proposal to cabinet 

tomorrow that would see a portion of the revenue from the sale 

of these lands go to an organization such as the FWDF [Fish 

and Wildlife Development Fund] for land conservation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We’ve also agreed to form a Crown land conservation 

committee, which I’d referenced earlier in question period. 

We’ve asked the stakeholders to be part of that so that we can 

work together. They’ve got great ideas. They can work with the 

ministry moving forward, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve agreed to 

that. Mr. Speaker, we have also agreed to put the assessment 

tool that we’re using under WHPA land on all other unoccupied 

Crown land, Mr. Speaker, so we can make the right decisions 

moving forward. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Yorkton on his feet? 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — To ask for leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Yorkton has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce a friend of mine and my family’s from Yorkton who 



May 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5479 

lives around the corner. Her husband and her two children live 

in Yorkton, Ms. Carma Lee Doupe. Hi, Carma Lee. 

 

She’s a very dedicated citizen of Yorkton, Mr. Speaker. She’s 

dedicated a majority of the last part of her life teaching high 

school at-risk and challenged youth, Mr. Speaker. Very 

commendable, very hard-working woman and a good friend 

who has helped my family through some difficult times in the 

past as well with her friendship. And I’d ask all members to 

help me welcome Carma Lee to this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Nutana 

on her feet? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well again in the west gallery are my 

neighbours, people who live directly across the street from me, 

Jake and Louise Buhler. Jake and Louise are very active in the 

Mennonite community, but they’re also very active in the 

international community. They have spent many, many years 

working in Vietnam. ensuring that people in Vietnam have 

access to some very basic services, Mr. Speaker. And in fact 

they’ve been, Louise has been recognized by the Government of 

Vietnam for the work that she has done in that country. 

 

In addition, they’re involved with the Saskatchewan SCIC 

[Saskatchewan Council for International Cooperation], which I 

believe is going to be holding a reception here today. And I 

would ask all members to welcome these good Saskatchewan 

citizens that do good work in our province, but they also do 

good work across the globe. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee on 

House Services. 

 

Standing Committee on House Services 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

instructed by the Standing Committee on House Services to 

report that it has considered certain estimates and to present its 

ninth report. I would move: 

 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services now be concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the House 

committee: 

 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 

 

The Speaker: — Committee of Finance. I do now leave the 

Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

 

The Chair: — The first item of business is the estimates for 

Executive Council, vote 10, found on page 67 of the 

Saskatchewan Estimates book. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Chair: — Is subvote (EX01), central management and 

services in the amount of $5,001,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Is subvote (EX07), Premier’s office 

(EX07) in the amount of 572,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Is subvote (EX04), cabinet planning, 

(EX04) in the amount of $1,001,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Is subvote (EX05), cabinet secretary in the 

amount of $504,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Is subvote (EX03), communications office in the 

amount of $1,413,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. Is (EX08), House business and research 

in the amount of $466,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



5480 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2010 

The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX06), members of the 

Executive Council in the amount of $154,000. The amount is 

statutory, is not required to be voted on. 

 

Is subvote (EX10), intergovernmental affairs in the amount of 

$3,066,000, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Chair: — 

 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 

months ending March 31st, 2011, the following sums for 

Executive Council, $12,023,000. 

 

Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

[Vote 10 agreed to.] 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I know we’re moving to 

conclusion here and just before we do, I never had a chance to 

thank officials who were here to help answer questions last 

night or to thank the Leader of the Opposition for the questions 

that were asked by . . . on his part on behalf of the opposition. I 

would do that now. I would thank the officials that were here 

and acknowledge not just their work, but the work of all of 

those civil servants across our government, the Government of 

Saskatchewan, our professional public service who work hard 

on behalf of all of government but significantly support 

Executive Council as well. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair: — The motion has been carried. There being no 

further business before the committee, I would invite to move 

that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 

again. I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I move the 

committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — It is moved by the Government House Leader 

that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 

again. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee 

to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 132 — The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s with 

great interest that I rise to participate in this debate today, given 

what has happened or what’s been revealed to be the case with 

this legislation over the past number of days and weeks, Mr. 

Speaker. I’d like to say that I’ve been surprised by what has 

transpired on this legislation as regards to the manner in which 

the Minister of the Environment has conducted her affairs and 

the affairs of that government as it relates to this piece of 

legislation. 

 

But I can’t say that I am all that surprised, Mr. Speaker, given 

that in the 2007 election — and I’ve talked about this in this 

Chamber before — in the 2007 election I stood on a platform 

with that member from Martensville, the current Minister of the 

Environment, when that member was the Environment critic for 

the opposition then, the Sask Party. And at which point she had 

said that the Sask Party’s position on carbon emissions was 

exactly the same as that of the NDP and as such there was no 

real need to look any further into the Sask Party position. You 

know, they’re the same as the NDP — please move it along; 

nothing to see here. 

 

And of course it wasn’t a matter of weeks or months after the 

election when that member and that government changed their 

platform position, changed the position that they’ve taken out to 

the people of Saskatchewan but which I saw that member 

opposite defend in person from a platform to a room full of 

young people at the University of Regina. 

 

They made the promise and then they promptly broke it with, 

you know, no seeming regard, Mr. Speaker. And then of course 

we’ve seen the moving target that is the carbon emissions 

reductions targets from the Sask Party government and how that 

has evolved and how it’s very hard to pin that kind of Jell-O to 

the wall when it comes to the targets that they’re presenting, 

Mr. Speaker. So it’s not like I entered into this debate with any 

great trust for the word of the member from Martensville as it 

related to the environment or generally, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again it’s always disappointing when you have members of 

the public come forward and say that they have been 

misrepresented by the government, that their interests that the 

government has assured the Assembly have been addressed, are 

not in fact addressed. When the members opposite and when 

that Minister of the Environment comes forward and says that 

no, we’ve consulted and we’ve consulted here, we’ve consulted 

there, we’ve consulted pretty much everywhere. 

 

It’s almost like when that minister says something is up, Mr. 



May 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5481 

Speaker, you know that is in fact down. You know that it’s the 

exact opposite of what’s taken place. And that’s certainly the 

case, Mr. Speaker. When that minister says that people have 

been consulted with, you can almost bet money on it that they 

have not in fact been consulted. 

 

I guess the one thing I want to read into the record, Mr. 

Speaker, off the top here, concerns the position of the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations as was referenced 

in question period today. And certainly, having sat in committee 

and listened to the minister represent the position of the 

government as concerns other pieces of environmental 

legislation and represent the environmental protocol that had 

been in place for 16 years, Mr. Speaker, and that for which the 

funding was in the amount of $282,000 was cancelled on 

budget day with a phone call, not even the courtesy of a 

face-to-face meeting, Mr. Speaker. That cancellation of funding 

for the environmental protocol resulted in the FSIN considering 

the agreement to be breached and null and void. 

 

And then to ask that minister, well is the protocol still in place? 

The minister will sit there, you know, bold as brass and tell the 

committee that no, the protocol is still in place; it’s just the 

funding that’s been cut — despite the express opinion on the 

part of the other partner in the protocol that the actions of the 

government of the day have necessitated that protocol being 

torn up. 

 

And again this is an agreement that was in place for 16 years, 

Mr. Speaker. It was the environmental protocol. It was signed 

by the then government of the day, the NDP, and signed by then 

Chief Roland Crowe for the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations. And it brought the two parties together to work on 

issues of common concern to make sure that this common 

interest had some capacity to it and to do a better job of 

working together in this province of Saskatchewan from the 

respective perspectives of the parties. 

 

And that 16 years of partnership was torn up with the dialing of 

a telephone on budget day, in some respects, Mr. Speaker, is a 

bit shocking, but when it comes to the approach of the members 

opposite to issues of the environment and when it comes 

together with issues of First Nations concern then we get, you 

know, anything is possible, Mr. Speaker. And we see that with 

the actions of this government as it relates to the environmental 

protocol and we see that in the action of this government as 

regards the different pieces of wildlife legislation and 

environmental legislation that have come to the Chamber over 

the past months. And we see that in spades, Mr. Speaker, as 

relates to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

So I want to . . . There’s a fairly lengthy correspondence that 

relates back and forth between the Department of the 

Environment and the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations regarding concerns raised by the FSIN. And what I’d 

like to read into the record now is a letter dated April 29th, 

2010. It’s sent to Minister Heppner. To quote from the letter, 

Mr. Speaker, it states as follows: 

 

Re: Amendments to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

and The Conservation Easement Act. 

 

Dear Miss Heppner, 

In 1984 the provincial government of the day initiated the 

wildlife conservation process by enacting The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act (WHPA). This legislation protects 

about 1.2 million hectares of Crown lands throughout the 

agricultural region of the province for the purpose of 

protecting natural habitats that are important to sustaining 

wildlife. 

 

In November 2008, the Ministry of Agriculture introduced 

the Agricultural Crown Land Sale program that provided 

financial incentives for lessees to purchase their leased 

land from the provincial Crown. The Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations Vice-Chief responsible for 

lands and resources, Delbert Wapass, responded to this 

program through correspondence to the Minister of 

Agriculture Bjornerud on November 19, 2008. [And I’m 

sure you’ll remember that, Mr. Speaker.] This letter 

detailed the concerns that the First Nations people have 

with regard to the Crown Land Sale Program. 

 

In June 2009, the Ministry of Environment decided to 

expand the Crown Land Sale Program to also make 

available for purchase Crown lands protected under the 

WHPA. The expansion of such programs, through your 

Ministry, continues to raise numerous concerns. 

 

The program will reduce the amount of accessible lands 

available to the First Nations people who possess Treaty 

rights to such available land through Treaty Land 

Entitlement and Specific Claims agreements. I wish to 

sternly express that such a program hinders the First 

Nations people in Saskatchewan to exercise their Treaty 

and constitutional right to hunt, fish, trap and gather on 

such lands. What is more perplexing is that such program 

excludes First Nations who possess such rights to these 

lands, from purchasing such, which is contrary to the 

Natural Resources Transfer Agreement (NRTA), 1930. 

 

As you are aware, the NRTA requires the province to 

provide lands to the First Nations in fulfillment of 

Canada’s obligations to the First Nations. As such, the 

program which you have implemented will limit access to 

the many archaeological, heritage and sacred sites 

important to the First Nations people in Saskatchewan that 

are found within those lands, not to mention the likely 

inability for First Nations to exercise their Inherent and 

Treaty rights to hunt, fish, trap and gather on such lands. 

Furthermore, delegating the responsibility to maintain the 

lands to the purchasers leaves these lands vulnerable to 

their destruction when the purchaser decides to make 

improvements to those lands or posts such lands as 

inaccessible to First Nations hunters, trappers, fishers, or 

gatherers. However, the most glaring concern is the fact 

that your Ministry continues to fail to consult and 

accommodate the First Nations people prior to initiating 

this program. 

 

It has come to my attention that you are informing your 

government colleagues and members of the Saskatchewan 

Legislature that your Ministry consulted and 

accommodated the First Nations people prior to initiating 

this program. I find these statements extremely troubling 

since no such undertakings have occurred. There has been 



5482 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2010 

no attempt by your Ministry to enter into a consultation 

process with First Nations people regarding the expansion 

of the sale of Crown lands protected under the Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Judging from past experience I can only ascertain that 

your deliberate refusal to consult and accommodate First 

Nations people on your Ministry’s initiatives, including 

the sale of Crown lands protected under the WHPA, as 

well as your Ministry’s “Results-based Regulatory 

Review”, is a reflection of the policy position that your 

government has taken with regards to the First Nations 

people in Saskatchewan. The province has no regard or 

respect for the interests, concerns and the Inherent and 

Treaty rights of the First Nations people in Saskatchewan. 

Furthermore, it appears your government views the 

Inherent and Treaty rights of First Nations people as a 

hindrance to Premier Wall’s “growth agenda” and that the 

government will proceed by attempting to ignore the 

provincial Crown’s constitutional and legal obligations to 

the First Nations people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Since the FSIN was not involved in any consultations, I 

am requesting a detailed explanation of how your Ministry 

purportedly undertook to consult with First Nations prior 

to the decision being made to expand the sale of Crown 

lands protected under the Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

Rather than a vague reference, I am seeking a response 

that includes a listing of all the meetings your Ministry 

held with the First Nations and the dates such were held, 

which First Nations and their leaders or representatives 

who attended such meetings, what their responses were, 

how these were incorporated into the report your Ministry 

used to make the decision, and how your Ministry reported 

back to the First Nations of your decision. I also request a 

copy of such report. 

 

I trust that the report will be forwarded to my office given 

that this sale of Crown lands gravely affects the Inherent 

and Treaty rights of First Nations people in Saskatchewan. 

 

I expect your response immediately. 

 

Sincerely, 

 

FEDERATION OF SASKATCHEWAN INDIAN 

NATIONS 

 

Lyle Whitefish 

Office of the Fourth Vice Chief 

 

[14:45] 

 

There are other stakeholders that have been cited in these 

proceedings, Mr. Speaker. But I just want to dwell for a 

moment on what I see the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations trying to say in terms of what that government opposite 

is doing. 

 

Two years ago just at about this time, Mr. Speaker, there was a 

conference held in Saskatoon concerning the duty to consult 

and accommodate. And that arose, that particular conference 

arose from a platform promise made by the Saskatchewan Party 

in the 2007 election to provide leadership on the duty to consult 

and accommodate file — leadership, Mr. Speaker. And again in 

terms of Sask Party promises, when they promise leadership, 

that’s the first opportunity, that’s the first sort of warning that 

you should check what’s really going on. 

 

I was there at that conference, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or Mr. 

Speaker. I was there when different leaders from that side of the 

House lifted the pipes in the morning and solemnly undertook 

to do their best in respect and in honesty around the duty to 

consult process. And there were things that were said on stage 

and we know that there were things that were said off stage by 

the members opposite in advance of the last election as regards 

to the duty to consult and accommodate position of the 

Saskatchewan Party. And we know that the members opposite 

like to talk about how the process, as it had evolved to date, was 

inadequate and wrong and how the Sask Party would do so 

much better. 

 

And with this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and with other 

pieces of legislation and with other things that we’ve seen this 

government do, we see what a mockery that they’ve made of 

their campaign promise in 2007 to provide leadership on the 

duty to consult and accommodate file. We see that they’ve 

made a sham out of the promise they had made in that 

campaign. We see that when they’d come together with First 

Nations and Métis people at the duty to consult and 

accommodate conference that was held two years ago in 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, we see how far that government has 

strayed from the path that they said they would be walking in 

partnership and respect with First Nations and Métis people. 

 

And as it relates to this legislation, Mr. Speaker, you know 

we’ve just, as recently as this question period, we’ve heard the 

Minister of the Environment, a ministry that has a huge amount 

of dealings with the duty to consult file, we’ve seen that 

minister say that, well opportunities to consult, you know — 

and whether or not those consultations actually take place, Mr. 

Speaker, but — we’ve seen that minister say that, you know, 

consultations are offered to everybody. There’s no particular 

onus on the government to live up to responsibilities to consult 

with First Nations and Métis people in particular. And that’s not 

the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s not the case that members opposite argued before the 

election. That’s not the case that members opposite went to that 

duty to consult and accommodate conference to talk about with 

First Nations and Métis leadership. And that’s not the case as 

has been developing out of different Supreme Court rulings 

over the past decade, Mr. Speaker. There is a specific onus on 

the Crown, there is a duty of the Crown, there’s an honour of 

the Crown to be upheld by the provincial government as it 

regards to the duty to consult and accommodate. 

 

And if those members opposite felt that that was the duty, if 

they felt that was their responsibility, if they felt that there was 

a particular regard that must be paid to the rights arising from 

these different Supreme Court rulings for First Nations and 

Métis people, then maybe they could enlighten their Minister of 

the Environment to give some different answers in question 

period. Maybe they could tell their Minister of the Environment 

to practise something different as regards to the way that First 

Nations and Métis people are dealt with in terms of their 



May 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5483 

dealings with the government. If they think that’s the case, they 

should enlighten their Minister of the Environment because 

that’s not what’s being practised in the name of that 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, the different challenges that 

this province faces in terms of what constitutes progress and 

how we go forward together or how we drift further apart. And 

sometimes there are things that are done through the political 

process, and sometimes there are things that are done through 

the legal process. And progress is certainly not, is certainly not 

a straightforward thing in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But as regards better engaging First Nations and Métis people 

in the social and economic life of this province, they hold up a 

tremendous amount of hope for the duty to consult and 

accommodate process and partly because it’s been demanded of 

all different levels of government by the Supreme Court. 

 

So when they see what happens in practice with something like 

The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and how the rhetoric from 

that government when they were campaigning and the rhetoric 

from that government when they were meeting in conference 

two years ago, Mr. Speaker, and how that has fallen so, so 

drastically short of the reality of what is practised in this case 

by the Minister of the Environment as regards The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act, as regards them upholding their part in 

the duty to consult and accommodate process, it’s not hard to 

understand the frustration that arises in the correspondence that 

we see from a person like Vice-chief Lyle Whitefish, who of 

course also has, in addition to his responsibilities for lands and 

resources, responsibility for the duty to consult and 

accommodate file. 

 

And we see the frustration across the piece, Mr. Speaker, where 

you have the Minister of the Environment stand up in the 

committee and say that, well we cancelled the environmental 

protocol because you don’t need this capacity on the part of the 

FSIN. And we read between the lines, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

pretty plain that the FSIN was disagreeing with the actions of 

the government. So we think this is a means by which, if you 

don’t agree with us, then we’ll pull your funding. And, you 

know, we’ve seen that from different governments over the 

years. 

 

But as regards the answer that is given by the Minister of the 

Environment when it comes to putting forward funds under the 

environmental protocol, that minister says, well there’s no need 

for that. There’s a $3 million consultation fund over in First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

And we’ve seen different ministers over there make a big deal 

about how this was such a great thing in terms of the money 

being put forward for consultation under the duty to consult and 

accommodate, and what great people they were, Mr. Speaker. 

But it’s always interesting to find out what the rhetoric is and 

what the actual actions are, and what the gap is between those, 

Mr. Speaker. And in this case the gap that exists between the 

rhetoric on the consultation fund and the practice in reality is 

worth about $2.4 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because last year the $3 million that was heralded in the budget 

and in the different estimates that we heard throughout the 

House and as it relates very much to The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act and the process therein, there was $3 million put 

forward, but you know what? Come the end of the year, Mr. 

Speaker, there was $2.4 million of that, nearly $2.4 million of 

that, that went inaccessible for First Nations and Métis people 

in this province. 

 

So again there’s, there’s consultation that is preached. There is 

funding that is put forward as being proof positive of their 

commitment to the consultation process, but when it comes 

time for the cash to get on the dash, we find out that 80 per cent 

of it was held back by that government, Mr. Speaker. And of 

course we see the same game being played again this year. 

 

We see another $3 million being brought forward. So a year’s 

time from now, Mr. Speaker, what’s the guess in terms of how 

much of that money will actually find its way to First Nations 

and Métis people to help them do their part in the duty to 

consult and accommodate process? You know. What’s the 

betting line on that, Mr. Speaker? Because this year it was 80 

per cent that they held back, and you talk to them in committee 

about it and the prognostication and the thought on the part of 

the officials and the minister is that, well you know, maybe it 

was the economic slowdown and there weren’t that many 

people interested as a result in duty to consult and 

accommodate, but you know, it defies belief, Mr. Speaker, that 

members opposite would make that argument with a straight 

face. 

 

Because if they’re doing their job, if they’re getting out across 

the province and talking to First Nations and Métis people, they 

know that the duty to consult and accommodate is a hugely 

important file to those people, and that if they’re not applying 

for the funds or if they’re not able to access the dollars, there’s 

something wrong there, Mr. Speaker. So when you ask the 

minister, is it a problem with the fund, you know, any fund that 

you put up that 80 per cent of the dollars in it go unaccessed, 

you know, what’s wrong there? And the minister doesn’t really 

have an answer. 

 

Well you’ll forgive the opposition, Mr. Speaker, but we think 

the answer’s pretty plain. We think it’s part of a pattern of 

action over there, Mr. Speaker, where they say consultation, 

where they preach consultation, but what they practise is 

something very different. 

 

And in terms of, in terms of this consultation fund, you know, 

what better example is there of a fund where you put forward 

$3 million with great fanfare and you pat yourselves on the 

back for it, you know, the length and breadth of this Assembly. 

But when it comes time to actually flow the dollars and allow 

people to access the resources to get their job done under the 

duty to consult and accommodate process, you don’t flow the 

dollars and 80 per cent of it — $2.4 million of it — goes 

unspent. 

 

And then it gets rolled over into this year, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

another $3 million. And aren’t we great people, and we can’t 

wait for the exploratory table process. And they’ll announce 

that they’re going to be releasing the final guidelines, you 

know, before year’s end, and they’re going to be providing the 

guidelines in April, and they’re going to be providing the 

guidelines in May. 



5484 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2010 

And you know I think one of the things they’re waiting for, Mr. 

Speaker, is that they’re waiting to provide the guidelines after 

this Assembly has closed. And of course the opportunity for the 

official opposition and the people of Saskatchewan to give the 

measure full scrutiny of course is diminished when this House 

is not in session. And you know, they’ve got a minister that 

likes to pull a bit of a Columbo routine in terms of, you know, I 

don’t know what’s really happening with this file, but we’ll see 

what happens. 

 

What happens, Mr. Speaker, is that the House closes and the 

opportunities to provide scrutiny are diminished, diminished for 

the people of Saskatchewan and diminished for those that are 

interested in what happens with the final guidelines around duty 

to consult and accommodate. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, it’s kind of appalling that the 

government would act in this manner, but it’s not particularly 

surprising, particularly given the minister that’s leading on this 

file, the Minister of the Environment. The Minister for First 

Nations and Métis Relations in discussion in the committee last 

night, there were points at which it wasn’t particularly clear 

whether or not the minister understood duty to consult and 

accommodate period, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again we find that kind of alarming on the opposition side 

in terms of, you know, if the minister doesn’t understand the 

file, what does that mean if that’s the guardian that’s on point 

for making sure that all the other ministries and agencies of the 

provincial government live up to their duty to consult? Is this 

something that’s farmed out to officials or is it something that 

they farmed out, you know, good luck or fate or fortune? Is that 

how they’re dealing with it, or is it something where they think 

that again because they’re not doing their job right in the first 

place, Mr. Speaker, then if people have to find their recourse in 

the courts, then that’s how they’ll get things sorted out. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, that’s an approach that smacks of the 

complete opposite of what was promised in the 2007 election in 

terms of providing leadership on the duty to consult and 

accommodate file. The members opposite, of course we know 

they talk a good game when it comes to consultation. When it 

comes to practising it though, Mr. Speaker, it’s something else 

entirely. 

 

And it leads you to wonder, in terms of the vaunted promise list 

that those members keep on the website, you know, at what 

point do they take things down? Because on this file, you’ve got 

one of the key partners in this legislation saying they were not 

consulted. And you’ve got that government over there patting 

themselves on the back for, you know, job well done on 

consultation and providing leadership on the duty to consult and 

accommodate file. And what is held up as proof for that, Mr. 

Speaker, is the fact they held a conference two years ago. And 

since that time, Mr. Speaker, it’s been round and round and 

round it goes, but we’ve seen the list of grievances pile up in 

terms of people that are not getting their rights addressed in 

terms of the duty to consult and accommodate. 

 

And again I’m interested in this in particular from the 

perspective of the First Nations and Métis Relations critic for 

the official opposition, Mr. Speaker. But I know that there are 

many, many other groups that the Minister of the Environment 

says have been consulted on The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act. But in fact, they come forward and say that’s not the case. 

That’s not what happened. You saw the unusual step of two 

former ministers of the Crown in this House, Mr. Speaker, 

come forward in the person of Lorne Scott, the former member 

for Indian Head-Milestone and Colin Maxwell, the former 

member from Shellbrook, I believe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And the former minister of the then Devine government that 

brought this legislation in in 1984, you saw Colin Maxwell 

come forward and condemn what had been done by this 

government to this point on this legislation. And he took pains, 

and you know he took pains to compliment the Premier and say, 

you know. in other regards I think he’s a great person and all of 

that. But it was a very unusual thing to hear Colin Maxwell on 

the morning CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] radio 

saying what they’re doing on The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act is wrong. 

 

That they’ve got a former colleague of theirs, a former member 

of this Assembly that you’d think would’ve been one of their 

brothers in arms over there, when people like that come forward 

and say, you’ve got it wrong, you’ve got to step back and 

you’ve got to get this right, it should give them pause for 

thought, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know they would . . . They’ve liked to pay attention to, you 

know, some of the things that former minister Lorne Scott, 

minister of the Environment Lorne Scott has done. Some of the 

things they like, some of the things they don’t, but for the most 

part, there’s that partisan treatment that’s given of the man. But 

this is a fellow who’s got the Order of Canada for the work that 

he’s done around conservation, around preserving habitat, 

who’s devoted his life’s work to habitat protection and to the 

wildlife of this province and who’s garnered the Order of 

Canada for it, as just the foremost of the different 

accommodations that he’s been provided for his work. 

 

So you’d think when somebody like that spoke up on this file, 

that would give them some pause for thought. But of course it 

doesn’t. You would think that when the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation speaks up and says, you’ve got it wrong on this 

legislation, you’ve got to take a step back and get this right, 

because of course once you lose these lands, that’s it forever for 

those lands. You’d think that when the Wildlife Federation 

stands up and says, what are you doing on this file, you’d think 

they would, that would give them some pause for thought. 

 

So you know, in terms of the Wildlife Federation; in terms of, 

you know, former notable individuals that have made a great 

contribution to the province through their activities in this 

Chamber and through their public policy work over the years, 

Mr. Speaker; in terms of the different organizations that are 

interested in this legislation; and in terms of a group like the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations and First Nations 

across this province that have not just a philosophical interest in 

this, Mr. Speaker, they have a constitutional interest, a 

constitutional right to have their interests addressed in this 

process, and if the government’s not doing that in The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act, of course we as the opposition are going 

to fight it. So again, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve registered how 



May 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5485 

strongly I disagree with the approach of the government on this 

legislation. 

 

How interesting it is that they seem to bring together what is 

usually a fairly disparate group of interests, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of their disagreement with the approach of the 

government on this part. I think I’ve pointed out the chasm that 

exists between the promises of consultation on the one hand and 

the actual practice of what goes on with that government and 

that Minister of the Environment on the other. And as such, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m going cede the floor so that another of my 

colleagues can take his place and to express a few more things 

on this legislation. 

 

But again, if this government was listening to what people had 

to say; if they were interested in doing, doing it right and not 

just ramming it home; if they were interested in giving public 

policy its due and not just making a mockery of a genuine 

consultative process, they’d be pulling this Bill. They’d be 

scratching their heads and they’d be going back to the drawing 

board to make right the problems that are glaring in this 

legislation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

again to speak on The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment 

Act. Some in the legislature, in the Chamber may recall, in 

respect to a piece of legislation that we debated at some length 

earlier respecting a heritage day for trapping, hunting, and 

fishing, I spoke at some length, considerable length — and 

some members may think too long — about the effect that 

human beings have had on the environment in Saskatchewan. 

And I’m going to return to that theme again. I think it’s 

appropriate in respect to this legislation because it’s because of 

those effects that the original legislation was brought into, 

enacted and brought into effect. And it’s because of those 

effects and concern about those effects that we have concerns 

about the legislation proposing the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now certainly there’s been some scholarship recently about the 

fact that modification and change to the natural environment of 

the Americas and North America in particular did not begin 

with European settlement, that there was significant 

modification of the environment by the actions of the 

Aboriginal people, maybe not so much on the prairies, but 

certainly on the prairies, but even more so in respect to 

agricultural communities throughout Eastern Canada and the 

eastern United States long before European settlement. 

 

But with the arrival of the Europeans, that modification of the 

natural environment proceeded apace and picked up 

considerable speed. And in the time, in the 100 years or more 

since the Prairies have come under the plow and agricultural 

development began in this province and in our sister provinces 

Alberta and Manitoba, there has been considerable modification 

of the natural environment in Saskatchewan. The breadbasket of 

the world meant that other things that did grow here were no 

longer growing here and that the environment was dramatically 

changed to achieve that title for the province of Saskatchewan 

and indeed for Canada. And it was a significant part of the 

Canadian role in the expanding British Empire, the providing of 

cereal crops to Europe. 

 

And it wasn’t just a case of some types of wildlife no longer 

being able to find habitat in Saskatchewan, such as bison, but 

they changed the type of wildlife that was in the province. So a 

province that would not have had, for the most part, whitetail 

deer or raccoons or red foxes, many birds found a home here 

when the landscape was changed when agriculture broke up the 

land. And many of the animals that we think of as native to the 

province, and the whitetail deer in particular as a provincial 

animal, were relatively foreign to the province prior to the 

breaking up of the land and the modification of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And this is an historical and given fact and can’t be reversed, 

and no one is suggesting that it can be or should be or that it 

would be desirable to do that. But in the early days of 

agriculture, when the attempt was made to maximize the 

production of the province as a whole and the production of any 

particular landholding, marginal lands or what we would now 

call marginal lands were cleared. They were ploughed and they 

were seeded. And that practice continues, Mr. Speaker, 

somewhat abated now. 

 

And the development of modern fertilizers, pesticides, as 

controversial as they sometimes might be, and even 

bio-engineering makes good land more productive and able to 

feed a larger group of people. And many of those almost 

industrial developments in respect to pesticides and in respect to 

fertilizers and in respect to bio-engineering are arguably — and 

some would argue quite strenuously — good for the 

environment because they make productive land more 

productive and therefore put less demand on the need to 

cultivate marginal land. 

 

The fact is before the development of and widespread use of 

many of those techniques, much marginal land was also 

converted to agriculture in Saskatchewan, and a lot of wetland, 

as we know, was drained throughout the province. And maps 

that groups like Ducks Unlimited will show of aerial maps — 

so even the early ones are relatively recent in time because 

obviously they were taken from aircraft, Mr. Speaker — but 

aerial maps even a decade apart will show a tremendous amount 

of wetlands in the earlier photos that have disappeared in the 

later photos as a result of drainage. 

 

And I think the province found itself by the 1970s with a lot of 

marginal land in production, a lot of wetlands drained and 

concern — that I don’t think was partisan, Mr. Speaker — that 

wildlife habitat was not sufficiently protected in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And we found ourselves in this province with 

perhaps one of the most modified landscapes in North America, 

at least south of the treeline, one of the most modified 

landscapes in North America. And people who live in 

Saskatchewan don’t think of it as that case. 

 

You can drive from one city to the next, and it takes a 

considerable amount of time to do that. And you drive past a 

landscape that’s not like a European landscape at all in that 

there are not homes and dwellings all the way along. The 

settlement ends, and after driving past only farm yards for a 

considerable period of time and at a great distance, settlement 

starts up again. But that is not a natural landscape. But it 



5486 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2010 

appears to be a natural landscape, and it’s the subject of great 

works of art by Saskatchewan landscape artists. But it is 

actually a very modified landscape compared to many parts of 

North America, many parts of Canada, except for perhaps the 

more northern part. 

 

But certainly the southern part of the province, the very 

southern part of the province, Mr. Speaker, is one of the most 

modified landscapes in the country. And it’s partly the breaking 

of, and the cultivation of, and the seeding and planting of crops 

on a great amount of land, including some that was marginal, 

and has now — some of it — been returned to a more natural 

state and the drainage of a large amount of water from the 

landscape. 

 

But a while back when we had a great crop here, destroyed by 

rain in the fall — and, Mr. Speaker, you will recall that 

probably even more acutely than I do — that year it was in 

some ways a revenge of the ducks because you can drain the 

water but you can’t stop it from coming down. It’s going to 

settle somewhere. And indeed we’ve seen in prairies where 

these drainage issues do cause problems because places where 

the water did go, it can’t go any more. And I know it’s a sore 

point often in rural Saskatchewan about where drained water 

does go, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the large scale, the large scale effectively is to dramatically 

change the nature of the Saskatchewan environment. And 

because of this extensive agricultural development over a 

century, we have seen 75 per cent of the natural areas in 

agricultural region disappear to cultivation or had seen this by 

the end of the 1970s, Mr. Speaker. And other developments as 

well as agriculture contributed to this, roads obviously, towns, 

cities. 

 

Between 1976 and 1981, according Saskatchewan Environment 

at the time, in those five years, Saskatchewan lost 2 million 

acres of natural landscape. So the process of breaking land and 

putting it to agriculture that began at the end of the 19th century 

with the coming of the railway, in particular, continued the 

pace. And it was not a century-old activity that just reached a 

plateau and a status quo. It continued on into the ’70s and into 

the early ’80s. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And it was a Progressive Conservative government that saw the 

need to conserve the land that was left. What did survive was a 

habitat for over 400 species of wildlife. You don’t get the kind 

of biodiversity in a province like Saskatchewan, an area like 

Saskatchewan that you do in a rainforest, Mr. Speaker. I expect 

that there are areas the size of this room, the size of this 

Chamber in Amazon rainforests that have over 400 different 

species in them. You’ve got to get less diversity as you move 

either north or south from the rainforests of the equatorial areas. 

 

But still even after the record of human activity on the 

Saskatchewan landscape, still a varied and a diverse 

environment for wildlife and a varied and diverse collection of 

wildlife in the province, but living on one-quarter of its 

previous habitat by 1981, Mr. Speaker. And so it was a 

Progressive Conservative government, to use the proper term, 

that brought in The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act in 1984. 

And what was significant of course and not surprising at all, 

Mr. Speaker — and I suppose it’s this reason why there is 

concern amongst First Nations, concerns amongst conservation 

groups, and concerns amongst the opposition about the 

legislation now before the legislature — this wildlife habitat, 

much of it, was Crown land. 

 

Now the previous NDP government, the government previous 

to the one that is now in power here, provided for private land 

that was crucial to wildlife habitat, particularly wetlands, 

particularly in the migratory routes to be available for 

easements, easements only by Ducks Unlimited which, you 

know, brought those conservation dollars into the province to 

preserve those lands on private land. And I think a win-win, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But there was a recognition in the ’80s that much of this land is 

not private land, much of this land is Crown land, and these 

natural areas are very important for maintaining wildlife 

populations as most land, two-thirds of the land base south of 

the treeline, south of the forest fringe is privately owned. So 

you have a situation south of the treeline where, not 

unexpectedly, the majority of the land, two-thirds of it is 

already privately owned, where little of that privately owned 

land is wildlife habitat. Some of it is, but most of the wildlife 

habitat is on the one-third of the land that is Crown land south 

of the forest fringe, and that represents much of the one-quarter 

of land that is the original habitat for wildlife in the province. 

 

So in 1984 the Progressive Conservative government initiated a 

conservation process by passing The Critical Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, which is now known as The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act and which this government wishes to 

substantially change — in effect, reverse the effect of the Act. 

Because the legislation that was passed in 1984 was meant to 

preserve the land, maintain it as Crown land, and prevent the 

government from selling the land. Or if the land was sold, to 

ensure the protection . . . the purchase of new land. That was 

later called the net loss policy, that even if land was lost from 

Crown land that other land would come in and be protected, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The legislation protected 3.4 million acres of uplands and 

wetlands or one-third of all wildlife habitat in the agricultural 

region in its natural state. And protection of the lands was seen 

by the government under this Act as a cost-effective wildlife 

habitat conservation program. And because it didn’t require the 

purchase of land or the purchase of easements on lands, it was 

obviously fairly cost-effective. What had not been lost to the 

point of 1984 could now be saved and preserved. 

 

One of the reasons that people defend Teddy Roosevelt being 

on Mount Rushmore, Mr. Speaker, is arguably without his 

foresight millions and millions and millions of acres of natural 

habitat in the United States would be privately owned and 

would not be in the state that it’s in. 

 

Similar foresight was shown by the Progressive Conservative 

government in 1984. And some would argue that if that 

foresight had been shown in ’74 or ’64, we would be the better 

for it. And I would not argue with that, Mr. Speaker. But as I’ve 

said here before and probably say again, given the opportunity, 

the best time to plant a tree is 20 years ago and the second best 



May 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5487 

time is today. And today was 1984, and that’s when the tree that 

was The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act was planted, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

Now this government — some would say a successor in some 

ways to that Progressive Conservative government of the ’80s, 

unfortunately, usually in bad ways, Mr. Speaker — this 

government on this opportunity to be conservative, to conserve, 

as with their opportunity to be fiscally conservative, decided not 

to give meaning to that word conservative at all, Mr. Speaker, 

and would seek to reverse the effect of the legislation that was 

brought in in 1984 by a Progressive Conservative government. 

 

The original legislation, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, prevents 

the government from selling designated Crown land. And that is 

the case unless and until this legislation is passed that is now 

before the Chamber and lessees require permission before any 

clearing, breaking, or drainage occurs. And I’ve spoken of the 

issues that are raised by clearing and breaking the land or even 

the drainage of land. And the philosophy of the Act, the current 

Act — not the legislation before the House but of the current 

legislation — is to conserve wildlife habitat while enabling 

compatible traditional uses to coexist. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when my colleague from Regina 

Elphinstone raises the concerns of the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, it’s about the changes to 

legislation and the disrespect that is shown for the right to 

traditional uses of the land and how these changes are being 

made and that disrespect being shown with what the minister 

will now acknowledge wasn’t consultation but was perhaps 

notification, Mr. Speaker. But notification, while we’re all 

notified when legislation is brought before the Chamber, 

notification is not consultation. And I think the members of the 

government are actually starting to appreciate that that’s been a 

failure of their government. 

 

The original legislation, the legislation currently in place, 

supports agriculture uses and actually supports petroleum 

activities in certain cases, Mr. Speaker. The lands are leased 

mainly to cattle producers who use them for grazing or haying. 

And the proposal of the government is that this land instead of 

being owned by all the people of Saskatchewan and leased to 

people who are free to use it for the purposes that they have 

traditionally have used it for — and the same purposes they 

would use it for if they owned it, Mr. Speaker, one would hope 

— that it be transferred to those smaller group of people, not the 

entire people of the province, to own it and to be able therefore 

to alienate the land, to be able to sell the land, to sell the land to 

other owners who would be able to do anything with the land, 

subject to the Crown easements, on the conservation easements 

on the land. 

 

And we appreciate that the government has brought forward 

parallel perhaps legislation, sister legislation in the conservation 

easements legislation, the conservation easements Bill that’s 

been brought before the House, Mr. Speaker. But I know the 

opposition can’t speak for the conservation groups on this 

specific issue, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know what their views are 

on this specific issue. But I know we in the opposition would be 

more comfortable with the legislation that I am now discussing 

if the conservation easement provisions weren’t in a separate 

Bill, were in this Bill, and had some kind of peremptory or 

presumption to them, Mr. Speaker, that there would be some 

presumption that there would be such an easement on land that 

was sold by the government. 

 

Not because we are concerned about the activities of the current 

lessees, Mr. Speaker. I hope that we have made it clear speaker 

after speaker, both on the legislation and in question period, 

made it clear we’re not concerned about the activities of the 

current occupants of the land. Mr. Speaker, we are concerned 

about activities of subsequent owners, and I think properly so, 

Mr. Speaker, and nobody would suggest that we shouldn’t be. 

And that’s why there is, at the same time or in the same sitting 

as we see this legislation, the conservation easement legislation. 

 

But we have to ask the question as to why that legislation is 

separate and why there is no presumption that when this land is 

sold it would be subject to an easement, and if it’s not subject to 

an easement, certain conditions have to be met in respect to that 

land; that land has to be of a certain kind. 

 

There has to be a reason why land that a Progressive 

Conservative government in 1984 thought should be protected 

and owned by the Crown generation after generation after 

generation should be sold and not subject to an easement, a 

conservation easement of any kind, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There should be an explanation of why that would be case, and 

there will be no explanation, Mr. Speaker. The majority in this 

House, the Saskatchewan Party government will pass the 

conservation easement Bill, whatever we may think about that 

over here. And I don’t think we have any difficulty with that 

legislation necessarily, Mr. Speaker. And they will pass this Bill 

amending The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, Mr. Speaker, 

because they are the majority and they will do that. And they 

don’t seem to be willing to withdraw the Bill. They don’t seem 

to be willing to consult with people they have failed to consult, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so subject or failing that withdrawal of the Bill, to have 

that discussion which we would encourage and have 

encouraged this government to do, failing that, Mr. Speaker, 

then this legislation will become law very, very soon, and there 

will be no guarantee of protection. 

 

There is waved by the minister a veil of the conservation 

easements. But that’s the minister who called notification 

consultation. So we don’t necessarily have a lot of confidence 

in how the minister will exercise her powers. And we have no 

idea who the successor to the minister will be and how he or she 

will use their powers and whether they have any intention of 

using their powers in respect to the conservation easement, Mr. 

Speaker, or whether the conservation easement is so much 

smoke and mirrors to make the . . . the sugar to make this 

medicine go down, Mr. Speaker. But we’ll in fact, we will not 

see a lot of sugar after this medicine is going down. People will 

just have to take the bitter taste of it. That is our concern. 

 

The lessees, the occupants of the land who were using the land 

at the time of the 1984 Act, did not notice a change. The land 

was Crown land before the 1984 legislation was passed. It was 

Crown land after the 1984 legislation was passed. And the 

legislation did not prevent them from carrying on the activities 

they had traditionally carried on on the land. Leases were 



5488 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2010 

renewed and transferred as in the past, and very little effect on 

daily operations. Fencing took place, dugout construction took 

place without any questions, without any reference to what was 

then the Department of the Environment. 

 

Oil and gas companies still explored and drilled, although there 

was — as farmers have too, Mr. Speaker, and the people of 

Saskatchewan should have as well as farmers — concerns about 

damage to the surface. And to suggest that only on these lands 

were oil companies required to do very little damage to the 

surface, we would hope that would be the case on privately 

owned land as well, Mr. Speaker. But that was certainly meant 

to be the case in the case of the wildlife habitat land. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Back in the ’80s, there were a number of plants and animals in 

the province that were already under risk and were species at 

risk under the provisions of The Wildlife Act. Some no longer 

existed in the province of Saskatchewan. Some were 

endangered and threatened to no longer be able to exist in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and usually not because — well 

never because — of hunting, Mr. Speaker, but because of loss 

of habitat. And some were likely to become endangered if they 

hadn’t already been removed from the province. 

 

Some of these are quite common — the whooping crane, the 

burrowing owl — quite common in that we know, it’s 

commonly known what animals are included in this list. Not 

that the animals themselves are common; that would be a 

contradiction. Swift fox, black-footed ferret, plains grizzly bear 

— which is not a very well-liked animal necessarily, Mr. 

Speaker, in particular but in general I think is considered to be a 

unique creature and we wouldn’t want to see its loss any more 

than we’d want to see one in our backyard. 

 

And this legislation that was brought in, I think, Mr. Speaker, 

probably had the support of the ranchers who leased the lands 

because they and the government and the legislature all agreed 

on the values of the lands, on the value of the traditional 

activities and the fact that the legislation would not conflict 

with those activities and preserving our protection of that land, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And to cast our minds back to the political situation in 1984, we 

will remember that there were, I think, eight opposition 

members in this House and most of them represented, not all of 

them — the one exception would be Pelly that I can think of — 

but most of those members would have represented urban 

ridings and the government would have represented most of 

rural Saskatchewan, almost all of rural Saskatchewan, and then, 

as now, represent a lot of areas, Mr. Speaker, where these lands 

exist. 

 

And so when this legislation was brought in 1984 by a 

Progressive Conservative government that represented these 

areas where this Crown land was, one can imagine that, 

speculate that, this legislation had the support of those members 

and had probably the support of their constituents. And so the 

affected people supported, supported the legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So all that makes us wonder why the need for change. Why a 

new government, relatively new government, less than three 

years old now, would reject the good conservative principles, 

conservation principles contained in the legislation brought in 

in 1984 by a Progressive Conservative government. Why, 

without consultation with conservation groups, including a 

spokesperson for those groups who was the minister of the 

Environment in a Progressive Conservative government that 

brought in the original legislation, why they would proceed 

without consulting with those groups. Why a government that is 

quite fond of the slogan — in opposition, now in government 

— duty to consult . . . Maybe they’re getting a little less fond of 

this slogan, Mr. Speaker, but they were very fond of this slogan. 

 

Why they would, as my colleague from Regina Elphinstone 

pointed out, refuse, refuse to discuss this legislation and its 

impact on other traditional users, the First Nations of 

Saskatchewan with their government, the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations. Why is this the circumstance, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

And what the opposition wants to do with this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, is give the government an opportunity. And they’ll be 

given another opportunity this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, because 

we are declining to move this Bill to committee. We are giving 

the government an opportunity to actually consult on this Bill, 

Mr. Speaker. There is no doubt an argument that government 

would want to make beyond the minister’s second reading 

speech as to why these things have to be done. 

 

And again, I find myself lecturing a conservative government 

on conservative principles. And they are sister principles, Mr. 

Speaker: if it ain’t broke, don’t fix it; and the law of unintended 

consequences, Mr. Speaker. What, in the legislation brought in 

by a Progressive Conservative government that has protected 

over 3 million acres of wildlife habitat . . . And it sounds like a 

lot, Mr. Speaker, but at the beginning of my remarks, I spoke 

about the dramatic changes that have been made to the 

landscape of Saskatchewan, the fact that it’s one of the most 

modified landscapes by human beings on the continent. 

 

What about legislation that protects over 3 million acres, 

slightly over 3 million acres of wildlife habitat, what about that 

legislation is broken, Mr. Speaker? I think that’s the first 

question the government should have answered. 

 

What about the current status quo . . . I guess that’s redundant, 

Mr. Speaker. What about the status quo is broken? What about 

the status quo is wrong? What evil does the government seek to 

remedy? Why is the government tinkering with this legislation 

that has served the interests of conservation groups, the users of 

the land, the public as a whole? 

 

And I know the minister doesn’t like to be accused of secretive, 

but it’s clear from the communications we received, it’s clear 

from the communications that have been made publicly — and 

I won’t go back to the editorial that I read into the record last 

time I spoke on the Bill, Mr. Speaker — but it’s clear that 

conservation groups were not consulted, this discussion hasn’t 

taken place, so why the rush? If not the secrecy, Mr. Speaker — 

I know the minister objected to that word — but if not the 

secrecy, why the rush? And why are we doing this at all? 

 

And that’s got to be part of the debate, Mr. Speaker. And if 



May 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5489 

members of the government don’t want to rise in the House and 

say, this is why we need to fix this, this is what is broken, then 

surely that’s a discussion that they should be willing to have 

with the public, Mr. Speaker. If they’re not willing to withdraw 

the Bill and have this discussion with the conservation groups 

and others who they should have consulted in the first place, 

then surely the government can commit itself to public hearings 

when the matter proceeds to committee. 

 

We haven’t had enough public discussion in committee on 

Bills, Mr. Speaker. I can think of two or three Bills that the 

government sent to committee for public hearings that were 

Justice Bills when I was Justice minister. But we haven’t taken 

advantage of that process to a great extent. I think this Bill cries 

out for it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The second principle, the law of unintended consequences. If 

there’s no glaring evil to be remedied, if there’s nothing 

obviously broken to be fixed, then the risk one takes when 

making dramatic changes is that there will be consequences 

intended or else the consequence is unintended, Mr. Speaker. I 

don’t really believe it’s the consequence of the government to 

eliminate crucial, vital, wildlife habitat and to see more species 

of plants or animals disappear from the province. I don’t think 

that’s their intention, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But things happen that we intend to happen, and things happen 

that we don’t intend to happen. And the danger that things will 

happen that we don’t intend and don’t desire — on either side 

of this House — of happening when we make changes, are 

there. And you have to assess the risk of doing that, and maybe 

the government has done this risk assessment and consider it to 

be acceptable. But acceptable for what benefit, Mr. Speaker? 

Which takes me back to the sister principle: if it ain’t broke, 

don’t fix it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that there are other members of the 

Assembly who want to speak on the legislation this afternoon 

and I want to allow them to do that. I’ve now had two 

opportunities to speak, the first time on the public reaction to 

the legislation as described in a StarPhoenix editorial, and today 

at a little bit greater length about the reasons for the original 

legislation and the questions we have about the need for change. 

 

And I expect that those aren’t the only concerns. The member 

from Regina Elphinstone had other concerns that he spoke to. 

There are a wide variety of concerns in the public and 

represented, I think, well on the opposition benches, Mr. 

Speaker. And because of those concerns, I again take the 

opportunity to suggest that the government take the opportunity 

that the opposition intends to provide once again this afternoon 

to reconsider its actions, look at withdrawing the Bill, and 

participating in some real public consultation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

this afternoon to stand and join in on the debate on Bill 132, An 

Act to amend The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and to make 

consequential amendments to other Acts. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

piece of legislation that a good number of us here in the 

Assembly have had the opportunity to speak to, and I’m pleased 

to be able to do so after the member from Saskatoon Meewasin 

and the member from Regina Elphinstone have made comments 

earlier today. 

 

And it’s a topic, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve had the chance to 

speak to on other days through adjourned debates as well as 

through question period. Because it’s clear, Mr. Speaker, that 

this issue is one that is important to Saskatchewan people. It’s 

important to the leaders in the province as policy makers, 

individuals setting the course for what this province can and 

should and will look like in the years to come. 

 

It’s an issue that affects many individuals in the province from 

different walks of life, individuals that may have a direct tie to a 

specific piece of land or individuals who simply are members of 

Saskatchewan society, citizens living in this province who care 

about the province, care about the assets, care about the things 

that are owned collectively as a group, things that belong to 

them, just as, Mr. Speaker, any individual cares about the house 

they may own or the car that they drive or their possessions. 

 

When we have any sort of discussion about what is termed 

Crown land or land that the people own, land that belongs to the 

people of Saskatchewan belongs to everyone, everyone who is 

from here and who lives here. It’s an important issue, just as if 

we were talking about a piece of land that was owned by simply 

one individual. A fact that more people own this land does not 

in any way diminish the importance of it. In fact it actually 

increases the importance of the debate because it’s an issue that 

affects everyone. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that in our province, the people of 

Saskatchewan, we have a great love for our province. We love 

the many different aspects about living in Saskatchewan. And 

for many people, Mr. Speaker, that love for our province is 

because of the people that we know. Maybe it’s friends, family, 

Mr. Speaker. It might be because of the experiences that we’ve 

had. But whatever the main reason is that generates a love that 

we might have for Saskatchewan, in all of those stories I think, 

Mr. Speaker, the land that we enjoy, the land that we live on 

certainly plays a major part about that, in generating that kind 

of love that we have for our province. And everyone’s affection 

for this province I think is tied to some degree to the land, to the 

place that we live, to the experiences that we’ve had, to the 

things that we see on a daily basis. 

 

And I mean a good reminder of that, Mr. Speaker, is that here in 

this Assembly we’re not commonly referred to according to our 

names, our Christian names, the names that are given to us by 

our parents when we’re born, but we’re referred to by the 

geographical area that we represent. So I’m the member for 

Saskatoon Massey Place. And whether we’re the member for 

Massey Place or a rural area like Wood River or a smaller city 

like Moose Jaw or North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that 

we have an attachment to the land that we are from. It’s an 

important thing. This largely comes out of — and this isn’t 

unique to just Saskatchewan — I think wherever people are 

living, we often have interaction and a connection with the 

landscape with the place that we are from. 

 

The member from Lakeview, who is fond of reading poetry 



5490 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2010 

here in the Assembly often will read a poem or a piece of 

literature that has some sort of connection, speaks to in some 

way the attachment someone has to the land, or an experience 

that they’ve had while living on the land. And if you think of 

any of the authors, the artists, anyone involved in the arts, it’s 

quite common, Mr. Speaker, that the art that they generate, the 

art that they create is greatly influenced by the land that we live 

on. 

 

I think for probably all members in this Assembly whose family 

roots go back further than one generation, for most of us, Mr. 

Speaker, we have a connection to the land. Land was a reason, 

Mr. Speaker, that for those of us that aren’t of Aboriginal 

heritage, land was the reason, Mr. Speaker, that most people 

came west or from a different direction, but most of the reason 

that people came to Saskatchewan. So we have a deep 

connection to the land. 

 

For me, Mr. Speaker, my grandparents and great-grandparents 

on opposite sides, one group homesteaded near Viscount, so our 

family has a connection to the land there. My other family, Mr. 

Speaker, homesteaded in the Ardath area, near Outlook. So 

there’s a connection there. And while that story might be 

special to me, it’s not a unique story, Mr. Speaker, because we 

could ask around this Assembly or ask anyone on the street and 

for most of us, Mr. Speaker, we do in fact have an attachment to 

the land. It’s something that’s important for people. It’s 

something that we care about. 

 

So over the years, Mr. Speaker, while some people in this 

Assembly and in this province most certainly are directly tied to 

the land in the way that they make their living — whether that 

is through agriculture or whether that is through, in the North 

through hunting, fishing, trapping, Mr. Speaker — we have the 

attachment to the land because of our heritage and because of 

the daily activities that we still are engaged in in doing on a 

routine basis. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, whenever we consider a piece of legislation 

that does have some sort of impact on the land, on how land is 

owned here in the province, how it is enjoyed by all, I think it 

surely is a piece of legislation that will generate debate, will 

create some discussion because people will have opposing 

views. And I think when that discussion occurs it’s important to 

have a thorough examination of what is the motivation, what is 

the rationale behind a proposed piece of legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, even if we’re not living on the land in the 

sense that some of us may no longer live on a farm — I know 

some members here in the Assembly do — we still are . . . the 

memories that we generate, the good experiences that we have 

with family and friends still certainly involves the land, often 

enjoyment of the land on Crown land, land that is owned by 

everyone. So whether that is engaged in hunting with family 

and friends, whether that’s hiking, whether that’s simply 

enjoying the many parts of the province, I think, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s a good thing that people can develop an appreciation for 

Saskatchewan by spending time exploring the many nooks and 

crannies and hidden gems of the province. 

 

That’s a great thing, Mr. Speaker, about being an MLA is that it 

does provide some opportunity to travel to different parts of the 

province where we don’t always get to go. Often, I doubt I’m 

alone in this experience, but sometimes when we grow up in 

one particular place, we don’t have the opportunity to explore 

our own backyards in the same way that we probably should. 

And I know most individuals have spent time travelling 

different parts of the country, different provinces or overseas, 

but we haven’t done the exploration maybe that we should in 

our own backyard. 

 

And as an MLA we do get the opportunity to travel to different 

constituencies and see different parts of the province where we 

don’t travel on a regular basis. And it’s an important step to do 

because it is part of the process of generating a love, an 

appreciation, and just as importantly, Mr. Speaker, a better 

understanding of what our neighbours, our fellow residents of 

Saskatchewan experience. So that if one individual is from an 

urban area and they have the opportunity to travel to a rural 

area, they can experience what life is like, gain a better insight 

to some of the challenges and positive things going on in a 

particular area, and of course the other way around as well. 

 

So when we have a discussion about changing, Mr. Speaker, 

how land is owned, how land is controlled here in the province, 

as I said it’s something that generates debate. Because whether 

we have family roots tied to a piece of land, whether we 

currently have a strong attachment to a particular piece of land 

because it’s how we make our living, or whether, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s simply how we enjoy our lifestyle here in the province 

through whatever pursuit, exploring whatever corner of the 

province, it’s clear that the land plays a very important role. 

 

And it’s because of this understanding, Mr. Speaker, that land is 

so important. And the land that is owned collectively by 

everyone in the province, the land that belongs to every person 

regardless of what walk of life we come from, whether we are 

an urban person or a rural person, whether we are a student, a 

business person, whether we’re a civil servant, whatever our 

occupation and calling is in life, this is land that is owned 

collectively. 

 

And I think in years prior, Mr. Speaker, when the initial 

legislation came into place that addressed the ownership of 

Crown land — land that is owned by everyone — there was an 

understanding, Mr. Speaker, an understanding of the 

importance of land that is owned by everyone. And as a 

consequence, the legislation that was put in place to control, to 

regulate, to ensure that what was owned collectively remained a 

collective asset for everyone in the province, there were steps 

taken to ensure that that was in fact done properly. 

 

And for many years, over a number of jurisdictions and 

individuals from different political stripes, Mr. Speaker, policy 

was in place that ensured that the people of Saskatchewan, the 

land that we own collectively, the land that everyone owns, the 

land that everyone has an attachment to, the land that everyone 

receives a benefit from is in fact cared for and kept in a secure 

manner. 

 

So it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, when the Sask Party 

government has recently brought forward Bill 132, An Act to 

amend The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and to make 

consequential amendments to other Acts, Mr. Speaker, it was 

interesting to see their take, their new approach to how this sort 

of legislation ought to be. It was interesting to see their opinion; 



May 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5491 

their view of how this land should be treated; their view of how 

this land is valued by everyone in the province; their view on 

what steps, what changes should take place to create the kind of 

future that they think is appropriate with respect to land that is 

owned and enjoyed and appreciated by everyone in the 

province. 

 

It was described, Mr. Speaker, in a newspaper article in the 

Leader-Post on April 26th as “the Saskatchewan Party 

government’s new approach.” And, Mr. Speaker, while 

certainly every government is entitled to take a new approach, 

every government is entitled to do things as they see fit because 

that is the prerogative of government, just in the same way, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s the role of the opposition and the role of civil 

society and everyone out in the public to respond as to whether 

or not they think a new approach is in fact an appropriate 

approach. Just because, Mr. Speaker, members opposite might 

have a new way of wanting to do something, a new approach of 

wanting to do something, simply because they received a 

majority in the election in 2007 in the fall doesn’t necessarily 

mean that their new approach is a sound one. It doesn’t mean 

that the new approach is a wise one. It doesn’t mean that the 

new approach is one that received proper consultation with 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I think in the last few weeks, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a 

great amount of evidence where the government has adopted an 

approach where they are using the fact that they have a 

majority, the fact that they did receive a majority in the last 

provincial election, they’re using that, Mr. Speaker, as an 

excuse to not engage in the type of proper consultation, the 

proper kind of discussion that needs to occur with 

Saskatchewan people. And I know that is troubling for many 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in having the opportunity to go through some of 

the previous content that has been discussed in the legislature 

with respect to Bill 132, as I said, it has proven to be a fairly 

controversial piece of legislation because people do have such a 

strong attachment to the land, do have such a strong attachment 

to what they own, to what we own collectively as a province. 

So it has generated debate. 

 

So I read with interest, Mr. Speaker, some of the opening 

comments that were made by the minister when the piece of 

legislation was introduced to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And 

so the comments that I just recently made in addressing this 

idea of a new approach, on so many other fronts with the Sask 

Party government when dealing with this new approach, 

whenever they have a new idea of how something should or 

could be done as they see fit, there have certainly been some 

major flags raised by a number of people in the province on 

how this government undertakes a new approach, how they 

decide as a group of people that they want to pursue a new 

approach and deliver a new approach to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It was interesting, Mr. Speaker, that this topic of raising a new 

approach and sharing it with Saskatchewan people, we saw, Mr. 

Speaker, on the issue of educational assistants, how when they 

had a new approach, Mr. Speaker, it was an approach that was 

photocopied in a document and mailed out to individuals 

throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. And this approach has to 

do with the Minister of Education’s desire, as it stated in the 

document, to change the number of educational assistants 

operating throughout the province in a number of school 

regions, helping children who require the assistance that EAs 

[educational assistants] provide in a very professional and 

competent manner. And the type of new approach that was 

exhibited by the Sask Party government in sharing this new 

approach on educational assistants was one where consultation 

did not occur. An idea was developed in a document and simply 

mailed out, and then we saw what happened. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it was clear that the new approach was not 

an approach that was appreciated by the people of 

Saskatchewan because I know members of this Assembly — 

whatever side we are that we are from or sit on — heard a 

whole lot of feedback on the new approach, heard a whole lot of 

feedback on the failure of the Sask Party government to consult 

properly with Saskatchewan people. 

 

So simply because, Mr. Speaker, a government received a 

majority at a particular time — in this case the fall of 2007 — 

this does not give them carte blanche to do whatever they want 

to do simply because they have the majority. It’s still necessary, 

Mr. Speaker, that proper consultation occurs and that the people 

of Saskatchewan are consulted when a piece of legislation that 

is controversial, that does have a great amount of bearing on the 

future of the province, when that is in fact considered. It’s 

necessary that consultation does occur. 

 

[16:00] 

 

While members opposite might say well he’s given one 

example to this failure to consult, and it has to do with the area 

of education. So that’s hardly building a case, they may say, 

that this problem is widespread throughout government 

ministries. Simply because it’s occurring perhaps in 

Environment — I’ll get to that in a moment — in Education, I 

wouldn’t say there is a mountain of evidence yet. This is what 

they might say, Mr. Speaker, on the opposite side. 

 

Well let’s move from the Education portfolio to that of Health. 

When looking at this idea of a new approach to a different 

course . . . And as I said, Mr. Speaker, every government that 

has a majority, that has been to chosen to govern, has the right 

and indeed the responsibility to bring forward a new approach. 

That’s why they are elected. But it’s how this new approach is 

delivered. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, for a period of time the government had 

engaged in negotiations with chiropractors in the province with 

respect to the care that is provided to Saskatchewan people. The 

government provides a subsidy for the services, for individuals 

visiting a chiropractor, and the thinking goes, Mr. Speaker, that 

while this may cost money on one hand by having individuals 

that are in better health because they’re not missing work or 

they’re not showing up in the emergency room or they’re not 

visiting a family physician, they have a higher quality of life — 

this saves money in the long run. So while it may cost some on 

the one hand to subsidize the services of visiting the 

chiropractor, it makes sense in the long run because it saves 

money. 

 

And again just as the issue with educational assistants, I know 



5492 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2010 

many members in the Assembly on both sides received a great 

number of phone calls. And I had a great number of visits to my 

office as well with people coming in, patients of chiropractors 

concerned about the government’s new approach on how they 

want to provide chiropractic services in the province. 

 

And it was despite the fact that negotiations had occurred for a 

great deal of time, that chiropractors had come to the table in 

good faith and had bargained, had talked with government 

officials and hammered out a new deal and it was all ready to be 

penned, Mr. Speaker. It wasn’t until the last moments before the 

budget that it was clear that that Sask Party government was 

going to walk away from the agreement that had been 

negotiated. No consultation with patients, Mr. Speaker. The 

written and oral statements that have been made by the 

association of chiropractors has been very critical on how they 

were dealt with, with respect to consultation, with respect to 

being treated fairly, with respect to engaging in the bargaining 

process in good faith — certainly not pleased on that front. 

 

So members opposite may say, well simply because poor 

consultation with respect to a new approach, simply because it’s 

occurred in the Ministry of Education, simply because it has 

occurred in the Ministry of Health, why would the member 

suggest that this is also occurring in the Ministry of 

Environment with respect to Bill 132? Well it doesn’t take long, 

Mr. Speaker, if we look to another ministry going across the 

benches, I suppose from south to north, that if we first visit the 

Minister of Education, then visit the Minister of Health, and 

then go east a little ways, Mr. Speaker, we come to the Minister 

Responsible for SCN. 

 

Now you would think, Mr. Speaker, that when we’re looking at 

an issue that provides a great amount of value to the province in 

the same way that the land associated with Bill 132 provides a 

great amount of value for Saskatchewan people because of the 

attachment that we have to the landscape, the attachment we 

have to the province, to the dirt here in the province and the 

rocks and the trees and everything else in between, individuals 

may say, well how on earth can the member suggest that the 

role of SCN in the province is an important one and matters 

about how the government may pursue a new approach with 

respect to SCN? Well, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve seen by having 

people come to the gallery and rallies in the legislature and the 

Facebook group SCN Matters, from hearing from individuals 

involved in the industry, it’s clear that on an economic front 

because of the jobs that are created and the investment that is 

attracted, excuse me, on a cultural front in terms of the stories 

that are told, often about the land that we hold so dear to 

ourselves as individuals and as families — it too matters. 

 

So when the cut, Mr. Speaker, was made to turn the lights off at 

SCN, and then it comes out in subsequent weeks that there was 

no consultation with the actual board of SCN — the individuals 

taking on the responsibility of controlling SCN and setting its 

direction and making sure that it’s successful — and not only 

consultation about the new approach with respect to killing 

SCN but with an absence of meetings in general over the last 

two ministers, Mr. Speaker, I think, on the cultural front, it’s 

another prime example of how the government is using the 

majority that it received in 2007 as an excuse, as a rationale to 

abandon any type of proper consultation with the people of 

Saskatchewan on a number of fronts. 

So now members opposite may say, well okay, the member 

from Saskatoon Massey Place has presented a fairly sound case 

on how there was a complete absence of consultation on the 

shutting down of SCN. The member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place may have given a pretty good story on how the major 

policy change in the number of educational assistants in the 

province was shared with the people of Saskatchewan, with the 

educators and the students in the province. And the members 

opposite may say, well the member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place has provided some strong evidence that poor consultation 

occurred with chiropractors and the patients of chiropractors in 

the province. 

 

What type of evidence does the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place have that a failure of consultation occurred on the 

environmental front with respect to Crown land, land that is 

owned by all Saskatchewan people, land that is going to be 

potentially affected by Bill 132? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if we look at the opening statements when 

Bill 132, The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) 

Amendment Act, 2009 was introduced by the Minister of the 

Environment, in the speech that was prepared . . . I haven’t been 

a minister, Mr. Speaker, but I’m told that these speeches are 

often prepared by individuals in the ministry staff because we 

want to convey the important points, and then they’d of course 

be approved by the minister and the minister’s immediate staff. 

I would assume that the minister would not come into the 

legislature reading a document for the first time. I would 

assume that the minister would be familiar with the content in 

the document. I assume that a competent minister, a minister 

doing his or her job, would read the document properly and 

know what they are saying, know what they are suggesting to 

be the actual fact of the situation. 

 

I know they would be wanting to put forward information, Mr. 

Speaker, that does in fact reflect the actual story, information 

that would be backed up by the people that are being spoken of, 

information, Mr. Speaker, that would simply tell it like it is 

because on so many fronts, the examples that I gave — whether 

it was chiropractors, whether it was SCN, whether it’s the 

educational assistants, Mr. Speaker — we see a new approach 

from the government where they are failing, in my opinion, to 

consult with Saskatchewan people and the relevant 

organizations involved with any particular issue. And they are 

instead simply using the election majority that they used in 

2007 as an excuse to do whatever they want because of 

whoever they are friends with. 

 

So I would assume, Mr. Speaker, that when the minister came 

into the Legislative Assembly on March 8th, 2007, and made 

comment on Bill no. 132, The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

(Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009, I would assume, Mr. 

Speaker, that the individual, the Minister of the Environment, 

when she read the speech that was prepared for her and then 

approved by, I would assume, herself and perhaps some input 

from ministry officials or her immediate political staff around 

her — and I’m sure the Premier’s office might have a say on 

what was in this speech as well — I would think, Mr. Speaker, 

when the minister would come into this legislature, rise to her 

feet and make comment on Bill no. 132, I would assume that 

the information she put forward would in fact be consistent with 

reality, with the facts. 



May 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5493 

So in the third paragraph of her speech, as it is recorded in 

Hansard on page 4004 on March 8th, 2010, the minister states: 

 

This has been developed in consultation with a wide 

variety of stakeholders such as the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation, the Nature Conservancy of Canada, Nature 

Saskatchewan, Ducks Unlimited . . . The Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association, and the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, these are the individuals that the minister, 

when she came into the Assembly, said that consultation did in 

fact occur with and that these individuals had been contacted in 

a meaningful way — consultation needing to be a meaningful 

thing, not simply a formality or a sending of an email perhaps. 

 

So I would think, Mr. Speaker, with these organizations that 

have been listed by the minister, in these organizations where 

she stated that consultation did in fact occur, I would hope, Mr. 

Speaker, that when the minister embarks on this new approach, 

just as the Minister of Education embarked on a new approach 

with wanting to reduce the number of educational assistants, 

just as the Minister of Culture, Tourism and Parks engaged in a 

new approach in wanting to turn the lights off at SCN, just as, 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health wanted to engage in a new 

approach in reducing or in eliminating a bargained agreement 

with the chiropractors and benefiting the patients here in the 

province, I would think, Mr. Speaker, that when the minister 

rose in the Assembly, spoke to Bill 132, her new approach 

would in fact have the type of consultation. 

 

But sadly, Mr. Speaker, just as we saw with the Minister of 

Education with respect to a new policy on educational 

assistants, just as we saw with the Minister of Culture, Parks 

and Tourism with respect to turning the lights off at SCN, just 

as we saw, Mr. Speaker, with the Minister of Health breaking a 

deal with the chiropractors and reducing the quality of health 

care for Saskatchewan patients, I fear that the type of 

consultation that did occur with the Minister of Environment 

and relevant stakeholders was not an adequate, a thorough, and 

a comprehensive type of consultation but instead, Mr. Speaker, 

was a type of consultation that was inadequate, less than 

thorough in its enactment, and a type of consultation that did 

not allow the minister to hear the true views of the individuals 

being consulted. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important because when a government 

simply uses a majority that they received in any given election 

and then takes a railroading approach on any particular issue 

ignoring what Saskatchewan people want, ignoring what is in 

the best interests of Saskatchewan people but for whatever 

political reason, whether it’s a reason that’s not known to 

individuals or whether it’s a backroom reason, whether it’s a 

reason for friends or reasons to perhaps address concerns only 

of one group, not looking at the collective concerns. Because 

remember, Mr. Speaker, when we’re talking about Crown land, 

it’s land that’s owned by everyone. We need to keep a 

perspective that it’s necessary to do what is right with that land 

for all Saskatchewan people, not only a select few. 

 

So I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that . . . I would’ve hoped that 

the minister would’ve engaged in a more thorough and 

comprehensive type of consultation. But as recent as question 

period earlier this afternoon, we saw the minister try to explain 

the type of consultations she had. And, Mr. Speaker, I recognize 

that consultation is not responding to every bit of information 

that is received. It’s impossible, Mr. Speaker, to please 

everyone all the time. So on a given issue, it’s true that not all 

feedback, not all input that will be received through 

consultation will be in favour of a position that a government 

wants to take. But when the amount of consultation . . . when 

proper consultation occurs, and there is a consistent concern 

being raised by a number of groups on a number of occasions in 

a number of places, I think, Mr. Speaker, that ought to be a 

concern for the Sask Party government. And it ought to be a 

concern for anybody who cares about democracy, transparency, 

and the things that are important to all Saskatchewan people. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So the minister claimed that consultation occurred with a wide 

variety of stakeholders, such as the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation, the Nature Conservancy of Canada, Nature 

Saskatchewan, Ducks Unlimited, the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association, and the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities. Well, Mr. Speaker, if you look at some of the 

statements that have been made by these groups in recent days 

following the statements that the Minister of the Environment 

made in this Assembly, one interesting piece is a news release 

that was sent out actually today, Tuesday May 11th, by the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. And the title, Mr. Speaker, 

of the news release reads, “The SWF opposes dismantling The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act.” 

 

And the news release, I think it’s important to read, Mr. 

Speaker, because it speaks to the approach, this “new approach” 

that the Sask Party government seems to be taking time and 

time again on a number of ministries where they are failing to 

consult with people. And if they had properly consulted, Mr. 

Speaker, I think the speech that the Minister of the Environment 

gave on the day — I think it was March 8th when she made this 

speech — in the legislature, I think the speech that she provided 

would have better reflected the types of things she was hearing 

from a number of groups. 

 

Now maybe her speech would have said, we’ve heard 

significant concerns from a number of organizations, 

organizations A, B, and C, but we’ve also heard supportive 

arguments made by groups F and G, and we’ve decided to go 

ahead anyway. But, Mr. Speaker, her comments didn’t say that. 

Her comments, Mr. Speaker, were one-sided. And it was the 

type of statements that we’ve seen from a number of Sask Party 

ministers, where they’re saying yes, we consulted, check. Here 

comes the bulldozer; here comes the legislation whether you 

like it or it, whether or not it’s good and proper for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And as a consequence, what we’ve seen in recent days, Mr. 

Speaker, following the statements the minister has made about 

this legislation, is that there are a number of groups raising a 

number of concerns about this piece of legislation. And these 

are concerns, Mr. Speaker, where the minister felt it was 

appropriate, as she indicated in question period today, to simply 

call a meeting at one given time and call it done, call it good. 



5494 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2010 

I’ll fire up the bulldozer, here comes the legislation whether or 

not it’s a proper thing, whether or not it goes contrary to a 

number of policy directions for a previous administrations, 

going back to Grant Devine’s Tories. So a significant departure 

from what has been done, this “new approach.” 

 

And what we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, in recent days are groups 

coming forward saying, hold on. This minister talks about 

consultation. The Sask Party government talks about 

consultation, talks about talking to Saskatchewan people. But 

they’re not listening to us, and they’re not listening to the many 

other groups that have real and legitimate concerns about the 

legislation. 

 

The Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, the news release that 

was sent out earlier today, it reads: 

 

The Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation (SWF) continues 

to have grave concerns surrounding the recent Legislation 

aimed at dismantling the Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

(WHPA), the legislation that was created almost 30 years 

ago and is still considered to be one of the most visionary 

conservation programs ever developed in North America. 

 

So 30 years ago, Mr. Speaker. Not quite my age but a 

significant amount of time. Longer than any one member has 

been here in this Assembly. Perhaps a few of the staff in the 

building have been serving here 30 years, Mr. Speaker, but in 

terms of MLAs sitting in this room, it’s a piece of legislation 

that has a long, rich history here in the province, legislation that 

has served Saskatchewan people well — important legislation. 

And I think that is also something, Mr. Speaker, that really 

escapes members opposite, ministers opposite when they’re 

engaged in any new approach. For example the new approach 

of the Health minister, the Education minister, or any given 

minister on a new approach.  

 

Mr. Speaker, the news release goes on to read: 

 

The over 3 million acres presently protected in the Act 

would now be controlled under regulation and would be 

able to be sold or changed at the discretion of the Minister. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when we have seen a Sask Party 

government on so many fronts who have simply said they’ve 

consulted through sending an email or calling one single 

meeting, Mr. Speaker, when we’ve seen ministers exhibit that 

type of judgment on the issue of consultation, in my opinion, 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t want that minister being the final and 

ultimate say on land that belongs to everyone here in the 

province. 

 

Under WHPA, [the news release goes on to read] any 

lands that were removed or changed were required to be 

debated in the Legislature and allowed for public scrutiny. 

Under the new legislation there would be no transparency. 

In addition, the newly passed Conservation Easement 

Legislation that the Saskatchewan Government would 

place on most of the sold parcels gives the Minister the 

power to remove or change the easement without public 

knowledge or recourse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that’s, that’s a very important paragraph to 

read into the record and an important paragraph to share with all 

Saskatchewan people because, Mr. Speaker, the sentence that 

really does it for me is, “. . . any lands that were removed or 

changed were required to be debated in the Legislature and 

allowed for public scrutiny.” 

 

And that’s an important point to make, Mr. Speaker, because 

it’s a point that goes back, as the news release indicated, 30 

years. It’s the fact that, one individual, a minister who thinks he 

or she is the best thing since sliced bread when it comes to 

consultation, when it comes to having a political plan, simply 

because that individual thinks they’re great at doing something, 

Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t mean that they are. Just because they 

think they have consulted, just because they think they have a 

great plan for the province, they have a great new approach on 

any given issue, whether that’s shutting down SCN, whether 

that’s eliminating services, paid-for chiropractors, whether 

that’s the number of educational assistants in the educational 

system, or whether that is the protection of Crown land, land 

that belongs to every Saskatchewan person, that should not be a 

decision that is up to one sole person. 

 

The benefit, Mr. Speaker, to how things have previously been 

conducted in the legislature is changes to the land that is owned 

by everyone, belongs to every person here in the province, that 

is a change, Mr. Speaker, that would come to the legislature, 

would be open to public scrutiny, would be open to debate, and 

would be open to a transparent airing of all the facts. Unlike, 

Mr. Speaker, as the minister would like, is to have the ability to 

make any decision to say thumbs-up, thumbs-down like some 

sort of emperor on a piece of land, on the fate of one area based 

on his or her decisions and feelings of that given day. I think, 

Mr. Speaker, people of Saskatchewan want the type of scrutiny 

on any given piece of legislation, but especially on a piece of 

legislation that affects land that is owned by everyone and that 

is important to everyone. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the news release goes on. It says: 

 

“The combination of a lack of consultation and the 

aggressive time line on this Bill has effectively made it 

impossible to address our concerns and left many 

important questions unanswered,” states Darrell Crabbe, 

Executive Director of the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation (SWF). “We need the Minister to table this 

Legislation until all the variables can be properly 

addressed.” 

 

And by tabled I assume it means paused, pulled back, let’s slow 

things down. Let’s, Mr. Speaker, as a group of Saskatchewan 

people, as legislators, as people in the community, let’s not rush 

forward on a piece of legislation that has served Saskatchewan 

people well for 30 years, has guaranteed the security of 

important land for all Saskatchewan people. Let’s not, simply 

because the minister thinks she can do an amazing job on 

determining the fate of parcels of land throughout the province, 

let’s not rush this decision. Let’s not forego the type of 

legislative scrutiny that is required to ensure that land is 

properly cared for here in the province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if the news release were to end there, in my 

opinion there would be enough evidence to suggest that the 

minister should put on the brakes, should have a sober second 



May 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5495 

thought and re-evaluate the new approach that she and the 

Premier have dreamed up. But, Mr. Speaker, the news release 

does in fact go on. The news release goes on and it says: 

 

The SWF sees a “no net loss” agreement, as has been the 

policy of every Provincial Government since the WHPA 

was introduced; changes to create public transparency; the 

establishment of a Conservation Lands Fund and the 

continuation of protection of properties under WHPA 

legislation; as the most pressing issues and is prepared to 

work with the Government towards this goal. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, another important concept introduced here by 

the news here that was sent out by the Wildlife Federation, the 

concept of no net loss. So the Wildlife Federation, as I think 

many other sound-thinking people here in the province, they’re 

not saying that the land arrangement in the province needs to 

stay exactly as it has been for 30 years. There’s a recognition 

that over time there may be changes, there may be sales that are 

required, but it’s a commitment to the principle, Mr. Speaker, 

that when land is sold off, when land exits the provision and the 

safety that is provided through the legislation, that additional 

land is brought in so that there is not a loss. There’s a no net 

loss. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan are just as wealthy, just as blessed 

to have the land that we all own collectively that belongs to 

every Saskatchewan person. We are no less blessed by having a 

transaction occur. If land exits, land comes back on. It’s a 

simple concept. And it’s a concept, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Wildlife Federation supports, and I think many other 

organizations in the province that are concerned about the 

protection of sensitive lands and important lands are. 

 

The news release goes on, Mr. Speaker, it says, “The SWF is a 

predominantly rural organization . . .” 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Yorkton on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — To ask leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Yorkton has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the members of the Assembly, in your gallery 

. . . I apologize to the lady; I’m not sure who it is. I can’t really 

see clearly from here. But the two gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Ray Malinowski and Mr. John Malinowski, two very influential 

business people in Yorkton, the owners of Leon, Ram 

Industries. Mr. Speaker, big employers and entrepreneurs and 

philanthropists, very well known in the Yorkton area and 

throughout the province. I’d ask all members to help me 

welcome the Malinowskis to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land 

Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I certainly 

extend a welcome to the visitors in the gallery as well. The 

paragraph I was reading, Mr. Speaker, is from a news release 

put out today by the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. The 

title of the news release is “The SWF opposes dismantling The 

Wildlife Protection Habitat Act.” I’ve talked about some of the 

concerns that the Wildlife Federation have presented to the 

public and to the government and to the opposition. 

 

The second-last paragraph, Mr. Speaker, as I was reading: 

 

“The SWF is a predominately rural organization. A recent 

poll on our member base indicates that we have over 7,000 

landowners and over 3,000 livestock producers in our 

membership. We recognize that the present operators that 

lease many of these properties have, and continue to be 

excellent stewards of these lands. We want to work with 

all the stakeholders to hopefully create a win-win scenario 

for all involved. We need the cooperation and commitment 

of the Provincial Government to make that happen,” states 

SWF President Ray Wild. 

 

The closing paragraph, Mr. Speaker: 

 

The Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation has over 30,000 

members in 121 branches across Saskatchewan and is, per 

capita, the largest wildlife conservation organization of its 

kind in the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a few important points that were made in that 

closing paragraph. Individuals raising this concern, Mr. 

Speaker, are largely, not entirely but largely coming from a 

rural background involved in making their life off the land and 

enjoying the pursuits that are provided on the land. And they 

raised an important point, Mr. Speaker, that I fully agree with, 

and it is respect to the role that many of the individuals who 

have been leasing Crown land, land that is owned by everyone, 

that they have been doing a fine job over many, many decades, 

Mr. Speaker, in most cases, of being good stewards of that land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know a good number of people who lease Crown 

land in the capacity that is referred to in this news release. And 

I wholeheartedly agree, Mr. Speaker, that these individuals do a 

fine, fine job of respecting the land, of caring for it, of treating 

it properly, of being good stewards as the news release 

suggests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this isn’t about pitting one group against another. It isn’t 

about wanting to make enemies or wanting to appease one 

certain group, or it ought not to be about that, Mr. Speaker. But 

as the Wildlife Federation suggests, it’s about slowing down. 

It’s about not 100 per cent putting blind trust in the Minister of 



5496 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2010 

the Environment and her ability, or proposed ability to control 

land. It’s about slowing down and doing this properly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[16:30] 

 

As the member from Meewasin has suggested, it’s clear that 

consultation, proper consultation has not occurred. And I think 

there may be some more . . . The member next following me in 

speaking may indicate some of the failed consultation. 

 

But it’s not only the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, Mr. 

Speaker, that has concerns. One of the other groups the minister 

listed in the list of groups that have supposedly been consulted 

was the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. There’s a 

letter from Lyle Whitefish addressed to the minister. The one 

paragraph reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Since the FSIN was not involved in any consultations, I 

am requesting a detailed explanation of how your Ministry 

purportedly undertook to consult with First Nations prior 

to the decision being made to expand the sale of Crown 

lands protected under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

Rather than a vague reference, I am seeking a response 

that includes a listing of all the meetings your Ministry 

held with the First Nations and the dates such were held, 

which First Nations and their leaders or representatives 

who attended such meetings, what their responses were, 

how these were incorporated into the report your Ministry 

used to make the decision, and how your Ministry reported 

back to the First Nations of your decision. I also request a 

copy of such report. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, one of the groups that was listed by the 

minister, a group that was supposedly consulted in a thorough 

and proper way, a fairly strongly worded letter coming from a 

vice-chief from FSIN about the failure of consultation that 

occurred with them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another example of failed consultation from Nature 

Saskatchewan, from an individual from Nature Saskatchewan. 

The quote I would like to read from a letter that was sent to us 

by Nature Saskatchewan, the sentences read, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We can assure you that no meaningful consultation 

regarding the sale of Crown lands has occurred with 

Nature Saskatchewan. On occasion we were told some 

details of the land sale program, but this is not 

consultation. 

 

So we see a track record and a pattern emerging, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe from the Sask Party government. We see a government, 

Mr. Speaker, that is convinced that because it won a majority in 

the fall of 2011, it is given the right, Mr. Speaker, to do 

anything that they think is politically wise. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen on a number of ministries . . . I 

gave some example of the Minister of Education with respect to 

EAs. I gave some examples of the Minister of Health with 

respect to breaking a deal with chiropractors and their patients. I 

spoke, Mr. Speaker, about an example from the Minister of 

Culture, Parks and Tourism with respect to turning the lights off 

at SCN, where individuals from different walks of life 

representing different organizations have been highly critical of 

the Sask Party government in its ability to consult in a proper, 

thorough, and comprehensive manner. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, in Bill 132, legislation that is proposed 

that greatly changes the control of Crown land. And by Crown 

land, land that is owned by all Saskatchewan people from every 

corner, from every community, from every walk of life, land 

that is so special to us because of our historical roots to the 

land, because of our current work pursuits, because of our 

current recreational pursuits, because of the memories that we 

create with our families and our friends and our loved ones that 

occur on the land. This matters to Saskatchewan people greatly. 

 

And following the poor track record, Mr. Speaker, that we saw 

from other ministers, I’m sad to say the evidence to me would 

suggest that the Minister of Environment has adopted the 

approach that must be condoned by the Premier, and in fact 

encouraged by the Premier, when it comes to consulting with 

Saskatchewan people. Because on a number of fronts we have 

three groups, three different groups — FSIN, Nature 

Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation — three 

groups that have different mission statements, different people, 

different organizations, different motives for why they would be 

acting, and we’ve seen a consistent message coming from these 

groups, a message that consultation did not, in fact, occur as it 

ought to have. Consultation by this government has been 

missing.  

 

Consultation by this government is not fully grasped, is not 

fully understood because it’s not simply sending an email 

saying send us your thoughts. It’s not simply calling one 

meeting and calling it quits after that. It’s not simply saying 

hello to someone, talking briefly about an issue, sharing a bit of 

information, and then bulldozing ahead with whatever 

legislative agenda they may have. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t spoken about the motives as to why 

Bill 132 may be coming forward. I wanted to focus, Mr. 

Speaker, in my remarks about how land is important to all 

Saskatchewan people because of the shared history we have 

with the land. And I wanted to talk about, Mr. Speaker, how 

when it comes to the issue of consultation and doing what is 

right on any given issue, time and time again what we’ve seen 

from Sask Party government ministers is an approach that is 

fully condoned and endorsed and supported by the Premier, and 

that’s one of flawed and failed consultation. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to say I’m very pleased that I 

was able to go on record and share some of my concerns and 

thoughts about Bill 132 because I do think it’s an instance 

where the Sask Party government could turn away from the 

path of arrogance and of bulldozing ahead with an approach 

even though there is real and legitimate concerns being raised 

by Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan organizations. They 

have, Mr. Speaker, the opportunity to do the right thing as 

suggested by the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. They have 

the opportunity to slow down, put on the brakes, and do proper 

consultation so that a proper outcome can be achieved on this 

issue. 

 

I thank members of the Assembly for allowing me the 

opportunity to make some remarks. And with that, Mr. Speaker, 



May 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5497 

I will conclude my remarks and let the next speaker from the 

official opposition have his or her say. Thank you so much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to join in the debate again . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m informed that the member 

from Saskatoon Centre has already spoken. 

 

I need to remind the member that unfortunately while the 

member spoke, but they also . . . the member relinquished his 

place, sat down and allowed somebody in, didn’t adjourn which 

would have allowed the member to get up again. So the 

member has given up his spot to speak. I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Just one second. I recognize the member from 

Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I am extremely pleased this 

afternoon to enter into debate on Bill No. 132, The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill 

that the people of Saskatchewan care a great deal about. Over 

the last few weeks, I think it’s very safe to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that this is a piece of legislation that we have heard more about 

than we have in many years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation is one that the ordinary 

citizens of our province have taken an interest in. And in taking 

an interest in this legislation, Mr. Speaker, we’re receiving 

literally hundreds of emails, letters, phone calls about this 

legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a common thread to all 

the correspondence about this legislation and it’s simply this: 

the people of Saskatchewan believe very strongly in protecting 

the future of their habitat, wildlife habitat, Mr. Speaker. And 

they view that any potential changes that could result in a 

lessening of the protection of that wildlife habitat is very 

serious. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, although the government will say that they 

have no intentions to sell off the 3.5 million acres, Mr. Speaker, 

the question everyone seems to be asking is then why change 

the legislation? Why make the change now if there’s not an 

intent to sell off that pristine wildlife habitat, Mr. Speaker? 

What is that hidden agenda? Now, Mr. Speaker, whether or not 

there is a hidden agenda or not, Mr. Speaker, there is a belief 

today that this legislation wouldn’t be coming forward in its 

current form and design if there wasn’t an agenda to do just that 

— sell off, if not all that 3.5 million acres, Mr. Speaker, a large 

portion of that pristine habitat land, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the other issue that seems to come about as a 

result of this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is the problem 

that many, many organizations that have come about with the 

sole purpose of protecting the habitat lands in our provinces and 

across our country, Mr. Speaker — whether it be the Wildlife 

Federation or the Ducks Unlimited or any of the other groups 

that have formed with the purpose of protecting our pristine 

habitat, Mr. Speaker, wildlife habitat in our province and in our 

country, Mr. Speaker — feel they weren’t consulted. 

 

They feel that they were not involved in the decisions to make 

the change. And in not being involved and not being consulted, 

Mr. Speaker, that raises for them a suspicion as to why. If this is 

good public policy, if it’s based on sound, thought-through 

analysis, Mr. Speaker, then why weren’t they consulted? Why 

weren’t they brought along and filled in every step of the way 

so that they clearly understood what the government’s agenda 

was? But the fact, Mr. Speaker, that they were not informed of 

what the agenda was and they didn’t clearly understand what 

the outcome would be, Mr. Speaker, and they still don’t today, 

Mr. Speaker, all the assurances in the world are not going to 

turn back the clock and make people believe that nothing is 

going to change as a result of this legislation. 

 

And the reason for that is, is that they believe very strongly that 

on something this important to the people of Saskatchewan, 

they should have been consulted. And when they’re not 

consulted, Mr. Speaker, they then believe that there is an 

agenda, whether there is or isn’t. So the government may not 

have a hidden agenda, but you’re not going to convince people 

today that there isn’t because they weren’t consulted, they 

weren’t brought along, they weren’t involved in the process, 

and all of a sudden they’re faced with a change that can affect 

their families, their children, their grandchildren. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to have the type of reaction that we’ve seen 

in the last several weeks over this piece of legislation, quite 

frankly, is surprising. But, Mr. Speaker, you only get that 

reaction when there’s genuine concern. And, Mr. Speaker, when 

you have this level of genuine concern being displayed by the 

people of the province, by the various groups who take it upon 

themselves and who work very hard on behalf of the people of 

the province and the people of Canada to preserve the wetlands 

and conservation lands of our province, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

important that we listen to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a process for many, many years where 

wildlife habitat lands could in fact be taken in or out of 

government protection, the protection of the legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, but in each case it had to be debated before this 

legislature. And there’s been a zero net loss policy in place for 

many, many years that if you’re going to take lands out, you 

have to replace it with at least an equal amount of land of the 

same ecological value. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that isn’t done in any one given day because 

it takes analysis of the ecological value of land. It takes 

purchasing land, Mr. Speaker. It takes a number of steps in 

order to ensure that there’s a zero sum loss of land of ecological 

value protected under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, Mr. 

Speaker. But that has been a goal that the province has 

undertaken long before I was elected, Mr. Speaker, and long 

before I would believe any of the current sitting members of the 

House were elected. 

 

I believe it was under the government of Grant Devine back in 

the early 1980s, Mr. Speaker, when we in fact undertook the 

first detailed look at the protection of wildlife habitat in the 

province and worked on it in a manner in which we really set 

out to protect the habitat for future generations, Mr. Speaker. 



5498 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2010 

And in doing so, the people of Saskatchewan began to clearly 

understand and value what this land represents for both the 

waterfowl and the wetlands of our province, Mr. Speaker, and 

for other wildlife, Mr. Speaker, but also for the various species 

of plants and shrubs, Mr. Speaker, that become endangered if 

we don’t protect adequately the ecological value of the land. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, today this particular piece of legislation moves 

the ability for the sale of that land out of the protection of 

legislation into regulation and placing it then at the whim of the 

government without the debate in the House about what’s going 

to happen to that land, without the debate of the potential 

changes to that land having to go through the scrutiny of this 

legislature and having to go through the scrutiny of the public 

of Saskatchewan because at any given time the opposition can 

raise that issue to raise public awareness of what’s about to 

happen to the land prior to it being sold off. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that was a check and balance system that 

was put in place many, many years ago to ensure that the land 

that we put under protection remains under protection or that 

we have at least a clear understanding of the value of the land 

we’re selling off — not from a financial value but from its 

ecological and wildlife potential, Mr. Speaker — and what the 

value of the land has in protecting endangered species, whether 

it be either endangered species of wildlife, Mr. Speaker, birds or 

waterfowl, but also plants and shrubs that are sensitive in 

various parts of our ecologically protected lands, Mr. Speaker, 

under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, in the last number of years we 

have not seen the type of public outcry that we are starting to 

see about this Bill. And this Bill, the outcry is not coming from 

a narrow group of stakeholders, Mr. Speaker. It’s coming from 

people from across the province from every walk of life, from 

university students to high school students, and families, Mr. 

Speaker, in the cities of Regina and Saskatoon, to groups like 

the Wildlife Federation, the Ducks Unlimited, and others, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve even had letters written in from 

various stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, that are talking about the, 

well for lack of a better word, the backwards approach to this 

legislation and what its impact can be on the province of 

Saskatchewan. And one of those individuals played a key role 

in the development and classification of the lands that were put 

under protection under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, Mr. 

Speaker. And this individual played a role — he’s a 

professional agrologist — in analyzing and assessing the value, 

the ecological value of the lands, Mr. Speaker, and determining 

why land should be put under the protection of the government 

in order to protect endangered species, in order to protect 

wildlife species, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we need to pay close attention to what the professionals 

have told us about the protection of this land and not make 

quick decisions that may be based on an economic quick dollar, 

selling off the land that’s owned by the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been said that we’re against land ownership if 

we’re talking against the sell-off of land protected under The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, Mr. Speaker. Well I’d like to 

tell the people of Saskatchewan that land is owned. We’re 

talking about Crown land that’s owned by all the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. You and I own that land. My 

children own that land. My grandson owns that land. And that’s 

land that’s been put into protection to guarantee that he has the 

same opportunity to enjoy and explore the wildlife of our 

province, to enjoy and understand some of the rare species of 

plants and animals and wildlife that exists within our province, 

Mr. Speaker. And anything that we do that takes away that 

opportunity from our children and grandchildren, Mr. Speaker, 

is something that I think we need to look at very carefully. 

 

And that’s why in the past any movement of land protected 

under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act had to come to this 

Assembly and be debated. It wasn’t that changes couldn’t be 

made. The fact was changes needed to come here to be debated. 

And I think that’s quite appropriate, Mr. Speaker. It then also 

means that the changes that are being proposed are thought 

through and looked at more carefully by the government 

because they know it’s going to go through a much more 

detailed scrutiny by the members of this Assembly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it also then goes to put great pressure on any 

government that’s in power to have a zero loss policy: that if we 

move some land that’s ecologically protected, of a certain 

ecological value, that we replace it with other land of a same or 

equal ecological value, protecting enough land within our 

province to guarantee the ongoing stability of those ecosystems. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s good. I think that’s a 

protection, a level of protection that the people of this province 

should in fact want to have, Mr. Speaker, I know that they do 

want to have, Mr. Speaker, and it’s quite appropriate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, many, many very interested groups are 

saying they haven’t been consulted. And, Mr. Speaker, when 

groups that have the type of respect in our society and our 

communities are saying they haven’t been consulted, and they 

should have been consulted, Mr. Speaker, then it’s incumbent 

upon us as legislators, whether we’re in government or 

opposition, to pay attention. Because, Mr. Speaker, we’re not 

here to represent ourselves. We’re here to represent the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan. We’re here to represent the 

best interests of the people of our province, not to represent our 

own personal interest, Mr. Speaker, but to represent all the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, 

when we’re given the responsibility to represent the interests of 

the people of the province, we need to take that responsibility 

very seriously. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that on this particular piece 

of legislation there are many, many people who are saying, let’s 

take a step back. Let’s not pass this piece of legislation in this 

sitting. Let’s re-examine what our options are. There is today an 

option, if the government wanted to move forward and deal and 

sell some ecologically protected land under the Act, Mr. 

Speaker, they could do that. They could do it under the existing 

rules, but it would have to be debated within this Assembly. It 

would have to undertake the scrutiny of the members of this 

Assembly and the scrutiny of the general public prior to it going 

into effect. Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s wrong with that? 

 



May 11, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5499 

So if we didn’t pass this Bill this session, it doesn’t stop 

anything from happening. It doesn’t change anything. The 

government could still bring forward a Bill to deal with a 

certain amount of wildlife habitat protection land for sale. But 

they’d also have to bring, they’d have to bring, in order to get it 

passed in this Assembly without a fight, Mr. Speaker, they’d 

have to bring land of equal value in the same amount, Mr. 

Speaker. If it’s 250 acres, Mr. Speaker, they would be expected 

to bring 250 acres of equally sensitive ecological-value land and 

put it under protection. So if you’re going to sell off 250 acres, 

Mr. Speaker, we’d expect 250 acres of additional land to go 

under wildlife habitat protection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that guarantees to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, that guarantees, Mr. Speaker, that we’re 

maintaining that ecological value, that wildlife habitat land for 

our children, our grandchildren, and future generations. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that’s absolutely important. It’s 

important to me. It’s important to my colleagues. I can tell you 

it’s important to thousands of Saskatchewan residents who have 

contacted the official opposition, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

important, Mr. Speaker, to our, it’s important to our future 

generations, Mr. Speaker, because they have a right to have an 

expectation that we’re going to protect our environment, our 

lands, and our ecological value for them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are reasons why we are elected. It’s not in our short-term, 

short-sighted, own self-interest, Mr. Speaker. It’s about our 

children. It’s about the future. And it’s about looking beyond 

what our own self-serving, short-term interests are, to look at 

the value of everything we do to future generations, to our 

children, and to our grandchildren. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, all I’m saying and all the people of 

Saskatchewan are saying is, let’s not make a hasty decision. 

Let’s not move to a Bill that puts all the power in one 

minister’s, in one minister’s hand, Mr. Speaker, without having 

to come back to this legislature for debate. Let’s leave it in the 

hands of the provincial legislature to determine what land 

should be protected for the future generations of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we need to do this and we need to do it for 

the people of our province. And, Mr. Speaker, the people are 

starting to speak out. A month ago the people didn’t know this 

Bill existed. We’ve had hundreds of people come to this 

Assembly now to talk about this Bill. We’ve had the Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations here today to meet with 

members of the cabinet, talking about the seriousness of this 

legislation and sharing their concerns, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve had the Wildlife Federation here. We’ve had the Ducks 

Unlimited here, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve had many, many other 

environmental groups here, with a common concern, that 

common concern being this legislation isn’t needed for any 

purpose. For any purpose other than simply, Mr. Speaker, 

simply taking what the government can already do, but through 

the scrutiny of this legislature, and moving it to the sole 

direction and scrutiny of a single cabinet minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that puts tremendous power in an individual’s 

hands, but it is power that is more appropriately controlled by 

this legislature and by all 58 members elected on behalf of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have many hours of debate on this 

particular issue. Mr. Speaker, I could probably go for, as 

members opposite would know on something as important as 

this to the people of Saskatchewan, for many, many hours. 

 

But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, I think it is important to 

make a few very, very specific points and then adjourn debate, 

Mr. Speaker. But those points are important to be made. And 

it’s simply three points, Mr. Speaker. Don’t fix what isn’t 

broken. Mr. Speaker, there’s no need to fix something that isn’t 

broken. The current legislation works best for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan and still allows the government to 

move forward on its agenda. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, before you make a drastic change that 

in fact takes the control away from the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan and gives it to a single individual, Mr. Speaker, 

there needs to be meaningful consultation, meaningful 

consultation so people know and understand. So even if there 

isn’t a hidden agenda, they clearly know there isn’t a hidden 

agenda. 

 

And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, every decision we make has to be in 

the best interest of all the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

It has to be considered through a filter of what is in the best 

interest of the people of Saskatchewan. Not in the best interest 

of a government to move an agenda forward rapidly, Mr. 

Speaker, or in the interest of stakeholders who are pressuring 

the government, but, Mr. Speaker, in the interest of all the 

people of Saskatchewan. And I just want my colleagues on both 

sides of the House to understand that we need to take into 

consideration what’s the best interest of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I see the clock very quickly coming to 5 

o’clock, Mr. Speaker, and because I will want to speak at length 

again on this particular issue, Mr. Speaker, I would now move 

we adjourn debate on Bill 132. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 132. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn for committees this evening. 

 

The Speaker: — To facilitate the work of committees, the 

Government House Leader has moved the Assembly adjourn. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:58.]



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5469 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5469 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5469 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5469 

  Ottenbreit ...................................................................................................................................................................... 5478, 5495 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5479 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5470 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5470 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5470 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5470 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5470 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5471 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5471 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5471 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5471 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5471 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Child Care Centre Opens in Moose Jaw 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5472 

 National Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Month 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5472 

 International Nurses Week 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5472 

 Motorcycle Safety Week 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5473 

 Two Worlds 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5473 

 Mining Operations Receive Awards 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5473 

 Response to Questions 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5473 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Proposed Long-Term Care Facility 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5474 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5474 

 Coverage for Dental Treatment 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5475 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5475 

 Consultation on Changes to Legislation 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5476 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5477 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on House Services 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5479 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 ....................................................................................................... 5479 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5480 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5480 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5485 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5489 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5497 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


