




















































Hansard: May 17, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 62A  MONDAY, MAY 17, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5545 

 May 17, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Principal Clerk Celebrates 25 Years of Service 

 

The Speaker: — Before I call for introduction of guests, 

members, I would like to draw your attention to a significant 

milestone that is being marked today by a member of our 

Legislative Assembly Service. Today Iris Lang, our Principal 

Clerk, celebrates 25 years of service to the Assembly. 

 

Twenty-five years ago today, Iris began her career at the 

Assembly as a security enforcement officer. In the span of the 

time since her early career with the Sergeant-at-Arms office, 

Iris has gone back to school and earned two university degrees 

which made possible her taking on new roles within the 

administration of the Assembly Service. 

 

In 1997, Iris was appointed supervisor of administrative 

operations and then in 1998, human resource advisor. In 2003, 

Iris changed her career path again when she applied for and 

won a competition to become a Committee Clerk and Table 

Officer. Members please join me in congratulating Iris on 25 

years of service to this Legislative Assembly. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It‟s a great privilege for me to introduce to you and all members 

of this Assembly a man who has worked with the Saskatchewan 

government for nearly 40 years. I‟m talking of course about 

none other than Mr. John Reid, or JR as most people call him, 

with his colleagues in your gallery today. I want to introduce 

you to him today because it‟s important for us to honour the 

many years he has spent serving the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now he‟s just retired last month from his position as the special 

advisor to the deputy minister of First Nations and Métis 

Relations. But this was only one of his many roles. He has 

influenced many different government ministries over four 

decades of service. 

 

Early in his career, he worked in the addictions field and then 

steadily worked his way up to the top levels of the First Nations 

and Métis Relations Ministry. Always affable, J.R. has 

developed many strong friendships with people across the 

province, and he has nurtured long-standing and trusting 

relationships with First Nations and Métis people. A devoted 

family man, he always made time for home and home life. He 

often speaks fondly of his son Ian and daughter Heather and 

their numerous pets. 

 

Whether he was a policy analyst or acting deputy minister, he 

worked tirelessly to make life better for First Nation and Métis 

citizens of our province. I would ask that all members of the 

House join me in thanking John for his long and distinguished 

service to the province of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to join, on 

behalf of the official opposition, the words of congratulations to 

John Reid. We had estimates last week and, John, it just wasn‟t 

the same without you here. I‟m sure you were following at 

home. 

 

But John of course is one of those public servants that for which 

the Saskatchewan public service has a tremendous reputation 

across this country. Forty years is a tremendous contribution to 

the life of a province. And again I‟d echo the sentiments around 

the fine relationships that John has built up, relationships of 

trust and respect that John had built up over the years with First 

Nations and Métis people in this province in particular. So on 

behalf of the official opposition, I‟d like to add our 

congratulations to John for reaching this milestone, and I‟m 

sure it‟s not the last adventure for this fine citizen of the 

province, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations, John. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs, the Minister Responsible for Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s with great pleasure that I introduce to you and 

through you four members in your gallery representing the 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business. Joining us today 

are vice-president, Saskatchewan and agri-business, Ms. 

Marilyn Braun-Pollon; Virginia Labbie, policy analyst, 

Saskatchewan and agri-business; Faris Sadden, district manager 

and winner of CFIB‟s [Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business] Big Voice contest. Now he had the highest response 

rate from all members in southwestern Saskatchewan; I know 

that people in southwest tend to have a big voice in the 

legislature here, and they do in the CFIB as well. And also 

Marc Taillon. Marc is the CFIB legislative intern. Marc, do you 

want to give us a wave? 

 

The Canadian Federation of Independent Business, Mr. 

Speaker, is a non-partisan, non-profit organization that 

represents 105,000 people, 5,250 here in Saskatchewan. 

They‟re funded entirely by members and take directions 

through surveys on various challenges facing their firms. I 

might indicate that one of their latest studies shows that 

Saskatchewan business people are the most optimistic in the 

country. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly, thank them for their good work that they 

do with Enterprise Saskatchewan, and the interaction they have 

with cabinet ministers. The Minister of Finance and I met with 

them. I know they meet with the Leader of the Opposition as 

well. So through you, I‟d ask all members to thank them for the 

work they do and congratulate them and welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 



5546 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would want to join with 

the minister in welcoming the members of CFIB to the 

Legislative Assembly. We had a great meeting this morning 

with Marilyn and her team. And I just want to say a special 

welcome to Virginia, Marc, and also to say to Faris Sadden, a 

good friend from down in that Cadillac area of southwest 

Saskatchewan. Welcome as well, and as the minister 

mentioned, winning that award. 

 

I want to say that the research that you‟ve done recently, as it 

relates to agriculture in Canada and across the country but here 

in Saskatchewan as well, I think will be very helpful to the 

Minister of Agriculture and myself as we go forward and plan 

for the future, especially as it relates to AgStability and its 

effect here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you it‟s my pleasure to introduce in the west gallery 21 

grade 8 students from Turtleford School. I had the opportunity a 

couple weeks ago to visit the grade 4 class in Turtleford at their 

school. And I can assure you the grade 4 class had some very 

good and very tough questions, so I would expect it with the 

grade 8 class, it could be twice as tough this afternoon. 

 

Accompanying the grade 8 class are their teachers, Christie 

Milne, Lorna Macnab, and Laurel Derenoski; and their 

chaperones, Marianne Little, Dean Domes, Garth Edwards, Reg 

Bellanger, and Joanne Bannerman. I would ask that all 

members of the Assembly welcome our visitors to their 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to you 

and to members of the Assembly, an individual from Prince 

Albert, Ted Zurakowski, who is a city councillor. Ted is also a 

teacher in the Catholic school division and is newly nominated 

as our candidate for Prince Albert Carlton, and I just want to 

welcome Ted here today. And I know that it will be one of the 

many stops you make here in coming years. So welcome to the 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my great pleasure 

today to rise and introduce my constituency assistant, Rose 

Rothenburger, who is heavily involved in the constituency in a 

number of ways. One of which is in support of our organization, 

the NDP [New Democratic Party], but she also does many, 

many hours of work on behalf of other residents in Prince 

Albert and certainly related to women‟s groups and support of 

their activities, so certainly proud that she‟s here today. It‟s a 

rare occasion when I get to introduce somebody from Prince 

Albert. I‟m certainly glad that Rose is here. 

 

And beside Rose is Nicole Rancourt, who is a proud mother, 

resident of Prince Albert as well, works in the constituency 

association and does tremendous work on behalf of 

disadvantaged people in Prince Albert. So I‟d like to ask that all 

members welcome them to their legislature here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you in 

your gallery, I‟d like to welcome, introduce two individuals, 

Kelvin Goebel and Kerry Westcott. They are here today to 

observe proceedings in their House, and both have a long 

history with trade unions in our province.  

 

And they are very concerned with the proposed Bill 80 

legislation and its impact on the construction industry. Mr. 

Speaker, specifically their concerns with the legislation are that 

it will end the rights of workers to choose unions along trade 

specific lines. Mr. Speaker, it‟ll be the end of province-wide 

collective bargaining, and it will lower wages for Saskatchewan 

families and, Mr. Speaker, there‟ll be a general destabilization 

of the construction industry. Simply, Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve read 

somewhere, if it ain‟t broke, don‟t fix it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Kelvin Goebel is the executive secretary-treasurer 

and Kerry Westcott is the recruiter, organizer of the 

Saskatchewan Regional Council of Carpenters, Drywall, 

Millwrights and Allied Workers. And they have asked me today 

to table over 1,600 signed cards for residents of this province 

with the Premier. These cards are all in opposition to Bill 80. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure to introduce some friends seated in your gallery, 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly. Seated in the front row, Mr. Speaker, are some 

friends and constituents from Saskatoon Massey Place. From 

left to right we have Ruben Peters, John Crawford, Margaret 

Crawford, Lois Schrader, and Donna Rederburg. I know these 

individuals hardly miss a question period on TV, so they 

wanted to come to the Assembly and see it in first-hand. 

 

I should also note, Mr. Speaker, I know all members rise and 

say that they have the best constituency assistant in the 

Assembly. I‟m sorry to inform all members that they‟re wrong. 

Donna Rederburg is my constituency assistant who also served 

the people of Saskatoon Massey Place with Eric Cline for a 

number of years. So I‟m very pleased that she‟s here. As well, 

Ruben Peters works as a casual constituency assistant. So I‟m 

very pleased that they‟re both able to be here, and I would ask 

all members to welcome them to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

While I‟m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to 

introduce some guests also seated in your gallery, about 10 

individuals, Mr. Speaker, that have come to the legislature 

today because of their questions and concerns about the Sask 

Party government‟s approach to the merger of Carlton Trail 

Regional College and St. Peter‟s College. In the gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, a group of people, about 10, from the communities of 

Watrous, Imperial, Raymore, and Muenster. I would ask all 

members to also welcome them to the Assembly. 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5547 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Also in 

your gallery are three people from Saskatoon Nutana that I‟d 

like to introduce to the Assembly. Joining us this afternoon is 

Martha Robbins. Martha was named by Maclean’s magazine 

one of the 100 young people to watch in Canada. And she‟s a 

constituent of Saskatoon Nutana, and we‟re extremely pleased 

with the activity that Martha is involved in, particularly with the 

Buena Vista Community Association. 

 

Joining Martha is Cathy Sproule. Cathy Sproule is a lawyer in 

Saskatoon, but she‟s also heavily involved with the Ness Creek 

Festival that takes place at Big River in July, and I‟d like to 

welcome her. 

 

And joining Cathy and Martha is Trevor McKenzie-Smith who 

has just got back from graduating from the University of 

Toronto with a master‟s in geography, and his research is 

extremely interesting. Trevor is also involved with the Buena 

Vista Community Association. So I‟d like to welcome these 

three citizens from Saskatoon Nutana to the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Also while I‟m on my feet, I want to again welcome Kerry 

Westcott who is in the Assembly. He also is a resident of 

Saskatoon Nutana. And Kerry has a very long history of 

advocating on behalf of working people, particularly carpenters 

in the province, but he has a real interest in making sure that we 

have a lot of apprentices that are involved in the industry and 

ensuring that the journeymen that are on sites have apprentices 

that they are training, Mr. Speaker. So I‟d like to welcome 

Kerry Westcott to the Assembly as well. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, I am pleased 

to introduce in the west gallery, Heather Malek, who is a 

member of SCN [Saskatchewan Communications Network] 

Matters, a group that‟s concerned with this government‟s 

privatization of the Saskatchewan Communications Network 

and the manner in which they‟ve gone about doing it. 

 

And just a bit of a side note, SCN Matters had the opportunity 

to spend the day in Swift Current on Saturday. And they spoke 

to about 80 people at the Bank of Montreal Square, did some 

great chalk drawings, and heard from about 80 people who were 

also concerned about the closure of SCN and who know the 

Premier well and don‟t understand this decision at all. 

 

With that, I‟d like us all to welcome Heather to her Legislative 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today on behalf of citizens 

of Saskatchewan who are concerned over the condition and the 

safety of our highways of our great province. This petition 

pertains to Highway 35 and the portion that runs through 

Pelican Narrows, which is currently a gravel road, but an 

upgrade to this highway would be an excellent investment in 

the safety and the well-being of the people of Pelican Narrows. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to pave the 7 kilometres of Highway 135 

through the community of Pelican Narrows as committed 

on August the 24th, 2007. 

 

And in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Pelican Narrows, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support the protection of wildlife habitat 

lands. And, Mr. Speaker, the residents know that The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act protects 3.4 million acres of uplands and 

wetlands or one-third of all wildlife habitat lands in 

Saskatchewan in their natural state and that many citizens, 

many, many citizens are concerned that the government is 

currently looking to repeal the schedule listing of these 

designated lands with proposed amendments currently before 

the House. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

We. in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately and 

without delay recognize the importance of the protection 

of wildlife habitat lands and immediately withdraw 

proposed amendments that will negatively affect the 

protection of wildlife habitat lands; 

 

And in so doing cause the provincial government to 

commit to meaningful and adequate consultation with all 

stakeholders that will be affected by future legislative 

changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by residents of Moose 

Jaw and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition on 

behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned that 

many senior citizens live on fixed incomes and are victims of 

physical, emotional, and financial abuse. And they also believe 

that seniors have a right to social and economic security and a 

right to live free from poverty. They also believe that seniors 

have a right to protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 



5548 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectively 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors‟ Bill of Rights which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

The petitions are signed from citizens from Marsden, Central 

Butte, Kinistino, Craik, and Aylesbury. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing for Saskatoon. And we see, Mr. Speaker, too many 

times where tenants cannot simply afford rent increases, and yet 

they see fewer and fewer accommodations on the market. I‟d 

like to read the prayer. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectively 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to develop an affordable housing program 

that will result in a greater number of quality and 

affordable rental units to be made available to more 

people in Saskatoon and Saskatchewan, and that the 

government also implement a process of rent review or 

rent control to better protect tenants in a non-competitive 

housing environment. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this come from the city of 

Saskatoon. I do so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — I rise today, Mr. Speaker, I rise today to 

present a petition in support of Highway 915. This petition 

addresses concerns of Saskatchewan people about the quality of 

Stanley Mission road. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to upgrade and repair Highway 915 as 

soon as possible. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed and supported by the leadership and 

community members from Stanley Mission. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 

petition in support of SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology] and the many students who 

are negatively affected by the recent cuts done by this 

government. The prayer reads: 

 

To cause the Sask Party government to recognize the 

importance of the programs offered by SIAST campuses 

in ensuring that we develop a highly skilled and educated 

workforce in Saskatchewan, and as in so doing to cause 

the Sask Party government to stop shortchanging SIAST 

which forces the institution to cut important programs, 

and instead to immediately increase funding to SIAST to 

allow for the reinstatement of programs affected by recent 

budget cuts. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of financial assistance for the town 

of Duck Lake water project. The petition is being circulated and 

signed by Saskatchewan residents because of the exorbitant 

amount of money that Duck Lake residents are forced to pay for 

safe, clean, drinking water. And it‟s causing them hardship and, 

in fact, forcing people out of their community. And the prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfill its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by good folks from the 

Beardy‟s First Nation, the town of Wakaw, the town of 

Rosetown, and Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present yet another petition from rural Saskatchewan regarding 

water issues. The government ministry has directed that the 

customers may no longer treat non-potable water using methods 

approved by Sask Health, although the Furdale residents, in 

dealing in good faith with SaskWater for over 30 years, have 

paid large amounts for their domestic systems and in-home 

treatment equipment. The alternative water supply referred to 

by the government ministry is a private operator offering 

treated, non-pressurized water at great cost with no guarantee of 

quality, quantity, or availability of water. And the prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5549 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Furdale and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a 

petition in the support of the withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. 

Speaker, we all know that the members of the building trade 

unions have a proud history of craft union certification in 

Saskatchewan, and that the existing construction industry 

labour relations Act, 1992 has provided a stable environment 

for labour relations. And, Mr. Speaker, we all know that the 

results of a stable labour relations environment provide for 

quality work and safe construction sites that benefit all of us in 

Saskatchewan. The existing building trades contracts, Mr. 

Speaker, also support an apprenticeship system of training 

which results in a highly skilled workforce. And the petition 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by residents of Moose Jaw and Pilot 

Butte. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased today to rise 

to present a petition in support of maintaining quality health 

care services in Saskatchewan. The petitioners note that CUPE 

[Canadian Union of Public Employees] members employed 

within the health regions provide valuable care, compassion, 

and quality health care services to the citizens of Saskatchewan 

in acute care, community care, long-term care, and the public 

health sector. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners pray: 

 

That the honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased 

to cause the government to commit to negotiating a fair 

and just collective bargaining agreement with health care 

workers in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of Meadow 

Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again here today to present petitions on behalf of residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party government. 

They allude to the two consecutive $1 billion deficits tabled by 

this Sask Party, and they reference the billions of dollars of debt 

growth projected underneath the Sask Party. The prayer, Mr. 

Speaker, reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions from concerned citizens are signed by 

individuals from Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

again today to present a petition in support of midwifery here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This petition is signed by residents concerned that despite the 

fact The Midwifery Act was proclaimed more than two years 

ago, that there‟s only seven registered midwives here in 

Saskatchewan, most of them concentrated in Saskatoon so 

there‟s a disparity of services between urban and rural women. 

I‟d like to read the prayer. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to keep its promise to broaden the options 

for women and their families and recognize that presently 

this promise remains unfulfilled, as many communities in 

Saskatchewan still do not have midwives employed by 

their respective health regions; 

 

And in doing so, your petitioners pray the honourable 

Legislative Assembly cause the government to support 

midwifery in Saskatchewan by making funding available 

for additional midwife positions in Saskatchewan‟s health 

regions as well as independent positions; 

 

And furthermore, the honourable Legislative Assembly 

cause the government to encourage an increase in the 

number of licensed midwives in Saskatchewan by 

extending liability insurance, thereby making it possible 

for prospective midwives to achieve the number of births 

required to successfully apply for a licence with the newly 

formed College of Midwives. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents in Regina and 

Moose Jaw. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 



5550 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

50th Anniversary of Boundary Dam Power Station 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Friday, 

May 14th, 2010 marked a very special day in Estevan. I had the 

pleasure of attending a dinner celebrating the 50th anniversary 

of the Boundary dam power station. 

 

The Boundary dam power station had very modest beginnings 

on May 14th, 1960. The dam was a plant that was constructed 

to supply electricity for a community of barely a few hundred 

residents. With the expansion of the local community, the 

Boundary dam also grew. Now there are 300 employees at 

Boundary Dam, along with an additional 450 individuals 

working in either the mining industry or other dam-related 

activities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the relationship between the city of Estevan and 

the employees of the Boundary Dam power station has also 

grown over the past 50 years. These employees are active in the 

community. They volunteer their time, they donate to the local 

charities, and these are the people that contribute to what makes 

Estevan such a great city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not personally 

acknowledge plant manager Mike Zeleny. Mr. Zeleny has been 

doing a terrific job in overseeing his 300 employees and making 

sure the plant runs at maximum efficiency. 

 

I would like to acknowledge all of the past and present 

employees of the Boundary Dam and to thank them for helping 

to grow Estevan and move Saskatchewan forward. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Norwegian Constitution Day 

 

Mr. Nilson: — [The hon. member spoke for a time in 

Norwegian.] 

 

Today is Norwegian constitution day, celebrating that day in 

1814 when a number of the citizens of Norway got together at 

the time of the Napoleonic Wars and declared independence for 

Norway. What was clear about this particular event was that the 

farmers had an upper hand, and they actually drafted a 

constitution which put into place a special spot for all of the 

farmers. 

 

And here in Saskatchewan, we have many Norwegian 

descendants. There are many Norwegian descendants all over 

North America. And it‟s always a pleasure to note this day 

because what it does do is reminds us of our roots. So with the 

member from Coronation Park, the member from The 

Battlefords, the member from Saskatoon Massey Place, the 

member from Saltcoats, the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers, as well as with the spouse of Mr. Speaker, all of us look 

forward to celebrating the 17th of May, Syttende Mai, today. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Surgery Wait-List Times 

 

Ms. Ross: — Mr. Speaker, today I am proud to rise and say that 

under this government people are spending less time on 

wait-lists for surgery. Mr. Speaker, the 18-month wait-lists are 

down 39 per cent, and the 12-month wait-lists are down 22 per 

cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is more to be done, but reduction in wait 

times over the past two years is a big step in the right direction. 

This progress is gaining recognition nationwide. These positive 

steps can largely be attributed to the hard work, dedication, and 

efficiency of individuals working in the new assessment and 

treatment clinics in Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Regina, and 

Moose Jaw. In the words of Michael Golbey, chairman of the 

Canadian Medical Association, we are seeing really good stuff 

in Saskatchewan. With very little increased costs, you can have 

a very large improvement in ways that are being done to shorten 

the waiting list. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the entire health sector should be commended for 

supporting new approaches and the innovations that will 

improve the quality, the availability of health services for 

Saskatchewan people. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Furber: — Star date, 5.7.2010. Mr. Speaker, captain‟s log. 

Communication channels are jammed aboard Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. Sensors detect few signs of life aboard this 

costly craft. But the Premier says that it‟s just an information 

flow and that the information flow is not in an optimum 

situation. 

 

When he launched Enterprise Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier‟s hopes were sky high. Its four-year mission was to 

seek out new opportunities, economic development, and to 

boldly go where the Premier had never gone before — success 

in business. An ambition prime directive, Mr. Speaker, 

travelling across 18 sectors including First Nations, local 

government, educators, and labour, but the Premier changed 

course, ignoring business, First Nations, and breaking the 

agreements to help local governments and educators. As for 

labour, Mr. Speaker, we know he declared war on their 

federation. 

 

So instead of pushing the economy ahead at warp speed, the 

Premier‟s vessel has been sputtering despite an astronomical 

$90 million worth of fuel. As Enterprise Saskatchewan drifts 

closer to the black hole of failure, Mr. Speaker, the crew are 

starting to abandon ship. Dale Botting beamed back to the 

private sector last month on an away mission costing taxpayers 

$15,000 a month. The Premier calls such wasted dollars 

challenges to his new approach. But the people are so many 

light years ahead of him that they‟re just asking what planet 

he‟s on. 

 

Communication channels may be jammed today, Mr. Speaker, 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5551 

but the Premier will get the message loud and clear in 2010 

when he crosses the final frontier — defeat at the polls. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Canadian Youth Against Impaired Driving Conference 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the weekend, 

Regina hosted a successful Canadian . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I‟d ask the 

member from Athabasca to allow the members to make their 

statements without interference. I recognize the member from 

Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the weekend, 

Regina hosted a successful Canadian Youth Against Impaired 

Driving Conference. This conference brings together hundreds 

of young people determined to end impaired driving. They 

listened to keynote speakers and discussed topics related to this 

issue. 

 

The Canadian Youth Against Impaired Driving Conference was 

put together by Saskatchewan‟s chapter of Students Against 

Drinking and Driving, better known as SADD. SADD is a 

youth-based organization devoted to eliminating impaired 

driving. Every year they deliver presentations and raise 

awareness about the impact of impaired driving. This is very 

important work, Mr. Speaker. Last year 44 people were killed in 

Saskatchewan and 786 were injured in collisions involving an 

impaired driver. Over 60 per cent of those injured and fatalities 

were caused by impaired drivers under the age of 30. 

 

Mr. Speaker, events like this conference are essential to 

educating young people about the dangers of impaired driving. 

Education and awareness will help reduce the numbers of 

needless deaths and injuries. We congratulate SADD on hosting 

such a successful weekend event. I hope all of our young people 

learn to always plan for a safe ride home and that they share the 

message with everyone they know. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Government’s Track Record 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Kentucky Derby‟s 

135th anniversary of racing three-year-old horses is as good a 

day as any to examine the track record of this three-budget 

government. Now, the Premier calls it nagging when we 

mention his early adventures in horseback riding, Mr. Speaker, 

and besides he‟s out of country, rebranding the region with his 

western horse-trading teamsters. 

 

So as this session comes down to the wire, Mr. Speaker, we 

look at some of the other horses running for government that‟s 

undecidedly unstable. The House Leader, Mr. Speaker, has 

been here 19 years — a bit long in the tooth — but he stumbled 

out of the gate to extend sitting hours, leading many to think the 

Premier had mistaken a gelding for a warhorse. And the 

Enterprise minister is tripping out of the gates on our domed 

stadium; even after a Chevy chase, he couldn‟t get Ottawa to 

pony up the dough. 

 

Then there‟s the Health minister, Mr. Speaker. The public are 

telling him to hold his horses, but he‟s still chomping at the bit 

to run roughshod over privacy rights. The Finance minister, Mr. 

Speaker, is known for a different Kentucky tradition than horse 

racing, but thanks to his unbridled spending and a risky bet on 

potash, he still managed to saddle this province with a $1 

billion deficit. 

 

In 2011, Mr. Speaker, the Premier will ask voters to gamble on 

this team for four more laps. Given their track record though, 

we‟re betting voters have the horse sense to say nay, nay to the 

Sask Party. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

New Democratic Party Leader’s Dinner 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. An old riddle asks: 

if a tree falls in the forest and no one is around to hear it, does it 

really make a sound? In Saskatchewan one might ask: if the 

NDP hosts a leader‟s dinner and hardly anybody attends, is 

there really a leader? Mr. Speaker, this was the case of its recent 

NDP leader‟s dinner. Free T-shirt night would have been a 

better incentive to attend. But the NDP went with an 

uninspiring title of Dinner with Dwain. 

 

Dinner with Dwain might have packed the house during the 

dying days of disco when he was as popular as a rhinestone jean 

jacket. But this is 2010, and according to a North Battleford 

news report, at $20 a person the NDP leader could only muster 

the support of 61 people. That adds up to a total of $1,220 for 

the NDP coffers, only a few hundred more than the NDP 

membership scandal. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to offer some free advice on how to 

coordinate a leader‟s dinner. First, your slogan should suit the 

cause. How about NDP aid? Might be a better slogan than 

leader‟s gala. Second, you should offer people something of 

value in exchange for their money, not a relic. And finally, Mr. 

Speaker, finally, if you want a successful event, don‟t associate 

your event with the NDP. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the agreement between 

the Sask Party government and Amicus contains a provision 

which states, and I quote, “In the event that either Amicus or 

the region terminates this continuing care and service agreement 

. . .” 

 

The Speaker: — I‟d just ask the Assembly to give us a second. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 



5552 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can we take a 

10-minute recess? 

 

The Speaker: — Would the members agree to a 10-minute 

recess? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The Assembly will reconvene in 10 minutes. 

 

[The Assembly recessed for a period of time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I‟ll call the session back to order. And first of 

all let me say thank you to the members for the co-operation as 

we dealt with this issue of a personal nature. 

 

Oral questions, I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Speaker, the agreement between the 

Sask Party government and Amicus contains a provision which 

states, and I quote: 

 

In the event that either Amicus or the region terminates 

the continuing care and service agreement before the 

expiry of the term of the agreement, or provides written 

notice to the other party that it does not intend to renew 

the continuing care and service agreement, Amicus, at its 

sole option, may require the region to acquire its assets 

and ongoing business operations; and the region agrees 

that it will pay to Amicus the amount required for Amicus 

to repay the outstanding balance owing to the mortgagee 

plus outstanding interest and charges for the mortgage 

referenced in clause 4(1). 

 

To the minister: is that not a loan guarantee? 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you very 

much for the question. The Saskatoon Regional Health 

Authority has looked into this and had a legal opinion. That‟s 

not a loan guarantee . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker, we have 

looked into it through the Ministry of Health and no, we don‟t 

look at this as a loan guarantee. This is a new financial 

arrangement with the Catholic Health Ministry that will offer 

100 long-term care beds in Saskatoon — much needed 

long-term care beds, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Under the previous government, we simply didn‟t have enough 

long-term care beds. We‟re moving on that, Mr. Speaker. We 

have anywhere from 60 or 70 residents living in an acute care 

centre, completely inappropriate for the care that they need, Mr. 

Speaker. This will move a project further along, Mr. Speaker, 

that will ensure that long-term care residents have the proper, 

appropriate care in the city that they so choose, Mr. Speaker. It 

allows them to age with dignity. It allows them to age with 

place, Mr. Speaker, in place, and it allows spouses to age 

together, Mr. Speaker. It would only be the NDP that would be 

against something like that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, on May 10th, the 

minister stated, and I quote, “We are not guaranteeing any loan 

for Amicus, not whatsoever.” But, Mr. Speaker, the government 

has entered into a continuing and service agreement with 

Amicus that guarantees that the mortgage will be paid off by the 

government if the agreement is terminated. That‟s something 

Amicus can take to the bank. 

 

So to the minister: why did he claim that the government wasn‟t 

guaranteeing a loan to Amicus when they signed an agreement 

that does precisely that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous 

answer, this is not a loan guarantee. We‟re not going to the 

bank and signing any sort of note for Amicus, Amicus, which is 

a subsidiary of the Catholic Health Ministry. 

 

The Catholic Health Ministry operates nine long-term care 

facilities around the province, with agreements through health 

regions right now, Mr. Speaker. It operates St. Paul‟s Hospital 

in Saskatoon through an agreement with the Saskatoon Health 

Region. It operates a facility down in Estevan through the Sun 

Country Health Region, Mr. Speaker. It operates a number of 

health care facilities across the province and has done so for 

100 or better years, Mr. Speaker, a very, very reputable partner, 

Mr. Speaker, to ensure long-term care residents in Saskatoon 

get the proper care they need. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — This is a Sask Party gift that just keeps on 

giving, Mr. Speaker. There is more, there is more to this. 

Brenda FitzGerald has been contracted by the Ministry of 

Health to conduct a review of the government‟s affiliation 

agreements with long-term care facilities. She‟s also the interim 

CEO [chief executive officer] of Amicus. 

 

Now the minister will no doubt answer that Amicus is not an 

affiliate, it‟s a pilot project. But that would be like arguing how 

many angels can dance on the head of a pin. The minister has 

contracted someone to review the terms of agreements with 

long-term care facilities, which are affiliates, while the same 

person‟s employer is negotiating an agreement with the 

government, an agreement that apparently is a pilot project. 

 

To the minister: how is that not a conflict of interest, and how 

much is she being paid or has she been paid, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Ms. FitzGerald‟s 

contract, which is a contract with the government, is not to seek 

out contracts with other affiliates, Mr. Speaker. It‟s to improve 

relationships with RHAs [regional health authority] and 

affiliates. 

 

Ms. FitzGerald has a long track record in health care in this 

province. She has been an assistant deputy minister in 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5553 

Newfoundland. She has worked at St. Paul‟s Hospital, Mr. 

Speaker, for many, many years. Ms. FitzGerald is simply being 

. . . is volunteering time to Amicus right now, Mr. Speaker. She 

had no part in negotiations whatsoever. It was an assistant 

deputy minister who looked after the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I am having difficulty hearing the minister‟s 

response to the member‟s question. I ask the members to allow 

the minister to respond without interruption. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it was an assistant 

deputy minister that worked directly with Amicus and their 

lawyers to seek out a memorandum of understanding. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Speaker, the government has signed 

an agreement that guarantees Amicus‟s loan. The construction 

company whose president has donated $18,000 to the Sask 

Party in the last four years and sits on the Sask Party appointed 

health board has received an untendered contract that is 

apparently worth up to 27 million, and the CEO of Amicus has 

a contract with the Ministry of Health to review the 

government‟s relationships with affiliates, a clear conflict of 

interest. 

 

So to the minister: why is the Sask Party using taxpayers‟ 

money to reward its friends? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that member is throwing 

out accusations . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that member opposite is 

throwing out accusation left and right with no evidence to back 

it whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Okay. It would seem to me . . . Order. It 

would seem to me the opposition members would like to have 

an answer to the question. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that opposition member 

likes to throw out accusations left and right and can‟t back it up, 

Mr. Speaker. It‟s absolutely wrong that the Government of 

Saskatchewan is building this without a tender. Amicus, the 

Catholic Health Ministry, is the one that‟s building it. I can‟t 

seem to get that through to that member. But Amicus has 

contracted whoever they want to contract to build the facility. 

We will be renting beds in that facility, Mr. Speaker, but, Mr. 

Speaker, after 16 years . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. The 

Minister of Health may wrap up his comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After 16 

years of NDP government thinking it‟s perfectly okay if seniors 

live in acute care centres, Mr. Speaker, our government is 

taking action. We‟re going to ensure that seniors in this 

province have appropriate care when they deserve it, Mr. 

Speaker, not like the former government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Relationship Between Colleges 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the government‟s stories 

regarding the merger of Carlton Trail Regional College and St. 

Peter‟s College just don‟t add up. Last week the minister said 

repeatedly that Carlton Trail and St. Peter‟s are not being 

merged; rather they just have a strategic partnership. But his 

story is contradicted throughout many documents we received, 

including minutes from a board meeting on November 24th, 

2009. Those minutes from last November say, “The tentative 

date to begin the formal merger is April 1st, 2010.” 

 

Will the minister stand today and correct his repeated 

statements that this is not a full-scale merger? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

the opportunity to provide an update to the people of the 

province. Mr. Speaker, there are seven regional colleges, Mr. 

Speaker. What we‟ve seen is that there have been over $140 

million invested in these colleges since we‟ve come forward 

including, Mr. Speaker, including extensive investments in both 

Carlton Trail and St. Peter‟s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What I‟m happy to report, Mr. Speaker, is that these two sides 

are certainly undertaking their own consultations. And what I‟ll 

do is quote, quote right out of a media story from last week, Mr. 

Speaker, from one of the officials within the ministry: 

 

The provincial review [quote] is expected to take place 

over the next few months . . . the executive director of 

public institutions and infrastructure with the ministry 

[said]. “We have to do our due diligence to ensure that 

public policy and government objectives for 

post-secondary systems are going to be taken into 

account” . . . 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The institutions have 

undertaken their own consultations. We‟ll now be beginning 

ours shortly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I asked the minister last week 

whether any legislation has been drafted to facilitate this 

merger. The minister replied, “. . . there‟s no legislation drafted 

on this.” But his story is again contradicted by board meeting 



5554 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

minutes from July 28th, 2009, nearly a full year ago. Those 

minutes state the transition board reviewed “. . . a draft of an 

Act.” The stories don‟t add up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: who‟s telling the truth, the minister or the 

college board? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, from last week from the 

Leader-Post, here‟s the quote, Mr. Speaker: “Two of the 

province‟s colleges have decided to „get serious‟ about a 

potential partnership,” Mr. Speaker. And certainly we 

encourage this. That being said, we‟re also going to undertake 

our own due diligence. 

 

The investments in these two institutions is well known, Mr. 

Speaker, and the fact that they want to explore opportunities for 

enhanced co-operation, Mr. Speaker, is going to be determined 

mostly by one criterion, and that is, does it serve the interests of 

the learners within that region, Mr. Speaker? That‟s what we‟re 

going to be taking a close focus on as we undertake our own 

due diligence in the coming months. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I didn‟t ask the minister to reread 

a news release. I asked him to state who is telling the truth, the 

minister or the board. When talking about the plans for a 

comprehensive merger, board minutes from January 26th, 2010 

say, “Direction has been given from Minister Norris to 

proceed.” 

 

Yet again the stories don‟t add up. Last week the minister 

pretended to know next to nothing about this, but now the 

documents reveal that the minister himself gave a direction for 

the merger to proceed. 

 

To the minister: will he admit that he personally directed the 

board members whom he appointed to proceed with this 

merger? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity 

to talk about the significance of our investment in 

post-secondary education — $1.6 billion, Mr. Speaker. As far 

as where we are, Mr. Speaker, it‟s quite simply — I‟ll repeat the 

May 12th, Mr. Speaker; this is an article that ran in the 

Leader-Post — quite simply: “There has been no legal merger, 

and should the change not go ahead Carlton Trail will seek 

another CEO.” In fact the acting CEO has said, “It‟s a process, 

it‟s not a done deal.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, what they‟re doing, Mr. Speaker, is they‟re going 

back to press releases from last summer. That was July 10th, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‟ve made an announcement with the Minister of Education 

about the new education centre in Humboldt, Mr. Speaker. If 

they want to explore opportunities, of course we‟re not going to 

get in the way. That being said, Mr. Speaker, we will undertake 

our own due diligence to ensure community stakeholders and 

others are going to be served by this idea — at this stage, Mr. 

Speaker, simply an idea. Thank you, sir. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there‟s something about the 

stories coming from the last two ministers. When it comes to 

sketchy details involving boards and large amounts of money, 

the stories don‟t quite add up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s been no consultation, and the minister is 

just now undertaking due diligence even though the documents 

show the merger process began almost a full year ago. All of 

that is concerning, but there are also significant implications for 

our broader post-secondary education system. The minister 

admitted in committee last week that he‟d be open to 

dismantling any of the regional colleges in the same way he‟s 

dismantling Carlton Trail. 

 

To the minister: is it the Sask Party‟s goal to have a fully 

privatized regional college system in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, our track record in 

supporting public institutions, especially public sector 

sponsored and public post-secondary institutions, Mr. Speaker, 

is rock solid. In fact we were just at the University of 

Saskatchewan this morning, Mr. Speaker, for a $30 million 

announcement. Mr. Speaker, quite simply the answer to that 

member‟s question, no. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Consultation with Ethanol Industry 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 

told the media in an interview on May the 7th, and I quote, 

“Industry is telling some things to Enterprise Saskatchewan and 

I‟m not sure that message is getting to where it should go.” Mr. 

Speaker, one group that doesn‟t feel heard by this government 

is the ethanol industry. They first learned of the government‟s 

intention to substantially reduce the ethanol fuel rebate program 

from 21 million to 8.8 million in the 2010-11 budget. 

 

To the minister: did the biofuels sector team of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan or the Enterprise Saskatchewan board 

recommend this substantial change to the ethanol rebate 

program, or was it merely a budget decision? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Whether it‟s ethanol or any other part of the economy 

in Saskatchewan, Enterprise Saskatchewan takes great pride in 

conducting consultations and listening to those very people that 

need that work in this industry. That‟s why we have our sector 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5555 

teams in place. That‟s why we have the Enterprise regions in 

place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ethanol industry is a thriving industry in 

Saskatchewan. It began in 2002 with some 12 thousand million 

litres. The goal is to expand it to some 400 million litres. Right 

now it‟s at about 342 million. The ethanol industry can rest 

assured that this government will work with them to grow the 

economy, to expand the industry, and to make sure it happens. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well in committee the 

other night, the Minister of Enterprise said the decision to 

drastically reduce the rebate was a budget decision and that 

consultations on this matter were not as extensive as he would 

have liked them to be. 

 

Given that it is very evident that the biofuels and bio-products 

sector team was not adequately consulted and given that the 

ethanol industry is just now being consulted on the matter that 

was already announced in the budget, can the Minister of 

Enterprise acknowledge that this lack of consultation was a 

mistake and that he‟s currently working with the industry to fix 

that mistake contained in the Finance minister‟s budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, Enterprise 

Saskatchewan consults with industry around the clock, around 

the calendar. They make sure that those consultations take 

place, Mr. Speaker, whether they‟re in the summertime, 

whether in the fall, whether in budget cycle or without budget 

cycle. 

 

Naturally during budget cycle, less consultations can take place. 

But I can assure all members of the House that those 

consultations take place 24/7, 365. I‟m on call. I‟m almost 

about . . . give my phone number out, but not quite there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But no, in all seriousness, those consultations take place. That‟s 

why we have the sector teams. That‟s why we have that direct 

voice into our government. That‟s why Saskatchewan‟s 

economy is growing, leading the country, and that‟s why it‟ll 

continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. The minister has 

acknowledged that he‟s meeting behind closed doors with 

industry representatives saying that the budget process didn‟t 

get it right and that he‟s working to change that budget 

initiative. In committee, the minister said, “Well we have 

committed to the industry that we will undertake extensive 

consultations for as long as it takes.” 

 

Industry knows that before this decision was announced nobody 

— nobody, Mr. Speaker — was lobbying for a change; nobody 

in the industry was expecting a change. And only after the fact 

is Enterprise Saskatchewan now taking a look at it. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, given the fact that the minister is 

telling the ethanol industry that his government got these 

measures wrong, will he also acknowledge that he can no 

longer support the Minister of Finance who, it appears, 

completely ignored Enterprise Saskatchewan and put small 

rural-based ethanol producers at risk? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, when you have a 

growing industry, the consultation process doesn‟t start at one 

particular time and it doesn‟t end at one particular time. It 

continues on. That‟s what‟s been happening. That‟s what we 

have is a growing industry. That‟s what Enterprise 

Saskatchewan is there to do. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, was created to get rid of 

barriers to growth. On November the 7th, 2007, the 

Saskatchewan people embarked on the same process — to get 

rid of barriers to growth. That‟s what they did. There were 30 

over there. They got rid of 10 of them. They‟re into 20. Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. There‟s half a dozen 

members on the opposition side that are making it very difficult 

to hear the response from the minister. I recognize the minister 

and ask him to wrap up his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. On November the 7th, 2011, Saskatchewan people 

will once again embark on a process of getting rid of barriers to 

growth. There‟s 20 left and I submit to you, they‟ll all be gone. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — So, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Enterprise 

acknowledges that he is holding consultations with the ethanol 

industry to fix a mistake in the Sask Party ‟10-11 budget. He 

acknowledges the sector team was not consulted realistically on 

any proposal to change the rebate program until the issue was 

already in front of cabinet. So the Minister of Enterprise says he 

recognizes the value of consultation and in fact, Mr. Speaker, he 

recognizes that that‟s the entire principle behind Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I ask the minister: if the government 

doesn‟t value true consultation, then what is the value of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I wish the member 

opposite would listen to the answers and not just read from the 

questions that are written there for him because we do consult. 

We consult around the year. We consulted with this industry 

when we became government, and we will continue to do so. 

We will continue to consult with them as the industry grows till 

it reaches its maturity. 

 



5556 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

Whether it‟s the small producers, the large producers, they‟re 

facing difficult challenges, Mr. Speaker, with the Canadian 

dollar, with the exchange rates. They can rest assured that they 

have a government on this side, a Saskatchewan Party 

government that continues to listen to the industry and 

continues to act when necessary — something that government, 

that NDP government failed to do, and that‟s why they‟re 

sitting where they are, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Response to Allegations of Abuse 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, Elizabeth Wilkie is at the 

legislature today looking for help. Ms. Wilkie is a registered 

nurse who we saw in action in the gallery. She‟s documented 

how she was sexually harassed and physically violated and 

intimidated by a doctor she worked with. 

 

For over two years, Ms. Wilkie has been writing letters to the 

Minister of Health and the Premier. Both have chosen to ignore 

her pleas for help, thereby allowing the documented abuse to 

continue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of Ms. Wilkie, I‟m asking today: what is 

the Premier going to do to immediately investigate Ms. 

Wilkie‟s documented issues of abuse in the workplace? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, you know, as 

a government in Saskatchewan, we want to ensure that every 

person can exercise their duties at work in a safe manner. And 

we want to ensure that that is the case, Mr. Speaker, from 

corner to corner in every sort of . . . help every profession that 

there is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m not going to comment on the particulars of 

this case here on the floor, but I do know that there is legislation 

in place to ensure that employers respect their workers, Mr. 

Speaker. I know there‟s legislation in place that protects the 

rights of workers. Mr. Speaker, we want to certainly ensure that 

that is being conducted in workplaces throughout the province, 

Mr. Speaker, because we truly do value the work that 

employees do throughout this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure Ms. Wilkie is really 

reassured by that answer. She has not worked in two years. 

She‟s tried to apply for jobs but says she‟s been blacklisted. Ms. 

Wilkie has lost her savings and is losing her home. Ms. Wilkie 

followed all the right steps and procedures to have her case 

resolved. When all else failed, she wrote to the Premier, who 

made a conscious decision to allow the documented harassment 

to continue by not dealing with it appropriately. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the Premier explain to Ms. Wilkie why he 

failed to investigate the complaint of harassment and instead 

turned her back into a system that she says continues to 

victimize her? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, I do not want 

to comment on the particulars here on the floor of the House, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what I will say is that there is legislation in place that 

protects workers, Mr. Speaker. And we want to ensure that that 

legislation is being enforced, that the letter of the law is being 

enforced in workplaces. There‟s also legislation to protect 

employee abuse, Mr. Speaker, and we want to make sure that 

that is also enforced, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We take this issue very seriously and I‟d be certainly glad to 

look into it further, Mr. Speaker, but I will not be commenting 

on the particular case on the floor of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I don‟t think the minister could go wrong by 

saying, yes, he would help her; yes, he would go back and read 

the 13 binders she sent to him with documents of every single 

thing that has been said and done for her and to her. So Ms. 

Wilkie actually went to the Premier as a last stop when all else 

failed. She went to the Premier looking for help and he turned 

her back into the system. The Premier has had Ms. Wilkie‟s 

extensive, detailed information for over a year and has done 

nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the minister talk about a zero 

tolerance policy but failed to act when Ms. Wilkie came to him 

for help. He didn‟t even read, I‟m sure, her binders. Obviously 

the Premier doesn‟t practise or the minister practise what they 

preach. 

 

To the Premier, Mr. Speaker: how can Ms. Wilkie or anyone 

else in a similar situation in the workplace take the Premier 

seriously when he has failed to act to protect Ms. Wilkie? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous 

answers, we want to ensure that every person in this province 

can go to work on a daily basis and be safe, Mr. Speaker, safe 

from many different dangers and especially if it becomes 

harassment, Mr. Speaker, that is . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The member from 

Regina Walsh Acres has continued to interfere when the 

ministers have been trying to respond. I‟d ask the member to 

allow the minister to complete his answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Especially, Mr. Speaker, if there are 

issues around harassment, we want to enforce a zero tolerance, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we are working on that. There is 

legislation in place . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Minister of Health. 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5557 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that 

the safety can be guaranteed when people get to work until they 

get home, Mr. Speaker, especially if they‟re employed through 

health regions, through government, Mr. Speaker, that we have 

that responsibility, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s what we‟re working 

to ensure — zero tolerance. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

members of the legislature, I‟d like to introduce a couple of 

visitors in the east gallery. Sitting there is Jason McLeod. Jason, 

give a wave to us. Jason is from Saskatoon and he is from the 

fine constituency of Saskatoon Fairview. And, Mr. Speaker, not 

oftentimes do we get people coming to watch, to watch us, 

other than concerned, so it‟s a great privilege that they‟re here 

to watch these proceedings. 

 

Now Jason is a tireless worker and is on the executive of 

Saskatoon Fairview. And, Mr. Speaker, many times this MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] has had to lean on and 

take counsel from Jason. And Jason was the secretary treasurer 

of the Saskatoon Fairview constituency, but has recently moved 

up to take over the position of president. 

 

Now Jason is, as I mentioned, a tireless worker, and that‟s not 

all that is new in Jason‟s life, Mr. Speaker. Saskatoon Fairview 

has gained a new member, and with Jason is his new partner, 

Anna Pontikis, who‟s now also a member of the NDP in 

Saskatoon Fairview. So I would ask all members here to 

welcome these fine people from Saskatoon to their legislature 

today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to present the seventh report. I 

move: 

 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Economy Committee: 

 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Chair of the Human 

Services Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Human Services to present its eighth 

report. I move: 

 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services now be concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Human Services: 

 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Chair of the 

Crown and Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report 

Bill No. 105, The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2009 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on the 

Bill, and that the Bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Enterprise has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 105, The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2009 and that the 

Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

[15:15] 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 105 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2009 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 



5558 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

that this Bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Enterprise that Bill No. 105, The SaskEnergy 

Amendment Act, 2009 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 132 — The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. I‟m 

pleased to wade into the debate on Bill 132, The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Actually, honestly it‟s not with a lot of pleasure that we‟re 

having this discussion here today. Many, many organizations 

have asked this government to slow down, to pull this Bill. We 

as an opposition have heard from many, many people and have 

been asked to ask the government to slow down. This 

government has been completely unwilling to do this, so here I 

am on my feet today to speak to Bill 132, The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act — quite unfortunately as we shouldn‟t be having 

this debate and discussion right now. 

 

I want to give a little bit of information. What are we talking 

about here? The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. This is some 

information from a backgrounder written quite some time ago. 

But what was the purpose of The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act? Well in terms of the status of wildlife habitat in 

Saskatchewan, I‟d like to read this here quote: 

 

Saskatchewan contains one of the most modified 

landscapes in North America. Because of our extensive 

agricultural industry during the past century, we have 

seen over 75 per cent of our natural areas in the 

agricultural region disappear to cultivation and other 

developments including roads, towns, and cities. Between 

1976 and 1981, we lost two million acres of natural 

landscape. As more land is broken, natural habitat 

disappears, and it continues to shrink. This habitat 

provides basic necessities such as food, water and shelter 

for over 400 species of wildlife. Saskatchewan‟s wildlife 

populations must live on far less than one-quarter of their 

original habitat. 

 

So this has been the status of wildlife habitat in Saskatchewan 

prior to this Bill, and this is why this Bill is in place — The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, Bill 132. 

 

So what exactly is The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act? Well 

much of the . . . I‟d just like to read from this backgrounder. So: 

 

Much of the best remaining wildlife habitat is on Crown 

land. These natural areas are very important for 

maintaining existing wildlife populations as about 

two-thirds of the land base south of the forest fringe is 

privately owned. 

 

In 1984, the provincial government initiated a 

conservation process by passing The Critical Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act, now known as The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act (WHPA). 

 

Bill 132, which we‟re discussing today. 

 

This legislation protects 3.4 million acres of uplands and 

wetlands, or one-third of all wildlife habitat in the 

agricultural region, in its natural state. Protection of these 

lands makes the Act the most cost-effective wildlife 

habitat conservation program in Saskatchewan. The Act 

prevents the government from selling designated Crown 

land, and lessees require permission before any clearing, 

breaking or drainage occurs. The philosophy of the Act is 

to conserve wildlife habitat while enabling compatible 

traditional uses to co-exist. 

 

So this is why we have Bill 132. It‟s the co-existence of 

protecting the land, but still allowing responsible stewards to be 

able to use the land for grazing perhaps. So just a little bit more 

regarding this backgrounder and some information about the 

wildlife habitat . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Exactly. The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act “. . . recognizes and supports 

some agricultural uses and petroleum activities.” 

 

So it‟s not you can‟t have one without the other. You can still 

have protected Crown land and still use the land for all kinds of 

things. 

 

These lands are leased mainly to cattle producers who use 

them for grazing or haying. The WHPA [or Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act, Bill No. 132] designation has no 

effect on the lessee‟s rights to continue leasing their 

lands, or on the terms and conditions of their leases. 

Leases can be routinely renewed and transferred, as in the 

past. In fact, the Act has very little effect on daily 

operations at all. Routine developments such as fencing 

and dugout construction can also take place without 

question. Oil and gas companies can explore and drill, but 

must ensure they do very little damage to the surface. 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5559 

So the minister in her remarks has talked about the need. When 

she introduced the Bill, she talked about, “This Act will allow 

the government to protect sensitive lands more efficiently, more 

effectively and more sustainably than ever before.” 

 

I don‟t quite understand how selling off protected habitat is a 

sustainable way to protect sensitive lands. I don‟t quite 

understand those remarks that selling off protected habitat is a 

sustainable method of protecting wildlife habitat. I‟m not quite 

sure how that squares. I am not sure about that at all. 

 

The one thing that has come out loud and clear from all kinds of 

stakeholders, Nature Saskatchewan, the first . . . Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, all kinds of groups feel like they 

have not been consulted on Bill 132 at all, The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act. And consultation is absolutely critical when 

you‟re in government. Consultation can tend to be a bit of a 

buzzword, but real and meaningful consultation is critical for 

citizens to have confidence in their government and in the 

democracy in which we live. 

 

And I think this confidence in this government and in this 

democracy is lagging these days with this Sask Party 

government. So when we talk about consultation, just with 

respect to Bill 132, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, the 

Minister of Environment, in question period on several 

occasions, has talked about how she‟s consulted. And she said, 

we‟ve sent out notices inviting people to participate. 

 

Well real consultation involves ensuring those impacted by 

decisions or who understand the decisions have ample 

opportunity to participate. It‟s not just about saying, to whom 

can we fire off a few emails or send a few letters? And you 

know if they don‟t respond, or if they‟ve got other things on 

their calendar, well then we‟ve consulted. This is what we‟ve 

done, and we‟ve consulted by sending off that first letter. 

 

The government has a priority. It should be the priority of 

government to ensure that those people who are impacted by 

legislation or who have some strong knowledge about a piece of 

legislation and why it‟s in place, those people . . . every effort 

should be made to allow for that participation. It‟s not just 

about setting a meeting; oh you can‟t make it, so I guess our 

initial letter to you was consultation. It‟s about making sure that 

you create the opportunity and the space for real consultation to 

occur. 

 

People in government, those of us in government or on the 

government benches, have an obligation to provide ample room 

for participation in decisions that they make to ensure that they 

. . . public policy is addressing the needs and the concerns of 

people here in Saskatchewan. So consultation isn‟t a one-way 

process. 

 

It‟s interesting the way we talk about consultation here or hear 

about it. We hear the people are being consulted, or we‟ve 

consulted them. Consulting is not a passive one-way activity. 

Again as I said, it‟s very important to create the venue for 

participation, the timing for participation, ensuring that those 

who are going to be involved in consultations have the proper 

background information. People have to know about what it is, 

the subject on which you‟re planning to consult. That‟s 

absolutely critical. And you need to ensure that all stakeholders, 

both individuals and groups, have ample opportunity to 

participate. And consultation has not been a strong suit of this 

Sask Party government. 

 

I‟ve only been an MLA since September, and this is only my 

second opportunity to be here in this Chamber, but I find it 

absolutely appalling the number of occasions that have come up 

where this government has clearly done absolutely no 

consultation. Consultation to this Sask Party government is 

introducing a piece of legislation, a firestorm erupts, and then 

it‟s time to do the consultation at that point. 

 

Well that‟s not how it should work. Consultation needs to 

happen well before the introduction of legislation, the drafting 

of legislation. It needs to start when you‟re going to make a 

major policy shift or a major shift in the policy paradigm. 

Consultation needs to start early on in the process, not after, as 

one of my colleagues has said, after the train has left the station. 

And this is a record that this Sask Party government has of 

consultations after the train has left the station. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that is far too late for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Some examples, some examples, The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act, Bill 132, it‟s been a clear case of this 

government failing to consult before making a radical shift in 

policy. 

 

The Saskatchewan Communications Network, the privatization 

of SCN is a very good example of the government not having a 

clue what it was doing with respect to privatizing the 

Saskatchewan storyteller. When it comes to consultation . . . 

well around SCN and this government‟s track record of lack of 

consultation, there was an independent board in place, and in 

the two-plus years that this independent board was in place, not 

one contact from the first minister and no contact from the 

second minister who was then responsible for the privatization 

of SCN. No consultation whatsoever with the people who 

actually knew what was going on at the Saskatchewan 

Communications Network. 

 

You would think that you would want to talk to the people who 

actually have some knowledge in the industry, but no, this 

government believes in charging ahead, often ideologically 

based into . . . somehow address its base, I guess. 

 

I‟m not quite sure why it‟s making some of these decisions 

because quite honestly, Mr. Speaker, the decision to privatize 

SCN was completely without merit. I mean with respect to Bill 

132, this Act, the lack of consultation around SCN speaks to 

this government‟s inability to consult whatsoever. 

 

This government has a track record of not consulting. Whether 

it‟s Bill 132, whether it‟s the privatization of SCN, whether it‟s 

Bill 80, Bills 5 and 6, the domestic abuse outreach program in 

Saskatoon, this government does not believe in consulting or 

connecting with the people for whom they‟re to be governing. 

 

Just because you‟re elected, that doesn‟t mean that you get to 

run roughshod over the people of this province. Yes, you have a 

mandate to govern, but when you‟re making a drastic shift in a 

policy paradigm that you haven‟t discussed in your election 

platform, it‟s absolutely critical that you go back to the people 

of Saskatchewan and ask whether or not that . . . whether or not 



5560 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

I hear . . . whether or not there is a connection or whether or not 

the decision you‟ve made is based in good information and has 

a positive impact on the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So personally I do recognize, despite the fact that I‟ve been 

elected to represent the people of Saskatoon Riversdale, that I 

still need to know what‟s going on in their world. And the only 

way that I can do this is by asking my constituents what‟s going 

on. 

 

This Sask Party government was not elected to bring the Bill 

132, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act before this legislature. 

This was not part of this government‟s party platform. This is a 

radical shift in the way we‟ve protected our wildlife habitat, our 

sensitive wildlife habitat for many, many years actually, when 

the Bill was originally brought in by their Conservative cousins 

in the ‟80s. This is a radical shift. So this government does not 

have the mandate to make this radical shift in how we‟ve 

protected wildlife species. 

 

They did not mention, there‟s no mention of this change, this 

shift in protecting this land in their platform, nor was there 

anything . . . again, the lack of consultation around SCN. There 

was nothing in their platform saying that they were going to 

privatize our Saskatchewan storyteller and our public 

broadcaster — not a single mention of that. And oh, lo and 

behold, no consultation on SCN either. 

 

The delisting of chiropractic services, I don‟t believe they 

actually mentioned that in their platform either. No 

consultation, no connection. Bill 80, TILMA [Trade, 

Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement] or the rebranded 

TILMA — they actually said in their platform that they weren‟t 

going to do this. 

 

So whenever you‟re going to make a radical paradigm shift in 

policy, you need to make sure that you know who your 

decisions impact, what the outcomes are, and why you‟re doing 

that. It shouldn‟t be just to speak to your base. We govern for 

all people here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I represent Saskatoon Riversdale, but I recognize that . . . My 

goal is to be the conduit or the voice of Saskatoon Riversdale 

but I‟m an MLA for all people in Saskatchewan — New 

Democrats, Liberals, Green Party members, Sask Party 

members. I am here to govern or here to be the voice of people 

in Saskatchewan. And this government I don‟t think quite 

understands that their role is to govern for all people of 

Saskatchewan and thus need to stay connected to the people in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So as I said, I recognize that although I‟ve been elected to 

represent Saskatoon Riversdale and I‟ve been given that 

privilege, I still need to know what‟s going on in my 

constituency, and the only way I can do that is by talking or 

connecting to people. And how does one do that? You make 

sure that you go out to community events. I‟ve created an 

incredibly accessible office. I believe that knocking on doors is 

still very important. 

 

You need, in terms of consultation, if you‟re not going to 

consult, you need to be connected and know what‟s going on. 

You need to reach out and understand what the issues are, and I 

believe this government has done a very poor job in knowing 

the outcomes of their decisions. 

 

And Bill 132 is a very good example because there‟s been an 

outcry. There‟s more than 1,000 people on a recently started 

Facebook group to save the . . . to ensure that this Bill stops and 

slows down — Bill 132 — that the government pulls it and 

stops to reflect about what this Bill will actually mean to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So as I said, I think that representative democracy is absolutely 

fabulous, and that‟s what we‟ve got here. I represent the people 

of Saskatoon Riversdale, and my colleagues all represent a 

group of people.  

 

And I was elected because my values and philosophies I think 

generally are representative of the majority of voters in my 

constituency. I was elected because I speak the language of my 

constituents or the majority of my constituents. But that said, I 

know that you can‟t always . . . people don‟t always agree 100 

per cent with what you‟ve got to say, or they still want to feel 

like they‟re being heard even if they don‟t entirely agree with 

your views or values. And perhaps they didn‟t vote for me. It‟s 

still important that I know what‟s going on in their lives and 

what‟s important to them. 

 

So when I was on the doorstep last fall and last summer, I made 

a commitment to voters — and this is what I think the Sask 

Party needs to do, especially around Bills like Bill 132 — and 

this is a good example of how one might consult or stay 

connected. As I said, I made a commitment to voters to remain 

connected to them, whether it‟s at community events, by having 

my accessible office, which I mentioned, by continuing to live 

my life in my constituency, whether it‟s running into friends 

and neighbours while walking my dogs or getting groceries or 

playing with my kids in the park in my constituency — that‟s a 

way to stay connected — and by being on the doorstep. I don‟t 

think for one second that just because I‟ve been elected that I 

don‟t have to listen to the voices of the people in my 

community any more. It‟s very important to stay connected and 

to consult. 

 

Bill 132, there‟s so many voices of people who do not feel like 

they have been properly consulted on this. I have a letter right 

here actually that I‟d like to read regarding that lack of 

consultation. And this letter was written to the opposition at the 

end of April expressing some concern: 

 

Dear Mr. Lingenfelter, Ms. Morin and Ms. Higgins: 

 

We write concerning the governments statement that 

conservation stakeholder organizations were consulted 

about the Crown land sale program, in particular the sale 

of land designated under the Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act (WHPA). 

 

Both the Ministers of Agriculture & Food and 

Environment have publicly stated WHPA [or The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act] lands will not be sold. We can 

assure you that no meaningful consultation regarding the 

sale of Crown lands has occurred with Nature 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5561 

Saskatchewan. On occasion we were told some details of 

the land sale program, but this is not consultation. Nature 

Saskatchewan was never asked for an opinion about the 

sale of Crown lands. The Crown Lands Stakeholder 

Forum, which did provide an opportunity for discussion 

about the management and future of Crown lands was 

abolished by the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

We request you to urge the government to delay the 

passing of the amendments to the Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act which would see these lands removed 

from the Act and placed under regulation where they 

could be sold at the discretion of the Minister. 

 

The Government has not properly consulted with the 

public on this very important issue which has the potential 

to cause significant consequence to biodiversity in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We look for your assistance in stopping the passage of 

this legislation. 

 

Sincerely, Gary Seib Acting General Manager Nature 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So when you say that you‟ve consulted with someone, and then 

the person who‟s apparently been consulted says, well I actually 

would disagree, I haven‟t felt consulted, I would have to say 

that you‟d need to take the opinion of the person who‟s 

supposed to be the consultee. If you don‟t feel like you‟ve been 

consulted, then there‟s been something missing in that process. 

 

And this is why consultation, whether it‟s Bill 80, whether it‟s 

the privatization of SCN, whether it‟s The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, whether it‟s Bills 5 and 6, whether it‟s small but 

important programs like the domestic outreach program in 

Saskatoon, consultation and knowing how your decisions 

impact people is absolutely critical. You have to know how 

your decisions are going to impact the people of this province 

and what those outcomes mean for the long haul. 

 

It‟s not about four-year election cycles. Politicians, we‟re 

elected because we‟re supposed to have vision and make 

long-term decisions based on the best interest of people today. 

But our children, our grandchildren, future generations, we have 

an obligation to ensure the decisions that we‟re making are 

well-informed with all the information possible in order to be 

able to ensure that we‟re leaving a good province, a good place 

to live, for future generations. 

 

And why is consultation so important? So I talk a little bit about 

representative democracy here. But I‟d argue, looking around 

here, that we actually don‟t really have a truly representative 

democracy or representative of the people of Saskatchewan. Of 

the 58 MLAs in this Chamber, only 13 of those are women. 

 

I know of the 58 MLAs, there‟s only two on this side of the 

House, of our 20 MLAs, who are of Aboriginal ancestry. I 

believe that there are one or two in the government side. But 

even if it was four or five members of Aboriginal ancestry, of 

58, that‟s not reflective of the Aboriginal population in 

Saskatchewan. Five out of 58 isn‟t a great number or four out of 

58. 

There‟s no other visible minority represented here in the 

legislature, despite our growing immigrant population. So we 

don‟t have a representative democracy and that‟s why 

consultation . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Currently the motion up for 

debate is Bill 132, the wildlife habitat Act. So I‟d ask the 

member to address the Bill rather than a wide-ranging debate 

that can take place on other occasions. I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — To request leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

members of the Legislative Assembly, sitting in your gallery — 

indeed it is a very special day for Saskatoon Fairview — we 

have some other guests from Saskatoon Fairview and some very 

special constituents of mine. One, Connie Hill. Connie can give 

us a wave there. Connie works in the education field and 

provides services to many people in our province. Also up there 

Dorothea Stasiuk also from Saskatoon and the constituency of 

Saskatoon Fairview. Mr. Speaker, Dorothea also is a volunteer, 

has worked extensively doing all sorts of volunteer activities in 

Saskatoon.  

 

Dorothea has also assisted me on the NDP Saskatoon Fairview 

constituency. One event in particular, Mr. Speaker, we hold a 

Ukrainian night, and the sauerkraut, Mr. Speaker, was out of 

this world at the last . . . The people were talking about it, 

mentioning it to me a couple of weeks and days later. So it was 

a wonderful, wonderful evening and without help like that . . . I 

know, Mr. Speaker, we all understand what these people bring 

and help us. So with that I ask all members of the Legislative 

Assembly to help welcome these two people to our Assembly. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

(Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just to carry on here 

with Bill 132, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. And the 



5562 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

reason consultation is so very important is because we don‟t 

have a representative . . . We technically have a representative 

democracy here, but truly the makeup of the legislature is not 

representative of the makeup of this province, and that is why 

consultation becomes especially important because not all 

voices are represented here in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

So that is why consultation becomes even more important and 

the government has dropped the ball, incredibly, on the need to 

consult and reach out and make sure that stakeholders, 

individuals, and organizations — and not just groups for whom 

you have an affinity — are engaged in a real and meaningful 

consultation. Again there‟s a big difference between sending 

out a letter, one letter, and inviting someone to come out, and 

the time or the date doesn‟t work out and so, oh well, we‟ve 

made our attempt to consult. Real consultation involves making 

sure that you are working with your stakeholders in terms of, as 

I said, venue, time, information. You need to make sure that the 

people with whom you‟re consulting are fully engaged in the 

process. So that is why, like I said about representative 

democracy, we aren‟t reflective of the makeup of the province. 

And that is why we need to consult even more than ever. 

 

And timing again, I can‟t emphasize this enough, but 

consultation doesn‟t occur after a Bill is introduced. Well 

actually it does here in this Legislative Assembly. In the last 

two and a half years, consultation apparently occurs after a Bill 

has been introduced. But that is not when consultation should 

occur. It should occur well before a Bill is ever even drafted. 

 

We saw that, as I mentioned, with SCN, the Saskatchewan 

Communications Network, the Dutch elm disease program, the 

West Nile program. There is no shortage of examples of this 

government‟s inability to be connected to the people of 

Saskatchewan when it makes policy decisions. It tends to be 

governed by ideology and not sound public policy. And again I 

haven‟t been here for very long, but it amazes me that I can 

come up with innumerable examples of this government‟s 

failure to consult or connect with people on a whole host of 

issues. I haven‟t even been here a year, Mr. Speaker, and I think 

I can name 10. 

 

So again, I had mentioned Gary Seib‟s letter from Nature 

Saskatchewan when and where he says: 

 

We can assure you that no meaningful consultation 

regarding the sale of Crown lands has occurred with 

Nature Saskatchewan. On occasion we were told some 

details of the land sale program, but this is not 

consultation. 

 

So again if the groups that you say that you‟ve consulted don‟t 

feel consulted, then you have a bit of a problem there. That is 

not genuine consultation. 

 

And just to be clear here, consultation does not always mean 

you‟ll make a decision that everyone likes. There‟s so many 

competing interests in governments. It‟s hard to govern. And I 

think this Sask Party government is realizing that, that 

governing isn‟t easy. You have many, many interests to 

balance. It is not an easy task. And consultation isn‟t always 

pretty, and you‟re going to make decisions that don‟t always 

make people happy. 

But if you have a much fuller picture through consultation of 

the issue and everybody has an opportunity to address their 

concerns, and maybe government discovers, I didn‟t think of 

that unintended consequence of my decision to sell off The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act or I didn‟t realize the 

unintended consequence of . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Pardon me — land. Thank you to the member from Cannington 

for clarifying that for me. I appreciate that always. 

 

Or this government‟s decision, as I said, to . . . In terms of 

learning unintended consequences, consultation helps you 

understand and helps you learn about those unintended 

consequences — for example with SCN, the unintended 

consequence of kicking the film and television industry clearly 

in the stomach by the privatization of SCN. So again 

consultation is important so you have full understanding of the 

unintended consequences of the changes that you are perhaps 

proposing. 

 

So consultation helps deal with that. And maybe you flag 

something or maybe you make a change to your piece of 

proposed . . . the piece of legislation that you‟re thinking about. 

You talk to someone and you think, that‟s interesting. I hadn‟t 

actually thought of that before, and I will make, we will make a 

change to that piece of legislation because we actually have 

now a full picture of the issue. So consultation helps you make 

good public policy, and good public policy is what the people 

of Saskatchewan are expecting. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And people in Saskatchewan are not feeling like Bill 132, the 

wildlife . . . the amendments that are being proposed to The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act are good for the people of 

Saskatchewan. They‟re not good. They‟re not good for trappers 

or fishers. They‟re not good for the future of this province. We 

think about what could potentially happen for our children and 

grandchildren and great-grandchildren and future generations. 

What is going to happen to some of these sensitive areas that 

can be sold off? 

 

And no one is questioning the stewardship of the current lessees 

of many of these lands. There‟s no doubt that many of these 

lessees are wonderful stewards of the land, but what happens 

when that land is sold? And going back to the minister‟s 

comment here that this Act, “This Act will allow the 

government to protect sensitive land more efficiently, more 

effectively, and more sustainably than ever before.” Again, I 

don‟t understand how creating the capacity to sell sensitive 

lands will, in fact, be a sustainable way of protecting sensitive 

lands. That makes absolutely no sense to me. I don‟t understand 

that. 

 

So again, decisions . . . I‟m a social democrat and a very proud 

social democrat, but I like to think that I believe in good public 

policy. And I think good public policy is based on knowing 

what the decisions that you‟re making, what impact those 

decisions are going to have, intended and unintended 

consequences. And decisions should not be made based purely 

on ideology. 

 

We‟ve heard the Minister of Environment talk about, well we 

believe in landownership. Well nobody is arguing that 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5563 

landownership is a good thing, but as I‟ve mentioned earlier on 

when I was talking about the backgrounder for The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act, we learned that there‟s many things that 

still can carry on or continue even though the people who are 

leasing the lands aren‟t the owners. It doesn‟t inhibit . . . many, 

many things that landowners can do. 

 

As I said, the: 

 

. . . WHPA [The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act] 

recognizes and supports some agricultural uses and 

petroleum activities. These lands are leased mainly to 

cattle producers who use them for grazing or haying. The 

WHPA, the designation has no effect on a lessee‟s rights 

to continue leasing their lands, or on the terms and 

conditions of their leases. Leases can be routinely 

renewed and transferred, as in the past. In fact, the Act 

has very little effect on daily operations at all. Routine 

developments such as fencing and dugout construction 

can also take place without question. Oil and gas 

companies can explore and drill, but must ensure they do 

very little damage to the surface. 

 

So I don‟t understand how the sale of this land or the potential 

sale of about 10 per cent — the minister has said about 10 per 

cent of this 3.4 million acres — is aside from the ideology of 

landownership, how this advances the cause of our sensitive 

wildlife habitat here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I don‟t know if I‟m missing something. I‟ve been following this 

issue and reading everything that comes in front of me and 

listening and hearing what people have to say, and I don‟t 

know. I don‟t understand that how continuing to be a lessee is 

harmful to the lessee rather than owning the land. I‟m not sure 

what activities being a lessee is limiting in terms of ownership 

except perhaps having the title to the land. But as we talk about 

selling that land, we know that that lessee, even though he or 

she may have been very good stewards of the land for 

generations, we don‟t know to whom that land might end up, to 

who, in whose hands that land might end up — which is the 

problem, which is my concern. 

 

I‟m a mother. I have two children. I want to be able to 

appreciate and enjoy some of this sensitive wildlife habitat. I 

want to be able to go and see a burrowing owl and wild 

crocuses, and I‟m concerned that there is the possibility that, by 

selling this land, that those opportunities won‟t be there — not 

just for my children but for their kids and for generations down 

the road. It is critical that we continue to protect this land and 

not make a public policy decision simply based on ideology 

when that . . . being a lessee, I don‟t . . . 

 

From all the information I‟ve read — and perhaps I need to 

continue to talk to more people as well because it‟s important as 

an elected representative to talk to people, which has, I think, 

been my key theme here — that maybe I‟m missing something, 

but I understand that‟s there‟s very little . . . Obviously there are 

controls because it‟s protected land, but you‟re still able to do 

what you need to do with respect to grazing and haying. You 

can build your fences, dugout construction, all those things can 

still occur. So I‟m not quite sure why this government is in such 

a rush to sell off our Crown land. 

 

And we talk about land ownership. Well you know what? 

There‟s a million people here in Saskatchewan who own those 

Crown lands and want to be able to have . . . sorry, Mr. 

Speaker. There are a million people here who believe that they 

are landowners already and would like that land to stay in their 

family and with them and . . . which is the family of the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Which takes me to another point. I don‟t know what percentage 

this is, but I know that some of these Crown lands have been 

donated through gifting and wills. So I can tell you if I had 

donated some of my land and, instead of passing it on to my 

family, I passed it on to the Crown understanding that it would 

be protected in perpetuity, that I‟d have some very, very grave 

concerns — no pun intended — I‟d have some serious concerns 

that it could be sold down the road. 

 

There‟s many people I am sure who have gifted land in their 

wills who, had they known before they passed away that their 

land could potentially be sold, never would have done that. 

They would have been very hesitant to pass it on. Because I‟m 

sure they would have tried to put some of their own protections 

in place, but they trusted that the government, the Crown, 

would protect their land they felt was sensitive habitat and 

needed to continue to have protection. 

 

So I would argue, I think it‟s important that the government 

pulls the Bill and holds off on this so there is the opportunity. 

Perhaps people who have donated this land and have passed on, 

maybe their families need to have the first right of purchase of 

this land rather than that land perhaps going to the lessees if it‟s 

someone who‟s donated land, and perhaps their family would 

like to ensure that that land stays well protected. 

 

We‟ve talked about many of the lessees being good stewards, 

and I have no doubt, I have no doubt that the majority of 

lessees, regardless of the circumstances, would continue to be 

good stewards as owners of the land. 

 

But there‟s always one person who . . . Just to be the devil‟s 

advocate, the reality is, if some of these constraints to doing 

things on the land are removed, then there‟s always the 

opportunity to do things to the land that damage the sensitive 

nature of it and hurt the biodiversity and the ecosystem that‟s 

there. So I‟m sure that The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, Bill 

132, has done a very good job in ensuring that lessees remain 

good stewards, because there‟s always the hammer, the threat of 

the loss of leasing rights which always remained as a deterrent 

to ensure that the lessees would be good stewards. 

 

And you know what? I have no doubt that most of these, most, 

99.9 per cent of the lessees are wonderful stewards and would 

continue to be wonderful stewards, wonderful stewards of the 

land. But there is always the opportunity that perhaps the fact 

that this Act was in place, it served as a bit of a, as I said, a bit 

of a hammer to ensure that through the loss . . . If you messed 

with the land, you would lose your lease rights or that that 

threat was there so that‟s what has helped keep people be good 

stewards. 

 

And as I said, I have no doubt that 99.9 per cent of the people 

leasing the land would be good stewards regardless of whether 

or not this was in place. But this is really important, really 



5564 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

critical land here in Saskatchewan, and we want to ensure that it 

stays protected and under the control of the Crown for that very 

reason — that this is not one person‟s land. It‟s a million 

people‟s land. It‟s the land of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So in an editorial in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix on April 29th, 

2010, the headline of this article says, “Short-sighted of gov‟t to 

sell protected land.” So, quote: 

 

The provincial government‟s plan to remove from under 

the protective umbrella of the Wildlife Protection Act 

nearly three million acres of Crown land smacks of 

short-term thinking and political expediency that‟s 

detrimental to all citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

And [this is a quote] despite Environment [Minister‟s] . . . 

claim that the move, which she wants to make by the end 

of May and would see about 10 per cent of the land sold 

to ranchers whose families have leased it for generations, 

“isn‟t about monetary things,” her decision remains 

puzzling. 

 

Even in a large province that boasts 43 per cent of 

Canada‟s arable land, the removal from wildlife habitat 

protection chunks of land that amounts to twice the size 

of Prince Edward Island, is cause for consternation. 

 

I want to draw your attention to this line in particular: 

 

At a time when the entire world is becoming increasingly 

aware of the value of preserving natural habitat for 

wildlife for the sake of future generations as well as our 

own, the government demonstrates a breathtakingly 

short-sighted approach to its duty and obligation to act as 

a responsible steward of the public interest. 

 

It carries on here: 

 

There‟s no doubt that the ranching families who‟ve leased 

some of these parcels for decades have proven themselves 

excellent stewards of the land. However, the onus has 

remained with the government to ensure that its lessees 

comply with the habitat act, and the loss of leasing rights 

remained a deterrent to those who might be tempted to 

contravene the law in order to maximize profits. 

 

However, wildlife protection and conservation groups, 

First Nations leaders and others are quite right to be 

concerned that, once private buyers acquire Crown land, 

there are no restrictions on the further resale of the land or 

any guarantees that the habitat will remain protected in 

the long run. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s what this is about. This is the long run. 

This is the big picture, the overall vision of the province. So I‟ll 

carry on here: 

 

It simply isn‟t acceptable that [the minister] seems 

determined to push through changes to three-decade-old 

legislation without properly discussing them with groups 

other than the ranchers who have a stake in protected 

land. 

 

As Darrell Crabbe, executive director of the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation aptly notes: “We just 

think that the future generations of Saskatchewan would 

be better served if there was full consultation with 

everybody and the original protection was left in place. 

 

“This is a huge issue for us. We‟re talking about millions 

of acres of land that we consider to be a jewel in the 

crown of Saskatchewan.” 

 

And the editorial goes on: 

 

For a government that‟s heading into an election year last 

year in a province whose economy shrank by 6.3 per cent 

in 2009 and is struggling to keep its spending in line with 

its diminished revenues, any source of revenue — 

especially when it‟s tied closely to making some of its 

rural support base happy — might seem attractive. 

 

It‟s easy to understand why groups such as Ducks 

Unlimited are concerned about putting in place 

conservation easements before any protected land is sold, 

so that subsequent owners are prevented from draining 

wetlands or breaking it up, and about the mechanisms the 

government is putting in place to assess the value of 

property that . . . [the minister] thinks “no longer has to be 

under wildlife habitat protection.” 

 

Here, from Ducks Unlimited: 

 

“We‟re not convinced that they have the means to be able 

to accurately define which lands have greater or which 

lands have lesser ecological value,” suggests Brent 

Kennedy, DU‟s manager of provincial operations. 

 

Given the steady loss of wetlands in Saskatchewan 

through drainage, with farmers making economically 

rational decisions that are at odds with the needs of 

wildlife, it‟s easy to understand from where Mr. Kennedy 

is coming. 

 

The call by DU and other conservation groups for the 

Saskatchewan government to develop a wetland policy to 

conserve and restore wetlands in the province has gone 

unheeded. This even though wetlands are crucial to 

protecting water supplies, reducing effluents from 

washing into lakes and rivers, and recharging 

groundwater supplies. 

 

Instead, the Environment minister is acting to further 

erode the protective legislation already in place. No 

wonder those who take a longer view of the province 

beyond its four-year election cycles are concerned. 

 

So that was an editorial in The StarPhoenix dated April 29th, 

2010 entitled, “Short-sighted of gov‟t to sell protected land.” 

And it draws into question . . . The minister has said, the 

Minister of Environment has said that this isn‟t about money. 

The sale of this 10 per cent, she says approximately 10 per cent, 

of this 3.4 million acres is not about money. But again, and that 

editorial mentioned that too, that one has to question that. This 

government in this past budget made all kinds of budget 

decisions that seemingly don‟t make a whole lot of economic 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5565 

sense. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Like I said, the closure of SCN which actually will cause 

citizens of Saskatchewan to lose money. The film and television 

industry and outside investment will be impeded by this. So the 

reality is . . . Is the government trying to get revenue out of 

these land sales? They say they‟re not, but one has to question 

when you‟re running $1 billion deficit, you‟re stripping the 

Crowns of all their equity, and your debt is going up 55 per cent 

by 2014, that you might be looking to nickel and dime in 

absolutely every place humanly possible. 

 

So the minister has said, it‟s not about monetary issues, it is 

about land ownership. And again I just want to go back to that 

point that it‟s not that people are opposed to land ownership. As 

I‟ve said, the people of Saskatchewan already own this land — 

1 million people own this 3.4 million acres of sensitive wildlife 

habitat — and so this isn‟t about people being opposed to land 

ownership. 

 

But my question comes to ask, why is the government always in 

such a rush to make some of the decisions that they‟ve made 

without consulting and connecting with people? Why is it 

absolutely critical to pass this when people are calling on them 

— not just the opposition, the opposition is not the only group 

that‟s asked for, the opposition is not the only one — who‟s 

called for the pulling back of this Bill? 

 

There are First Nations and Métis groups. There‟s 

environmentalists, hunters and trappers. There are no shortage 

of people who have said, slow down, let us have an opportunity 

to at least have a discussion about how this impacts our various 

organizations and the things that we see, how these changes can 

negatively impact our work, but also ultimately the people of 

Saskatchewan for generations to come. 

 

So again I have to go back to that need for consultation, and 

there has been none around Bill 132, The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act. Or perhaps the government can say there‟s been 

consultation, but again consultation is a bit of a buzzword. And 

consultation isn‟t really meaningful unless the people who have 

been purported to be consulted with feel like they‟ve been 

consulted and had a say. To say that you consulted with 

someone and the people with whom you‟ve apparently 

consulted say, oh well, we‟ve talked to the government on one 

or two occasions, but that doesn‟t mean they‟ve consulted with 

us — it doesn‟t constitute consultation. That‟s a hard one to say, 

a little alliteration there. 

 

So if you don‟t feel like you‟ve been consulted, then you 

haven‟t been consulted. And government owes it to its citizenry 

to take that opportunity to connect and know what‟s going on 

and how their decisions impact people. Duty to consult — this 

government has the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations] . . . Actually have a letter from the FSIN here that I‟d 

just like to read into record, a small portion of . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Please. That‟s a good idea. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Yes. With the treaties that have been signed 

here in Saskatchewan, in fact there is a duty to consult. There is 

an obligation to consult and to accommodate where feasible and 

possible. So this is a letter dated April 29th, 2010, cc‟d to the 

opposition and written to the Minister of Environment. So, “It 

has come to . . .” And sorry, it‟s written by the federation of . . . 

Or it‟s from the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations and 

signed by Lyle Whitefish, the office of the fourth Vice-chief. So 

Vice-chief Lyle Whitefish wrote this: 

 

It has come to my attention that you are informing your 

government colleagues and members of the Saskatchewan 

Legislature that your Ministry consulted and 

accommodated the First Nations people prior to initiating 

. . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. Order. Why is 

the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 

thank the member from Saskatoon Riversdale for allowing me 

to make an introduction. Seated in the west gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, is 33 students, grades 10, 11, and 12, and they‟re from 

Rosthern Junior College from Rosthern. And they‟re here today 

to view the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Their teacher here today is Richard Janzen. And they have 

chaperones Dave Feick and Kathy Powley. It‟s always a 

pleasure to have constituents of mine come down to the 

Assembly and, today, to have the Rosthern Junior College come 

down and visit the Assembly is a pleasure. So I would ask all 

member of the Legislative Assembly to help me welcome these 

students to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

(Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again, 

we‟re back to where we left off. I just want to read a portion of 

a letter from the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 

Vice-chief Lyle Whitefish. And he says here: 

 

It has come to my attention that you are informing your 

government colleagues and members of the Saskatchewan 

Legislature that your Ministry consulted and 

accommodated the First Nations people prior to initiating 



5566 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

this program. I find these statements extremely troubling 

since no such undertakings have occurred. There has been 

no attempt by your Ministry to enter into a consultation 

process with First Nations people regarding the expansion 

of the sale of Crown lands protected under The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Judging from past experience I can only ascertain that 

your deliberate refusal to consult and accommodate First 

Nations people on your Ministry‟s initiatives, including 

the sale of Crown lands protected under the WHPA, as 

well as your Ministry‟s “Results-based Regulatory 

Review”, is a reflection of the policy position that your 

government has taken with regard to the First Nations 

people in Saskatchewan. The province has no regard or 

respect for the interests, concerns and the Inherent and 

Treaty rights of the First Nations people in Saskatchewan. 

Furthermore, it appears your government views the 

Inherent and Treaty rights of First Nations people as a 

hindrance to [the] Premier‟s . . . “growth agenda” and that 

the government will proceed by attempting to ignore the 

provincial Crown‟s constitutional and legal obligations to 

the First Nations people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Since the FSIN was not involved in any consultations, I 

am requesting a detailed explanation of how your 

Ministry purportedly undertook to consult with First 

Nations prior to the decision being made to expand the 

sale of Crown lands protected under the Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act. Rather than a vague reference, I am 

seeking a response that includes the listing of all the 

meetings your Ministry held with the First Nations and 

the dates such were held, which First Nations and their 

leaders or representatives who attended such meetings, 

what their responses were, how these were incorporated 

into the report your Ministry used to make the decision, 

and how your Ministry reported back to the First Nations 

of your decision. I also request a copy of such a report. 

 

So that again is from Vice-chief Lyle Whitefish of the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. So those are strong 

words, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Those are very strong words 

coming from an organization that apparently was with whom 

the government consulted. 

 

And again I go back to my earlier comments. If you don‟t feel 

like you‟ve been consulted, it‟s not meaningful consultation. 

Consultation again isn‟t just about extending a letter of 

invitation. And if a person doesn‟t have an opportunity to reply 

or has other things going on at the time you‟re holding your 

consultations, that is not meaningful consultation. Government 

has a responsibility to engage actively with stakeholders and 

make sure — again, timing, venue, full information — that the 

individuals and the stakeholder groups with whom you‟re 

consulting have all that they need to be active participants. 

 

Because as I said, despite the fact we live in a representative 

democracy, this legislature isn‟t particularly representative of 

the people of Saskatchewan. So it becomes even more critical, 

more critical that consultation, real and meaningful consultation 

become a part of this government‟s lexicon, which it really 

isn‟t. As I said, in my short time here, I find it absolutely 

appalling that there are a number of issues that this government 

has failed to consult on. And consultation doesn‟t mean you 

engage with people after you‟ve introduced a piece of 

legislation. Consultation has to occur right at the start. 

 

And it‟s not always easy. As I said, governments make 

decisions all the time and have to make hard decisions that not 

everybody agrees with. Governing is difficult. And it‟s about 

choice, but in order to make the best choices for the people of 

Saskatchewan, you have to ensure you have the full breadth and 

depth of information and how that will impact not only the 

current generation but future generations to come. That‟s 

absolutely imperative. 

 

And government policy should not be based simply on 

ideology. As I‟ve said, and I‟ll say again, I am a proud social 

democrat but I believe that good public policy comes from, not 

from ideology necessarily, but from well-informed discussions 

with the people for whom you‟re creating the policy. You need 

to know what‟s going on. 

 

So I just want to go back to emphasizing that the backgrounder 

on The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, from a few years ago 

here — that acknowledges there are many wildlife-friendly 

farmers and ranchers. It says here: 

 

Ranchers who lease WHPA lands are good stewards of 

the land and wildlife is benefiting. Preserving important 

wildlife habitat has enabled Saskatchewan to come to the 

forefront of national and international habitat and natural 

eco-system conservation, which is helping Canada 

contribute its share towards global environmental 

conservation. Wise, multiple use [I want to emphasize 

this — wise, multiple use] of public lands can curb habitat 

loss while accommodating the interests of agriculture, 

wildlife and the public. 

 

I‟d like to know, I would like to know how Crown lands and the 

leasing of Crown lands, how this has inhibited the interests of 

agriculture, wildlife, and the public. Because, as we‟ve heard 

earlier that: 

 

Routine developments such as fencing and dugout 

construction can . . . [still] take place without question. 

Oil and gas companies can explore and drill, but must 

ensure they do very little damage to the surface. 

 

Grazing and haying can still occur. So I need some help 

understanding how the ability to sell these Crown lands will 

enhance or support the protection of the wildlife habitat that we 

have here in Saskatchewan. And again the minister‟s comment, 

one of her first comments earlier on: “This Act will allow the 

government to protect sensitive land more efficiently, more 

effectively, and more sustainably than ever before.” 

 

Again, sustainably — I don‟t know how having the capacity to 

sell the lands makes the protection of wildlife habitat 

sustainable. I‟m not sure how that works here. I have some 

concern about some of the measurement tools. 

 

And it‟s not just me. There‟s been much correspondence that‟s 

come in from all kinds of stakeholder organizations who know 

far more about this than me, who are on the ground and know 

the issues first-hand, and they have expressed concerns. It is not 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5567 

just the opposition. The opposition‟s a conduit for the concerns 

of citizens, for individuals and groups. 

 

So it‟s not without . . . I would still urge it‟s not too late. I 

would urge the government to consider pulling this Act until it 

fully has the opportunity to engage in real and meaningful 

consultation with the people who are asking to have this real 

and meaningful consultation. There‟s people who want to 

discuss this and know exactly the government‟s rationale, and 

they want to share their concerns with the government. They 

want that opportunity, and I think government owes it to its 

citizenry to make sure, when it‟s doing a radical policy shift at a 

policy paradigm, it needs to engage and know what those, what 

those issues are. 

 

So, I believe that one of my colleagues has some more to add to 

this debate. So with that I‟d like . . . I think that I‟ve had plenty 

to say and again, the overarching theme was around 

consultation. And again I can‟t emphasize how very, very 

important that is. But as I said, I believe one of my colleagues is 

eager to get into the debate. So with that I cede the floor. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Fairview 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‟s a 

pleasure to enter into the debate on the wildlife, Bill No. 132, 

wildlife habitat protection amendment Act, 2009. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I‟d like to start by just reading into the record again, as 

part of my comments, the comments made by the Environment 

minister. I‟ll be returning to those comments, Mr. Speaker, 

because they‟re somewhat discouraging. 

 

[16:15] 

 

I would think the word would be “discouraging” in terms of 

when you look at what was said when she made her initial 

comments in bringing forward this Bill, and what we have since 

learned that is happening in terms of the groups that are now 

concerned about her legislation. You‟ve heard much, many 

things said about the lack of consultation. And again, just if I 

could, Mr. Deputy Speaker, now I‟ll just read, again so we‟re 

reminded, so that we all can hear again those words that she 

spoke on that day when she brought this in. And part of that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, she went on to say this: “Until now, the 

government had no detailed values inventory of protected land 

in our province,” Mr. Deputy Speaker. “Until now,” she said, 

“the government had no detailed values inventory of protected 

land in our province.” 

 

Now just that first sentence, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you 

think about that, that somehow magically the protected land that 

we had under the former government and under the former 

Grant Devine government that started a lot of this, the land that 

was protected is . . . Somehow this minister failed to see how 

that got there, failed to see that there was no . . . what she‟d 

have us believe is that there was no way, no values, detailed 

values inventory, as she said on that. 

 

Now I suppose to many of us who are not involved in those 

sorts of details, involved in the environmental issues that deal 

with land, who might‟ve briefly read some reports on that to 

retain all that information, but upon research and upon speaking 

to people and upon people who are involved in that looking at 

that, I wonder. I wonder how embarrassed she is about that 

statement, to say that “Until now, government had no detailed 

values of inventory of protected land in the province.” 

 

That there had been no work done since she came onto the 

scene, as some sort of superhero and was now going to save 

these protected lands. And she went on to say: 

 

We didn‟t know why a piece of land was currently being 

protected and if that land still had the characteristics that 

originally qualified it for protection. Much of the current 

protected land is used for various activities such as 

grazing. We will now be able to identify which land has 

changed and is suitable for limited activity. We‟ll also be 

able to tell which land is the most sensitive and needs 

stronger protection. 

 

Now did she not, did she not know in terms of how that land got 

there? Perhaps I could just read to her something and that is the 

definition of enduring features based on four specific factors. 

And this comes from the RAN [Representative Areas Network], 

the protected land, the Saskatchewan Representative Areas 

Network that talk about this. 

 

 And they have the definition of enduring features are based 

upon four specific factors, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Soil 

development: how soils were formed through various factors 

like climate, soil organisms, the nature of the parent material, 

the topography of an area, and time. Number two: origin of the 

parent material, the method by which material such as soil, 

gravel or rocks was deposited; example — wind, water, glacial 

melt water. Surface form, number three: physical land features 

such as eskers or potholes. And four, Mr. Speaker: slope, the 

steepness or grade of the surface terrain. 

 

Now the Saskatchewan Representative Areas Network program 

was launched in 1997 with the approval of the Representative 

Areas Network final action plan. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

again for the minister, the plan sought — and this is 1997 — the 

plan sought to conserve representative . . . in a unique example 

of Saskatchewan‟s varied and diverse landscapes. 

 

Since the beginning of the network‟s launch, more than 2 

million hectares of both Crown and private owned land has 

been added to the nearly 3 million hectares of lands that were 

already protected as parks, ecological reserves, and other 

protected areas. 

 

When the network is complete, nearly 7.8 million hectares or 12 

per cent of the province will be recognized as contributing to 

the goals of the Representative Areas Network. Now the 12 per 

cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the target as committed including 

the Saskatchewan Biodiversity Action Plan. I think we‟ve 

reached 10 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but the 12 per cent 

that‟s there was the UN [United Nations] goal. Now I know 

what they think of the United Nations and that‟s clear, but it‟s 

also now a sad commentary of this minister and the approach 

that she is taking as the new hero on the block of the 

environment. 

 

And again, just by the comments, many people are shocked that 

the minister would make comments such as, “Until now, the 



5568 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

government had no detailed values inventory of protected land 

in our province.” Now this, coming from a minister . . . And I 

would at any time that she would again want to say that, she 

would make that statement, would say for the record that she 

stands by that statement, I would ask her to do so, if she can 

screw up the courage to do that again and say that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, many . . . As my colleague before me 

went on to talk, the minister also, just in terms of . . . Before I 

leave what she had to say about this, she also said: 

 

The Act also creates a Crown land ecological assessment. 

This will allow government to evaluate and identify 

important ecological values and know how best to protect 

them. This has been developed in consultation. 

 

In consultation. Now we know the value that these folks put on 

consultation and what they think of consultation. And on many 

times again, they‟d got notice of the UN, who in certain times it 

has said to them they, on certain Bills, must start over again. 

Time and time again we hear there has been no consultation 

and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I‟ve said before, this has now 

become a trademark of this Sask Party government. 

 

Now where the Minister of the Environment, the groups that 

she said she consulted and we heard just recently . . . but she 

says: 

 

This has been developed in consultation with a wide 

variety of stakeholders . . . The Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation, the Nature Conservancy of Canada, Nature 

Saskatchewan, Ducks Unlimited Canada, the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s 

Association, and the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities. 

 

Now she says that, that the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, 

that she consulted with them. Now perhaps again, as here, that 

she feels she‟s the new superhero on the block in terms of when 

it comes down to lands and the environment and that what she 

thinks is right, should go. But I would also like to at this time 

from an article in The Border R Town News, May 12th — very, 

very recently, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what they think of this 

minister‟s approach to consultation, not only consultation, but 

her understanding of this. And I just remind that this is the two 

paragraphs that I read into the record, probably short of that. 

They are probably three-quarters of what she had to say on this 

issue when she first brought this Bill in — rather a weak 

performance. But let me read what Darrell Crabbe here says, the 

executive director of the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, to 

the minister, and who she says she consulted: 

 

The Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation (SWF) continues 

to have grave concerns surrounding the recent Legislation 

aimed at dismantling [Mr. Deputy Speaker, it says 

dismantling] the Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

(WHPA), the legislation that was created almost 30 years 

ago and is still considered to be one of the most visionary 

conservation programs ever developed in North America. 

 

Now here we have superhero Environment minister, Sask Party 

style, coming in saying, I know what‟s happening and I 

consulted all of these people. All of these people I consulted, 

and you know maybe we‟ll just slip this one by because the 

people of Saskatchewan aren‟t listening. We have our own 

definition. She must be thinking of consultation, and we‟ll use 

that word loosely. Consultation, we‟ll use it loosely, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And here we have . . . Maybe I would just read that again, so in 

case the minister misses it when she is no doubt going to review 

all the materials, so that she can make the appropriate decisions 

on this issue.  

 

Or perhaps, perhaps she won‟t care. Perhaps she won‟t care, 

like a good number of groups where they say they‟ve consulted. 

And they would just push ahead because they have an agenda 

that is their own agenda, that is their own agenda, and that they 

have looked at the world, not in governing for the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but governing for 

somebody else. Perhaps it‟s the people who fill their coffers to 

get them re-elected. And maybe that‟s the agenda, and maybe 

that‟s the only people that they‟re playing to these days. But 

that is short-sighted. We all know that‟s short-sighted, and they 

will pay dearly for that come November 2011. 

 

But I think it‟s people who have dedicated their lives, dedicated 

their lives to this area who are passionate about these things. It 

has struck me, and it‟s somehow unbelievable that you would 

simply pass over these people who work in there, who dedicate 

their lives to that, oftentimes at not a lot of remuneration, that 

we might think of people just simply doing that, but who 

dedicate their lives to that, to the pursuit of whether it be 

environmental lands or whatever other issue that we here debate 

that.  

 

And I sometimes feel that we don‟t do it justice, that we don‟t 

do it justice. But we have set in place, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

have set in place committee works, debates, things to do that. 

But over and over again we see the Sask Party government push 

forward. And when I say push, I would . . . probably the 

appropriate word is ram. Ram through Bills because they feel 

that they know what‟s right even over people who are 

committed and passionate and are saying, as Mr. Crabbe has 

said here, again he said: 

 

The Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation (SWF) continues 

to have grave concerns surrounding the recent Legislation 

aimed at dismantling the Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

(WHPA), the legislation that was created almost 30 years 

ago and is still considered to be one of the most visionary 

conservation programs ever developed in North America. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don‟t pretend to be an expert in 

this area, but that is what we get elected to listen to the people 

of Saskatchewan when they make comments on this. And I 

wonder what the minister, whether she simply has earplugs not 

to hear this or simply does not read the papers or does not get 

briefed on issues around the environment, particularly this Act, 

Bill 132. 

 

The over, Mr. Crabbe goes on saying: 

 

The over 3 million acres presently protected in the Act 

would now be controlled under regulation and would be 

able to be sold or changed at the discretion of the 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5569 

Minister. 

 

Now I can recall saying those things and hearing laughter from 

the other side, that in fact no, that‟s not what was going to 

happen, not going to happen. But here we have now the experts 

in the field saying exactly that: that it allows you to do that. 

When we build legislation, we build it to last. Good legislation 

you can tell because the test of time will prove that out. The 

legislation that is here, the things that, the principles that we 

build democracy on or be it different Bills, that‟s what it is built 

on. 

 

And so here we have somebody saying that the minister 

actually disagrees with this, disagrees with this, with this 

statement. Somehow saying that no, no, under her system this 

will be protected. It‟s short-sighted. It‟s short-sighted, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It‟s sad. It‟s a sad day for Saskatchewan that 

we have come so far and we‟ve gotten 10 per cent of our land 

up to be protected, and now we get a minister in, a minister in 

who sadly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is bent on destroying this. 

 

And perhaps she just doesn‟t even know what she‟s doing. 

Perhaps she doesn‟t even know what it is she‟s doing, but that 

has become a bit of also a trademark of not understanding and 

not knowing what they‟re doing. And so putting on the big 

boots and just clump, clumping out into that or walking with 

big muddy boots on the kitchen floor, just coming right in from 

outside and stomping on everything because there‟s no respect, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, no respect for the environment. 

 

And it‟s a sad day that that minister would even be called the 

Minister of the Environment. Because in fact it‟s almost the 

opposite of what is going on here, the opposite of what is going 

on. It is the getting rid of the environment and not the minister 

that protects the environment. The Minister of Environment, 

perhaps she doesn‟t understand what the Minister of 

Environment‟s role here is, but the Minister of Environment 

should be concerned about the environment. That is what it‟s 

called, the Ministry of the Environment. That‟s why it is there. 

That‟s why it‟s there. But I‟m not sure that that minister has 

gotten that, has quite figured that one out. 

 

I mean it‟s quite well known that nothing has happened in that 

ministry. Nothing has happened. There are no targets. It is sort a 

sort of an example of the Sask Party policy in terms of the 

environment — nothing. A big zero, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now Mr. Crabbe goes on to say that: 

 

Under WHPA, any lands that were removed or changed 

were required to be debated in the Legislature and allow 

for public scrutiny. Under the new legislation there would 

be no transparency. 

 

Now that doesn‟t come as any surprise to me. For sure that‟s no 

surprise to me because one thing they are not is transparent. 

 

[16:30] 

 

On a daily basis we see where they are coming up and trying to 

. . . Now they‟re trying to sneak things under the carpet in terms 

of the issues that were just debated here earlier in the legislature 

today surrounding new care homes in Saskatoon. And they may 

laugh about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or they may smirk, but 

the truth is that they‟ve gotten caught with their hand in the 

cookie jar again. And that is also becoming quite common. 

 

In such a short time to lose such contact with people, people 

who work in areas such as the environment, people who work 

in, for example, our health care workers . . . And many places 

right across this province now, in terms of those health care 

workers, many communities, and whether that be in the minister 

of natural resources who‟s sitting over there smiling, 

Kindersley, or in Meadow Lake. And especially the member 

from Meadow Lake should be very concerned about this 

because there is definitely no love lost there. 

 

And I guess in the same way that they consulted when people 

came to their offices, where they slammed their doors in their 

offices or snuck off, that‟s a sad day for democracy. If you say 

to somebody, you‟re a health care worker, therefore I‟m not 

going to meet with you — singling out a group where they will 

not meet with people — and that‟s sad. 

 

But it‟s the same thing in here. Now here we have the minister 

saying, as she said in here, that she‟s consulted with this group 

of people, she‟s consulted with the Wildlife Federation. And 

here we have a letter on the 12th . . . And obviously, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this is a while back when the minister 

presented this Bill. Now we have a . . . Obviously, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it‟s a while back when the minister presented this Bill. 

Now we have the executive director of the organization saying 

another thing, saying something else. So if you don‟t listen to 

the executive director of the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, 

who exactly are you listening to? 

 

And this is not, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as they have said, oh well 

there are folks that will be taking care of the land and they are 

good guardians. They are good people that they will take care 

of the land. And I‟m not here to say that they won‟t. I believe 

they will too. I believe they will too. But this is not what we‟re 

talking about. 

 

This is a bigger picture issue, and the bigger picture issue is that 

we have determined that we want to preserve certain lands, 

preserve certain lands, as I read earlier, in terms of the RAN, 

that in terms of what they had to say, were that they determined 

that the plan sought to conserve, as I read earlier, “The Plan 

sought to conserve representative and unique examples of 

Saskatchewan‟s varied and diverse landscapes.” 

 

Totally missed by the minister, totally missed as to what she 

was talking . . . In fact, as I mentioned earlier, she said she 

didn‟t think there was any detailed inventory of land. There was 

a huge gasp, as I understand it now, across the province when 

she said that. Who‟s in charge? Who‟s in charge here and who‟s 

doing this? This is important. This is important stuff. 

 

There was people, a lot of people that put a lot of time, energy, 

and passion into this, to determine this, to build Saskatchewan 

for the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the future — for our 

children, for our grandchildren, and for people that come after 

that, after we are long gone. That people will look back and say, 

this was something. As was said here that this “. . . legislation 

that was created almost 30 years ago and is still considered to 

be one of the most visionary conservation programs ever 



5570 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

developed . . .” Thirty years ago this was done and now we 

have the situation that we‟re under now. And isn‟t that just a 

shame that we‟ve come to this, that now we have to come to a 

crossroads where people have to say everything we‟ve built is 

now means nothing. 

 

And why does it mean nothing? Because we have a Minister of 

the Environment who doesn‟t understand. Or if she does 

understand, then what a sad day for Saskatchewan that 

somebody is taking this kind of approach to the environment 

and protected lands of this province that people have worked so 

hard for. And who did she talk to? 

 

It was a letter from Chief Lyle Whitefish which I will still get 

to, but in terms of what the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians 

said, and in terms of the kind of, the kind of . . . where more and 

more groups on a daily basis are impacted by the Sask Party‟s 

calling, saying it‟s consultation. And where somebody phones 

people right from two hours before they‟re going to put a Bill 

in, or in the spring, and say, we‟ll see you down in the office 

and we‟ll consult here and, you know, we‟ll call that 

consultation — maybe a phone call. Maybe a phone call will be 

all will be necessary that we should do this, and that‟s where 

we‟ll be on this. 

 

And they take this very lightly. They take this very lightly. And 

how soon we have gotten so arrogant, how soon we have gotten 

so arrogant, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to be able to dismiss all the 

groups and to say that we consulted them, to say that we 

consulted them, and to hear the people say back, what an 

outrage if that‟s what you mean by consultation. 

 

And maybe we give it to the minister, and maybe we give it to 

the whole Sask Party that this is what they think consultation is. 

You know, perhaps that‟s where they‟re at and that‟s what they 

think consultation is, and it‟s a very dismissive, very dismissive 

type of approach, very arrogant type of approach. And they‟re 

feeling the pushback from people because people are writing in 

newspapers, people are writing in letters, and people are talking 

to us. And I am amazed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the turnaround 

— amazed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now I know, and perhaps I feel like perhaps I shouldn‟t warn 

those folks over here about what‟s happening out there, but they 

are living in a glass house. They are living in a bubble if they 

don‟t see this, in amongst all of the others things that they are 

doing, as to what the people think about that. We‟re not talking 

. . . Perhaps it‟s an ideological thing. I haven‟t quite figured this 

out. But I sense that what I‟m seeing here is that it is pandering 

to people who are supporters and pandering to people who give 

them money. And it is at the lowest, the lowest kind of 

indicator, the lowest kind of that they‟ve, the lowest possible 

place that they‟ve reached to common . . . that they‟ve reached 

for reasons to pass legislation. 

 

Because I do want to get all of this. And this is again 

Wednesday, May 12, so that is last week, not even a week old 

here. And again, I think this is just where I was, if I could just 

do this again, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Under WHPA, any lands that were removed or changed 

were required to be debated in the Legislature and 

allowed for public scrutiny. 

And again we‟ve spoken about that and what I think about the 

ability of that Sask Party to do that. And: 

 

Under the new legislation there would be no transparency 

[at that point]. In addition, the newly passed Conservation 

Easement Legislation that the Saskatchewan Government 

[the legislation that goes with this] would place on most 

of the sold parcels gives the Minister the power to remove 

or change the easement without public knowledge or 

recourse. 

 

And this is perhaps noteworthy. “The combination of a lack of 

consultation . . .” Now the executive director of the Wildlife 

Federation says: 

 

“The combination of the lack of consultation and the 

aggressive time line on this Bill has effectively made it 

impossible to address our concerns and left many 

important questions unanswered,” states Darrell Crabbe, 

executive director of the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation. 

 

Now I would think that if, as the government, if we would 

receive this sort of thing, there might be a call from the 

Premier‟s office to the Minister of the Environment saying, 

what‟s going on over there? I mean, you know, what‟s 

happening? You said you consulted. Well we‟re getting these 

letters that say you haven‟t. What does that mean? What does it 

mean for the legislature here when these folks come out in 

question period or when they bring forward Bills, and we say 

we consulted, we say we consulted? 

 

Now I guess fortunately this makes it really clear why you need 

an opposition, an opposition that would take the time to look at 

this Bill. Otherwise it would go by and they would say they 

consulted, and only later would we find out from people or 

people of this province that in fact there has not been any 

consultation. And in fact, as was said here, the lack, the 

combination of the lack of consultation and the tight timelines, 

this is ramming. This is the definition of ramming it through. 

 

And to whose benefit? To whose benefit? Is it to all those 

people who have worked over the past 30 years.? Was it? Was 

it the Grant Devine government that they no longer feel that . . . 

Colin Maxwell who raised concerns about this issue? Even right 

across the political spectrum people are looking at this and 

saying that. So maybe they . . . Sometimes they lead us to 

believe that they‟re somehow representative of the people and 

they represent all sorts in their party, but I don‟t think so. I 

don‟t think so. And I think this is even a sad . . . They definitely 

gotten themselves on to an island on this one because in fact 

whether you are a . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. Why is the 

member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Requesting leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member has asked 

for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5571 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member may 

proceed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

would like to introduce to you and through you to all members 

of the House two guests we have in the east gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. We have Travis Lingenfelter and his partner Caitie 

who are down in Regina tonight for a very important dinner in 

about an hour and a half from now and decided to come to their 

Assembly for a few minutes and spend some time here. So I‟d 

like to introduce all members of the Assembly to both Travis 

and Caitie. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

(Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, and no doubt what a 

wonderful event it will be tonight, a wonderful event. Because 

this is what I‟ve been talking about and people are turning in 

droves, turning in droves because they can see that they made a 

mistake. Over and over again I receive many contacts in my 

office saying, we voted for them once and we‟ll never do it 

again. 

 

And you might, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they might think that that 

is just simply posturing, but I would think they should take it as 

a warning. And I wouldn‟t repeat it too many times because in 

fact . . . Well I guess I could repeat it because they‟re hardly 

going to listen here when they don‟t listen to the people of 

Saskatchewan. When they don‟t listen to the people of 

Saskatchewan I doubt that they listen here, and that becomes 

obvious on a daily basis. But, Mr. Speaker, this is important 

work and we have to get this on the record because people will 

say, how did that happen? How did that happen that they‟re 

doing this? And we‟ll say, well here‟s what the things that we 

said, here‟s the things that we said back and doing that . . . 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw North 

laughs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I would think that in terms of 

being a one-term wonder I think that‟s where it‟s going to start, 

is right there in Moose Jaw North in terms of being a one-term 

wonder and in terms of what they will be writing after 

November of 2011 about a one-term wonder government. 

Because not ever so quickly have people, has a government 

fallen so far out of favour, and in fact as the newspaper articles 

are now saying, lost — they‟ve lost their way. 

 

Now the Premier lost his way back in . . . He said he lost his 

way with the Grant Devine government. He lost his way there 

in terms of delivering the alcohol and all the other things that 

we know about. Perhaps they lost their way when they are now 

tied up with the PC [Progressive Conservative] trust fund and in 

the court case and they lost their way. And now the newspapers 

are starting. Isn‟t that incredible that in fact you now see that in 

fact with this Sask Party that this Premier has now again lost his 

way in terms of governing? Because it was easy to govern, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it was easy to govern when you have $2.3 

billion in the bank and you can go on a spending spree and 

everybody‟s your friend. 

 

And now that‟s over, and the saddest day is that some people 

are saying that they want to sell off this land to get some more 

money, try to get my hands on some more money because as 

soon as I get it I want to spend it because it feels good. And 

then you get the hangers-on who come after that. And now we 

see what is happening in terms of people perhaps benefitting in 

terms of the Department of Health. 

 

Now they should be worried about the children‟s hospital first 

because they promised a lot of people in Saskatoon the 

children‟s hospital. And now they say the money‟s there. But 

where‟s the money? And every day now, we start the debate 

about where the children‟s hospital going to be? Where‟s it 

best? In Royal University or is it City Hospital or some 

combination? And now the debate starts there. No direction. 

 

And perhaps they‟ve lost their moral compass, because of any 

number of things. We had a member statement earlier today in 

terms of driving while drinking; we heard some of the stories 

over there from Kindersley, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of 

some of the events there. So I think not only they‟ve lost their 

way but they‟ve lost their moral compass. And that‟s a 

dangerous combination. 

 

Much as it is dangerous when not only, as Darrell Crabbe has 

said, the executive director, the combination of lack of 

consultation and aggressive timeline is devastating, so not only 

have they lost their way in terms of government and directions 

as they flail about, whether that be miscalculation of potash or 

whether they flail about on an issue like this. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And it is almost amazing, almost unbelievable that the Minister 

of Environment can stand up in this House and say the 

government had no detailed values inventory of protected lands 

in our province. Amazing statement. Amazing statement that 

she could say that. That somehow nothing had occurred before 

she came on the scene. Nothing had occurred. 

 

And yet we had a list of lands, a huge, huge list of lands, a huge 

list of lands here, updated, a list of lands contributing to the 

RAN. And as I mentioned earlier, the Saskatchewan 

Representative Areas Network, it was listed all out here. And 

this is from list of lands contributing to RAN updated 

September 1st, 2005 — 2005. And here‟s the minister saying 

this when she passed the Bill. 

 

Now here is what the list of lands are. Under Saskatchewan 

Agriculture, food and Crown, we have the provincial 

community pastures. There‟s 56 and the area is 258 760 

hectares. Under that‟s the wildlife habitat protection lands. 

There‟s 24,000 of those, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 1 437 562 

hectares. The RAN ecological reserve, the Great Sand Hills, the 

Great Sand Hills, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of course there‟s one. 

And there are 36 585 thousand hectares. Under the 



5572 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2010 

Saskatchewan environmental Crown land ecological reserves, 

there are five ecological reserves with an area of 159 678 

hectares. The FWD Fund [Fish and Wildlife Development 

Fund] lands, Mr. Speaker, the number is 1,486 or 78 277 

hectares. Parkland reserves, Mr. Speaker, we have two. Those 

are 4998 hectares. Provincial parks, Mr. Speaker, we have 34. 

There‟s 1,172,512 recreation sites. 

 

Now I know the Minister of the Environment will want to hear 

all these numbers because of course it‟s her impression that 

there was nothing detailed or no inventory. Under recreation 

sites, there‟s 130. The area is 36 723 hectares. The RAN 

ecological reserves, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are 32 for 408 

951 hectares. Special management areas there are three, 601 

983 hectares; wildlife refuge, 24 and an area of 24 596. Under 

the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority lands there‟s a number 

is 361 and there are 910 hectares. 

 

Now the federal administration, the CFAD [Canadian Forces 

Ammunition Depot] Dundurn, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the military 

installation, there is one and there are 23 209 hectares. The 

migratory bird sanctuaries, there are — for the minister‟s 

information — there are 15 for a total area of 57 702 hectares. 

National parks, Mr. Speaker, there are two here for a total area 

of 487 056 hectares. There are national wildlife areas, Mr. 

Speaker. There are 34 with a total area of 37 225 hectares. 

 

The PFRA [Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration] 

community pastures, there are 64 with a total area of 696 870 

hectares. Mr. Speaker, corporate lands, corporate lands, PCS, 

[Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan] Rocanville, one. There is 

1552 hectares. Under non-government organization, Ducks 

Unlimited Canada, there‟s 355 875 hectares. Private lands, Mr. 

Speaker, conservation easements — now this should be of 

interest to those folks over there, Mr. Speaker — there‟s 195 

and there‟s 23 772 hectares. 

 

Now total RANs, contributing to RAN, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 

terms of parcels when you add all this up, there‟s 26,470 and in 

terms of hectares there‟s 5 964 765. 

 

Now in case perhaps that is too, takes too much time for the 

Minister of the Environment to deal with that. Perhaps it takes 

too much time to put that into her statements. But in terms of, 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of where we go here, what in fact the 

Minister of Environment does do is she comes out and she says 

the government, after perhaps listening to all of that, Mr. 

Speaker, she . . . the audacity here to come out and say, until 

now the government had no detailed values of inventory 

protected land in our province, no inventories. And I could read 

that again perhaps so that she, perhaps she, the minister, would 

take the time to say that in fact there are no detailed inventories 

in the province. And what does that actually mean? 

 

But perhaps the minister is not, just doesn‟t read newspapers. I 

think the one newspaper that she did read though, Mr. Speaker, 

was the New York Post. Was it the Post that she made it into, 

the National Post? I believe the Minister of the Environment 

made it into the National Post with the pig roast. And now she‟s 

got some international acknowledgements. She‟s not a lot in 

terms of the office for policy. Not a lot happening there because 

we haven‟t heard anything new or otherwise out of there. But 

she does have a bit of notoriety on the international scene. A 

little bit of notoriety of there in terms of making the New York 

Post, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I would rather, I think, rather be known for good 

environment policy, for going and consulting people who are 

now locally saying that she didn‟t consult. And what was 

amazing, as amazing then as amazing now, that when first 

contacted and talked to her about her little event there that she 

had, where she got the international recognition, that she also 

didn‟t see there was anything wrong at that time. They simply 

brushed that one off too. 

 

But there were a lot of people who noticed that and were well 

aware of what happened there. And what a sad, sad day for 

Saskatchewan out there, when the Premier‟s out running around 

the country, that we would again be known as the place of the 

pig roast — place of the pig roast. That‟s what we would be 

known here in Saskatchewan, thanks to the Environment 

minister. 

 

Now it would have been rather that she would have be known 

for, as Mr. Crabbe here said, about the legislation, that it was 

created almost 30 years ago and is still considered to be one of 

the most visionary conservation programs ever developed in 

North America. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would rather be thought of in that fashion 

than, Mr. Speaker, than in looking at this and saying, well I‟d 

rather be known for a poster and gain some national exposure in 

the New York newspaper and international fame. But instead of 

having good environmental policy, supporting environmental 

policy that by people in the field who feel that it‟s important — 

no, we have a different way of gaining popularity and that is by 

an insensitive poster that is recognized internationally. 

 

And then the amazing part is that not to acknowledge that and 

not to say, you know, we have offended some people, we 

should pull this off. And instead they go through a bunch of 

contortions of trying to say that this, in some way, they didn‟t 

mean it. What people are saying, who are involved in that, the 

families in the 9/11 disaster were saying that it‟s a bad, bad 

thing to do; you would think that there‟d be some quick 

reaction. But there wasn‟t and so we made it into the New York 

Post. We made it into the New York news media. 

 

And that‟s how we get to make it into the news media, not on 

good environmental legislation, Mr. Speaker, but we get . . . 

The minister is quite popular now internationally. She‟s gained 

some prominence. So the next time she travels to New York she 

could perhaps do some interviews — not on the environment, 

but on the towers, the trade towers which she has now made 

famous in Saskatchewan. Or should I say made famous, made 

Saskatchewan famous in New York. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the opportunity of going to 

New York and visiting the place of the twin towers. And it is 

indeed a place that, when you‟re there, you feel the enormity, 

you feel the enormity of the situation. And it is not something 

. . . Mr. Speaker, I wouldn‟t go near that and in terms of trying 

to somehow capitalize or make . . . Mr. Speaker, it‟s just a sad 

day. It‟s a sad day because when you‟re there, you feel the 

enormity of the tragedy and the people there and what they 

must have gone through watching that. Still those visions of 



May 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5573 

those planes crashing into the towers are, I think, in all of our 

minds. And it‟s sad that we should gain notoriety in that 

fashion. 

 

But again, Mr. Darrell Crabbe, executive director, who went on 

to talk about what visionary conservation legislation we have 

here in Saskatchewan . . . Right across North America. no doubt 

that they have travelled, held conferences, done many things, 

and talked with people across North America. who say, because 

I‟m sure Mr. Crabbe just wouldn‟t put in writing that this is. 

 

But this was created 30 years ago, 30 years ago. If we subtract 

that from here this puts us right into 1980. Now we know who 

brought or which government played a role in that. It was the 

Devine government and we had Colin Maxwell speaking out on 

this issue in terms of that. But would you think that this party 

would, that the Sask Party would listen to things like that? They 

didn‟t. They didn‟t. 

 

So across the political spectrum, as people talk to them, give 

them input, there is just simply no input. It‟s like they have shut 

down all ability, all ability to listen. They call it consultation 

and we have . . . I haven‟t gotten to the letter from Chief Lyle 

Whitefish, office of the fourth Vice-chief of the FSIN, haven‟t 

even gotten there yet, Mr. Speaker, because there‟s so much 

material here to be brought forward on this issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the executive director, Darrell Crabbe, of 

the Saskatchewan Wildlife says that, that the way: 

 

The combination of a lack of consultation and the 

aggressive time line on this Bill has effectively made it 

impossible to address our concerns and left many 

important questions unanswered [Mr. Speaker] . . . We 

need the Minister to table this Legislation until all the 

variables can be properly addressed. 

 

So what they‟re asking for is to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I would now move that this House 

adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

moved that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nays have it. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — I‟m not certain that they quite grasp the 

issue there, but anyways, Mr. Speaker, the executive director 

here in turn went on to say: 

 

We need the Minister to table this Legislation until all the 

variables can be properly addressed.” 

 

The SWF sees a “no net loss” agreement, as has been the 

[provincial] policy of every Provincial Government since 

the WHPA was introduced; changes to create public 

transparency; the establishment of a Conservation Lands 

Fund and the continuation of protection of properties 

under WHPA legislation . . . 

 

So again, what are they asking? What are they asking this 

government? 

 

“We need the Minister to table this Legislation until all 

the variables can be properly addressed.” 

 

The SWF sees a “no net loss” agreement, as has been the 

policy of every Provincial Government since the WHPA 

was introduced; changes to create public transparency; the 

establishment of a Conservation Lands Fund and the 

continuation of protection of properties under WHPA 

legislation; as the most pressing issues and is prepared to 

work with the Government towards this goal. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these are messages, messages from the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, messages from the 

executive director of the Wildlife Federation which have 

unfortunately fallen on deaf ears and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 5 p.m., the Assembly will recess 

until 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 Principal Clerk Celebrates 25 Years of Service 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5545 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 5545 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5545 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5545 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5546 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5546 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5546 

  Iwanchuk ............................................................................................................................................................. 5546, 5557, 5561 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5546 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5547 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5547 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5565 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5571 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5547 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5547 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5547 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5548 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5548 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5548 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5548 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5548 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5549 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5549 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5549 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5549 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 50th Anniversary of Boundary Dam Power Station 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5550 

 Norwegian Constitution Day 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5550 

 Surgery Wait-List Times 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5550 

 Enterprise Saskatchewan 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5550 

 Canadian Youth Against Impaired Driving Conference 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5551 

 Government’s Track Record 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5551 

 New Democratic Party Leader’s Dinner 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5551 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facility 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5552 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5552 

 Relationship Between Colleges 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5553 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5553 

 Consultation with Ethanol Industry 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5554 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5554 

 Response to Allegations of Abuse 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5556 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5556 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5557 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5557 



 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5557 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 105 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2009 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5557 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5558 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5567 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


