




















































Hansard: December 07, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 23A  TUESDAY, DECEMBER 7, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6403 

 December 7, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask leave of members of 

the Assembly to make an extended introduction this afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

thanks to hon. members for leave to make a special introduction 

of guests who have joined us in your gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it was Mark Twain that famously said that 

everyone complains about the weather and nobody does 

anything about it. Mr. Speaker, the group that I’m about to 

introduce to you and to members of the Assembly and to the 

province are . . . They can’t do anything about the weather 

themselves, but when weather strikes, as it did this spring in our 

province, they are there for Saskatchewan people and 

Saskatchewan communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know this spring and summer was one of 

the most devastating in terms of weather in Saskatchewan in 

terms of the history of our province. Whether it was the 

flooding in Maple Creek and area, in the RM [rural 

municipality] of Maple Creek as well, or the flooding in 

Yorkton and area or the flooding that hit farmers so hard in the 

east central and northeast part of the province or the flooding in 

Saskatoon or the tornado at Kawacatoose or the flooding in 

North Battleford, it was quite, quite a strange year for the 

province and more importantly a very difficult year for 

communities and for Saskatchewan people who were dealing 

with flooding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the guests in the gallery today are representing a 

number of ministries. Though they are from Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing, Mr. Speaker, though they are from the fire 

commissioner’s office and we also have folks from the Red 

Cross, they are here to represent civil servants, public service 

members across government and in the Crown corporations and 

social services, in Highways and in the various Crowns that 

responded to the flooding that was going on, responded to help 

people in Saskatchewan when they needed the help the most. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a lot of the people in your gallery and those that 

they represent gave up vacation time, they gave up personal 

time, they gave up family events and family reunions in order 

that they could respond, in order that they could be there for the 

people of the province to provide disaster assistance. 

They’ve been working, Mr. Speaker, to make sure even today 

that the provincial disaster assistance program is delivered for 

the benefit of Saskatchewan people. They’re on the front lines, 

reporting back to government as to how we can improve the 

provincial disaster assistance program to help more people and 

help them in a more meaningful way. And that input, by the 

way, is continuing today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were 4,353 private claims under the 

provincial disaster assistance program, 68 municipal claims; 

2,976 payments already made, Mr. Speaker, 509 files already 

completely closed, $10.7 million already paid out, 200 

municipalities who have been designated as eligible for disaster 

assistance. 

 

Behind the numbers though are Saskatchewan people who are 

out of their homes, who are displaced, who needed a helping 

hand, and we salute the local governments in each of these 

communities today. We salute the local First Nation at 

Kawacatoose. We salute, Mr. Speaker, those who responded, 

the front-line emergency responders in those communities as 

we honour those in your gallery today from CPSP [Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing]. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would, with the indulgence of the Assembly, 

like to read into the record the names of those who are here 

because, Mr. Speaker, they deserve to be honoured and thanked 

for their public service that’s ongoing with respect to the 

disaster assistance. So if I may quickly . . . And I’m going to go 

through the list pretty quickly and I apologize in advance for 

maybe some mispronunciations. But if those of our guests wish 

to give a wave, they’re certainly welcome to do that. 

 

In attendance is the deputy minister, Al Hilton; the ADM 

[assistant deputy minister], Mae Boa; Tom Young, executive 

director; Deana Carter Keller, Noel McAvena, Tamie Folwark, 

Janet Gangl, Stacey Ostepchuk, Leisha Grant, Tracy Hodel, 

Elizabeth Parks, Carmen Schimmers, Correen Nagy, Rachel 

Brown, Renu James, Dean Marcia, Carol Juhlin, Rosanne 

Jayawardena, Lisa Flodell, Michelle Chalus, Sheila Clark, Kelly 

Lima, Crystal Dirksen, Tamara Miki, Randa Tyndale, Mieka 

Torgrimson from Sask EMO [Emergency Measures 

Organization]. The first group was from PDAP [provincial 

disaster assistance program], Mr. Speaker. 

 

From building standards, Bill Hawkins, Paul Cook, Margaret 

Ball, Len Semko; from the office of the fire commissioner, 

Duane McKay, Yvette Wright, Greg Reeves, Randy Backlund, 

Duane Hiebert, Larry Zadvorny. And, Mr. Speaker, from CPSP 

communications, Desirae Bernreuther. And also from the Red 

Cross, who were great in responding and working with our local 

municipalities and the officials at CPSP, from the Red Cross, 

Cindy Fuchs and Rod Orr have joined us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the work continues in terms of processing claims. 

We know there’s been significant improvements made to that 

program. More help is being provided. But today we wanted to 

just say to the people that have gathered together in the 

legislature today, in their legislature, thank you on behalf of a 

grateful province for what they did over and above the call of 

duty and as a part of their service to the people of 

Saskatchewan. And we welcome them to their Legislative 



6404 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2010 

Assembly as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition, I’d like to join with the Premier, and I 

imagine the minister in a few minutes, in thanking the many, 

many civil servants who have served your province with great 

skill and dedication over the last several months. 

 

This year without doubt has been a challenge for many, many 

families in the province, but through your hard work that 

challenge has been made easier for many, many families. You 

provided hope. You provided clarity. You provided direction 

when many of these families needed that very touch of hope 

that they could look towards the future. 

 

I think, as the Premier indicated, more than 200 municipalities 

affected. Communities that were devastated: Maple Creek, 

Yorkton, North Battleford, Saskatoon. Many farmers who saw 

their yards totally flooded. 

 

Across this province this was a year that many are going to 

remember for the devastation and the impact upon their lives. 

And you made a difference. You were there to help people. You 

gave up your vacations. Many of you stayed for weeks away 

from your families and away from home. And that is the true 

meaning of being a dedicated professional civil servant working 

for the people of the province. 

 

And as a result of that dedication and hard work on your part, 

families are better off today. And people who thought that 

maybe things weren’t going to look so great tomorrow have a 

little bit of hope that the future is not so bleak. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s always more that any program can do or more 

that any of us would like to have been able to do. But we can 

only do the best we can, and under very trying circumstances 

you performed over and above the call of duty. You presented 

for the people of this province an opportunity for hope and a 

future that they can look forward to. 

 

So on behalf of the official opposition and the members of this 

Assembly, we’d like to thank you for your dedication, hard 

work, and for your commitment to our province and our future. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 

to join with the Premier and the member from Dewdney in 

recognizing and saying a thank you to all of the guests that we 

have with us today. I had the opportunity to speak with them at 

lunch and offered my comments about the outstanding work 

that they have done during the summer months and ongoing to 

this day. 

 

We did an awful lot of changes to the program, Mr. Speaker, 

and a lot of the ideas came from the women and men that you 

see sitting in the gallery today. But they responded. When we 

decided on a change from listening to what the people of the 

province had to say, these folks responded, and it created an 

extra workload for them. But they really responded in kind and 

put the best foot forward and responded to what the needs of the 

people were. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to, on behalf of CPSP 

and all of the members here, just say a warm thank you to all of 

the members and to our Red Cross friends who have done so 

much to help out in the disasters this summer. So I would like 

to ask all members to join with me in thanking the folks that we 

have visiting today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave for an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Carlton has 

asked for leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave’s granted. I recognize the member for 

Prince Albert Carlton. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

your gallery today, it’s my pleasure to introduce through you 

and to you to all members of the legislature, Mr. Ken Engel. 

Can you give us a wave, Ken. 

 

Ken began his career as executive director with SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] in 1995 

where he began dedicating countless hours to help make rural 

Saskatchewan what it is today. Newly retired, Ken joins us 

today, and I had the privilege of taking a few moments over the 

lunch hour to acknowledge his contributions to our great 

province, and today here. 

 

I’m reminded of Winston Churchill’s simple quote that is, “We 

make a living by what we get, we make a life by what we give.” 

Ken has given much. He’s a gentlemen and a statesman. And he 

has shown boundless energy in gaining consensus with 

municipalities and, when needed, in pushing the provincial, 

federal, and municipal governments alike to become more 

creative, more dynamic in our collective work. 

 

In recent times, Ken helped the municipal sector and our 

government develop the historic new revenue-sharing 

agreement between the province and the municipalities. He’s 

been a strong advocate for SARM and a champion for 

municipal government. Earlier today on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan and Municipal Affairs, I 

presented Ken with a framed portrait of the Legislative Building 

in appreciation for his commitment to our work together and for 

his work for Saskatchewan people. 

 

I invite all members to welcome Mr. Engel to his Legislative 

Assembly and join me in thanking him for service to our 

province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 



December 7, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6405 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 

minister and offer Ken Engel a warm welcome to the 

legislature. Mr. Speaker, much like the bureaucrats and the civil 

servants that are in the gallery today, Mr. Engel served that role 

with SARM for many years, brought a very level head and a 

calm voice to many, many meetings, always was very persistent 

in putting forward his views but always spoke well and had the 

best interests at heart of the people that he represented at 

SARM. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was a little sad when I heard Mr. Engel was 

going to retire this year. But I think, like all members in the 

Assembly, I would wish him well. Enjoy retirement; it’s well 

deserved. And welcome this afternoon. Good to see you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce some of Saskatchewan’s best and brightest graduate 

students. They’re from the University of Regina, and they’re 

recipients of tri-council graduate scholarships, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re joined today by Dr. Blachford, the associate dean of 

Graduate Studies and Research from the University of Regina, 

and Wendy Machmer who’s the manager of graduate 

scholarships and awards from the University of Regina. 

 

The students are: Katherine McMillan, a doctoral student in 

psychology and who’s doing some work on some key areas of 

anxiety management and related areas of physiology; as well, 

June Zimmer who’s a doctoral student in kinesiology and health 

studies and she’s recently been awarded a CIHR [Canadian 

Institutes of Health Research] grant; Vanessa Phillips who has 

been awarded an NSERC [Natural Sciences and Engineering 

Research Council of Canada] grant focusing on some key areas 

of water quality. 

 

Mamata Pandey is a doctoral student in experiential 

psychology, focusing on cognitive aspects of development; 

Adam Dube, a doctoral student who’s working with children’s 

academic and cognitive development; Amber Fletcher who’s 

doing work at the doctoral level in Canadian Plains Studies, 

looking at the role of women in changing communities across 

our province and beyond. 

 

Lindsay Friesen is a master’s student who’s also been awarded 

a CIHR grant. Omeed Ghandehari is a master’s student 

focusing on physiology, doing some work with the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region. Myriah Mulvogue is a master’s 

student who is working on some preventative violence 

initiatives and has received a CIHR grant; Marc Beal, a 

master’s student who’s been awarded an NSERC grant working 

on some key indicators within mice, and obviously in this era of 

zoonotic diseases we understand the significance there. 

 

[13:45] 

 

And Krista Baird who is now Krista Allen, just recently 

married, is a master’s student who has been awarded a SSHRC 

[Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council] grant for 

qualitative studies on intercultural dialogue and connectivity 

across our province and well beyond. 

We’d like to offer our sincere congratulations and thanks to 

these students. They offer examples of inspiration and inclusion 

for all of us, both within the academic realm and right across 

our community. 

 

And if I could, Mr. Speaker, I would add two additional names, 

no strangers to this House. Kyle Addison who is the student 

president of the University of Regina and a tireless worker. 

With him is Matt Steen, vice-president finance, serving the 

students at the University of Regina. 

 

To all these students, to our graduate students and to the 

undergraduate student leaders and to those with them today, we 

want to say on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan, behalf 

of their government, thank you for your work; thank you for 

your inspiration. And we are certainly encouraged in the work 

that’s under way and wish you all the best in your academic and 

professional endeavours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will ask all members of the Assembly to join me 

in offering this welcome and congratulations. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 

with the minister in welcoming these graduate students to the 

Assembly today, along with faculty and student leaders who are 

here. 

 

It’s very encouraging and inspiring to hear the varied fields of 

study that are planned. I want to congratulate all the students on 

receiving these awards, and I know you’ll do our province very 

proud as you pursue your academic endeavours. So on behalf of 

the official opposition, I’d like to welcome you to the 

legislature and congratulate you once again. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the legislature I would like to 

welcome 23 grade 11 students from my hometown of 

Kelvington, Saskatchewan. Obviously we have a group of very 

attractive and intelligent people with us today and with their 

teacher, Jim Lissinna, who I assure you has been very dedicated 

when it comes to bringing his group to the legislature every 

year. And afterwards we have an opportunity to discuss what’s 

happening, and they ask some tough questions. And I really 

appreciate your insight and your knowledge when it comes to 

the workings of our legislature. So I ask all members to join 

with me in welcoming the grade 11 students to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance, the 

member from Canora-Pelly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you and to all the 

members of the Legislative Assembly two ladies that are sitting 

in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, two individuals who have 

travelled from Kindersley, which is the home of the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

introduce to you and to the members Kathy Strutt who is the 



6406 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2010 

general manager, and Bonnie St. John who is the administrative 

assistant. And I’d ask all members to welcome these two 

individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to 

reciprocate on this side of the . . . for the opposition here and 

welcome the two administrators here, on behalf of the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan. We welcome them to their 

Assembly and we welcome their work that they provide to 

Saskatchewan people on a daily basis on this important issue of 

income security, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the east gallery I’d 

like to introduce a constituent and friend of mine, Mr. Stuart 

Busse. He is a lawyer in Biggar, and I’d like to welcome him 

here to his Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also 

want to welcome the grad students in the University of Regina. 

But I also want to welcome Dongyan Blachford to the 

Assembly. 

 

In 2006 I had the opportunity to go on a trip with the University 

of Regina to China, and we were recruiting international 

students. And Dongyan was with us and accompanied us on that 

trip. She is a superb, a superb ambassador for the people of our 

province when it comes to China. And I know that she is doing 

wonderful work at the University of Regina. And I also want to 

welcome her to the Assembly this afternoon. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition signed by over 150 Saskatchewan residents who wish 

to bring to our attention the following: that the Saskatchewan 

Seniors Association has approximately 180 seniors’ centres 

throughout the province, many of them in rural Saskatchewan; 

that these centres provide much-needed recreation and social 

activities as well as important health clinics and workshops 

which contribute to an enhanced quality of life for many of the 

seniors who use them; and that due to the skyrocketing costs of 

utilities, insurance, taxes, etc., approximately one quarter of 

these centres may close within the next few months; and that 

the closure of these centres will lead to the deteriorating mental 

and physical health of seniors, which will lead to additional 

stress on long-term care facilities and hospitals: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

cause the Government of Saskatchewan to provide the 

much-needed funding to assist seniors’ recreation centres 

to remain open and active within their communities. 

And these signatures are from the communities of Foam Lake, 

Sheho, Ituna, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Regina, 

Strasbourg, Lanigan, Jansen, and Asquith. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d 

like to rise and present a petition in support of eliminating 

poverty in Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from 

poverty is an enshrined human right by the United Nations that 

all citizens are entitled to social and economic security. And we 

know that citizens living in poverty have long identified 

affordable solutions such as the recent national and provincial 

initiatives, including the Saskatoon health disparities report and 

the Canada Without Poverty Dignity for All campaign. They 

call for a comprehensive poverty elimination strategy that 

includes income, food, and housing security. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing the petition come from 

the cities of Regina and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that calls for the expansion of the graduate 

retention program and a call for fairness for post-secondary 

Saskatchewan students. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Regina and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Hi, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to present 

another petition regarding Furdale. And the situation in Furdale 

is that they’re looking for a permanent solution rather than 

another delay of what the decision is going to be. A government 

ministry has directed SaskWater to cut off supplies for water for 

domestic use to Furdale customers. The government ministry 

has directed that customers may no longer treat non-potable 

water using methods approved by Sask Health. 

 

The Furdale residents, in dealing in good faith with SaskWater 

for over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their domestic 



December 7, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6407 

systems and in-home treatment equipment as well as for 

livestock and irrigation lines; and that the alternative water 

supply being referred to by a government ministry is a private 

operator offering treated, non-pressurized water at great cost 

with no guarantee of quality, quantity, or availability of water. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Furdale and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 

from across Saskatchewan as it relates to our unprecedented 

mismanagement that we witness from a financial perspective 

under the Sask Party government. They allude to the two 

consecutive deficit budgets, the billions of dollars of debt 

growth, Mr. Speaker — $4.2 billion alone over the next four 

years which represents a growth of 55 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

And of course this mismanagement and these deficits come at a 

time of record highs in revenues, Mr. Speaker. And of course 

they come at a consequence to Saskatchewan people now and 

into the future. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens of Saskatoon. I 

so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Food Bank Meets Community Needs 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was with a sense of 

humility last week that I joined some of my fellow NDP [New 

Democratic Party] MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] and candidates in volunteering with the Regina & 

District Food Bank. To volunteer is important at any time of the 

year, but it always seems to carry extra significance in this 

season when the weather turns bitter, family budgets get tighter, 

and as we heard that night, Mr. Speaker, when a growing 

number of families find it hard to know where their next meal is 

coming from. 

 

The Regina & District Food Bank supplies 10,000 people with 

food every month. This figure means that about 5 per cent of 

Regina’s population counts on this organization and its staff and 

supporters just to put food on the table. And 63 per cent of 

those forced to rely on the food bank are Aboriginal people. 

Though the food bank does deserve the highest praise for this 

work, it’s a terribly sad commentary on our society when so 

many of our neighbours lack the means to adequately feed 

themselves and their families. 

 

In keeping with the season, Mr. Speaker, the food bank also 

prepares packages of toys for children, who make up 44 per 

cent of food bank users. No doubt the toys will be welcome, 

Mr. Speaker, but the greatest gift we could give these children 

would be a commitment to eliminate the poverty that sends 

them to the food bank in the first place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in acknowledging the 

amazing work done by the Regina & District Food Bank, not 

just through the holidays but through the whole year. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Public Servants Thanked for Help to Flood Victims 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

has been spoken about in this Assembly quite a lot lately, but 

today I will take time to acknowledge the PDAP staff, working 

tirelessly to help those who were affected by the summer’s 

flooding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after forming government we realized the 

shortcomings of the program, but after the flooding hit, even 

more shortcomings became evident and were quickly 

addressed. Our government listened to the property owners who 

were telling us that PDAP was inadequate to meet their needs. 

Mr. Speaker, when claimants informed us that the deductible 

amount was too high, that the maximum eligibility levels were 

low, that the eligibility requirements were too restrictive, our 

government listened. The ministry also hired additional staff to 

review files to assist with residents’ concerns. 

 

There is certainly more work to be done to further reduce the 

wait times and improve the program, but good progress has 

been made. 

 

I ask this Assembly to recognize the efforts of PDAP workers 

and volunteers. But, Mr. Speaker, volunteers definitely deserve 

all the credit they get and received and more. However, public 

servants as a rule are expected to do this as part of the job. But I 

would disagree, that these public servants went above and 

beyond what they were called to do. 

 

It is nearly impossible to put into words the appreciation and 

thankfulness of the government, but more than that, the 

individuals and families affected by the flood. So simply, Mr. 



6408 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2010 

Speaker, and somewhat inadequately on behalf of Maple Creek, 

Yorkton, Saskatoon, Kawacatoose, The Battlefords, Hudson 

Bay, Regina, Carlyle and all points in between, bless you and 

thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Homelessness in Saskatoon 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, last week the video Nowhere to Go: Homeless in 

Saskatoon was launched at the Saskatoon Indian and Métis 

Friendship Centre. This video powerfully depicts the challenges 

too many people face in finding a home in our largest city, 

Saskatoon. 

 

Nowhere to Go tells the stories of homeless individuals, people 

who society often don’t listen to, says Marjorie Beaucage, the 

project co-ordinator for Passion for Action Against 

Homelessness. She says these are real people with real lives. 

 

Beaucage was shocked to learn the number of young people 

who are now on the streets of Saskatoon. And now there are 

over 400 people at city soup kitchens every day. Each of these 

individuals represent another 10 who are couch surfing or who 

are in semi-permanent shelters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know the lack of affordable and emergency 

housing is a growing issue in Saskatoon and throughout our 

province. The effect of this is to leave those most vulnerable in 

the most desperate need of housing. We now know that the 

waiting list for public housing has more than doubled in the last 

three years with more than 2,300 people — including over 

1,000 families and 900 seniors — on the Sask Housing waiting 

list. Mr. Speaker, we need action and we need action today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of those who are homeless, I’ve been 

asked today to pass on their season greetings to all members of 

the legislature here with these holiday cards, from our home to 

yours. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Melville Football Coach Honoured 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this year at the Vanier Cup’s coaches’ dinner, a coach 

from Melville, Saskatchewan was honoured. John Svenson was 

recognized as the Home Depot NFL [National Football League] 

Youth Coach of the Year in Canada. 

 

“John Svenson has had a positive impact on a lot of young 

football players in the province of Saskatchewan and we’re 

proud to recognize that,” said Mike Danischewsky, football 

development, NFL Canada. “He is a coach who exemplifies 

everything our award represents: a long-term commitment to 

coaching that goes beyond the win-loss column and strengthens 

the sport in his community.” 

 

Benny Walchuk, a former player of Coach Svenson’s at 

Melville Comprehensive, submitted the essay nominating his 

former coach: 

 

John Svenson has been volunteering his time and effort at 

the school’s football program for the past 18 years, 

coaching, repairing equipment, and keeping the field in 

shape [said Walchuk]. In the summer months, he helps 

coach Team Saskatchewan and organizes games with the 

teams from the United States. If you can find someone 

that does more for football in their community, then hats 

off to you, because in my opinion there isn’t anyone that 

does as much as Coach Svenson does for Melville. 

 

The football program at the Melville Comprehensive School 

will receive $5,000 in new football equipment as well as a 

$1,000 Home Depot gift card for football-related renovation 

projects such as field repair, fixing bleachers, painting locker 

rooms, etc. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all members of the Assembly, I 

would like to congratulate John on all of his years of hard work 

and dedication to football in Melville. This honour is well 

deserved. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

African-Canadian Heritage Museum Honourees 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, five individuals and three families 

from The Battlefords have been honoured by the Saskatchewan 

African-Canadian Heritage Museum. A ceremony to honour 

Gordon Yarde, Freda Ellis, Roberto Zayas, Don Hodgins, Jane 

Shury, the Mayes family, the Lane family, and the Works 

family was held earlier this year in Battleford. 

 

Gordon Yarde was honoured as the first politician of African 

descent in Saskatchewan. He was first elected to Battleford 

Town Council in 1985. Freda Ellis was a renowned actress in 

the 1960s and the first Black to earn her certified nursing 

assistant’s accreditation. Roberto Zayas was a baseball star and 

a worker with intellectually challenged individuals. Don 

Hodgins was a high school coach who worked with former NFL 

rookie of the year, Rueben Mayes. And Jane Shury, the CEO 

[chief executive officer] of the Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of 

Fame, was honoured for her efforts to remember the great Black 

baseball players of Saskatchewan’s past. 

 

The Mayes family began with Joseph and Mattie Mayes, who 

moved out of slavery to Saskatchewan with their 13 children. 

The Lane family moved to The Battlefords in 1928, and the 

Russell Works family has seen seven generations living and 

flourishing in northwest Saskatchewan. More information on 

the heritage museum can be found at www.sachm.com. 

 

I call on all members to join me in congratulating these fine 

individuals for their recognition by the Saskatchewan 

African-Canadian Heritage Museum. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 



December 7, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6409 

Positive Assessment of Saskatchewan’s 

Health Care System 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A recent Canadian 

public opinion poll shed some new light on Saskatchewan’s 

health care system and its relation to other provinces. 

 

The lead paragraph read, “Saskatchewan is the only province 

where half of the population offers a positive assessment of the 

current state of health care.” Mr. Speaker, in a country that 

faces significant challenges in delivering universal health care, 

half our population remains positive about Saskatchewan’s 

system. 

 

Other key findings in this poll reveal that 90 per cent of 

Saskatchewan’s residents had a positive view of their visit to a 

family doctor or general practitioner. Also, Mr. Speaker, nearly 

two-thirds of Saskatchewan residents were satisfied with their 

last visit to a Saskatchewan emergency room. 

 

What this poll tells us, Mr. Speaker, is that Saskatchewan’s 

health care providers deliver top-notch service to our residents. 

Their expertise, dedication, and professionalism are being 

recognized by the people of Saskatchewan, which is reflected in 

this poll. Even though our government has made positive steps 

in expanding and enhancing health care services throughout the 

province, we realize there is more work to be done. 

 

On behalf of this House, I would like to congratulate 

Saskatchewan’s health care providers and their delivery of 

top-notch services to the people of this province. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Saskatchewan’s Forgotten People 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a growing list of people 

in Saskatchewan who feel left out or forgotten by this Sask 

Party government. Across this province people tell us their 

daily lives are not reflected in the government’s slick 

advertising campaigns and good news photo ops. 

 

There are renters and seniors on fixed incomes struggling with 

low vacancy rates and rising rents. There are young parents 

attending university trying to find affordable child care while 

their tuition bills rise. There are working families increasingly 

forced to make ends meet at the end of the month by a trip to 

the food bank. There are families in rural communities 

watching health care services reduced, long-term care beds 

closed, and elderly parents relocated to facilities in strange 

surroundings far away. 

 

There are northern families waiting for the government to take 

meaningful action on housing, mental health, addictions, and 

youth suicide rates. There are children in care who depend for 

their well-being on the oversight of a government that does not 

even know how many they are or where they live. 

 

The list of people and families this government has forgotten or 

left out is already too long. Instead of putting feel-good photo 

ops and expensive PR [public relations] campaigns at the top of 

its agenda, it’s time for this government to start putting some of 

these left out people and their forgotten issues at the top of its 

to-do list. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Support for Low-Income People 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today the Regina & District Food Bank reported, and I 

quote, “Every day in our community more than 10,000 people 

worry about where they will find their next meal.” Nearly half 

of them, 47 per cent are children, and we know that the number 

of people using food banks is up 20 per cent province-wide, the 

second highest in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government brags about our province’s 

prosperity, but there are more than 10,000 people in this city 

alone that are suffering. And the Regina Food Bank is calling 

for a comprehensive anti-poverty strategy to deal with this 

issue. 

 

To the Premier: does his government think it’s acceptable for 

10,000 people in this city alone to be going hungry? And if he 

doesn’t, will he heed the food bank’s call for a comprehensive 

anti-poverty strategy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, our government believes if 

even one person is hungry, that’s one too many, and that’s why 

we’ve been working extremely hard since 2007 to make sure 

that we’ve added money to the enhancements. We’ve added 

over $40 million worth of enhancements to income assistance 

programs in the last three years, Mr. Speaker. Our average 

weekly earnings are up 6 per cent, and our unemployment rate 

is at 5.5 and that is the second lowest in all of Canada. I know, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s below the national average rate. We have 

more people working in Saskatchewan now than ever before, 

and we put more money back in people’s pockets as well. 

 

Is there more work to do, Mr. Speaker? Yes there is. We’re 

working very hard on it. And I assure you that the people of the 

province are encouraging us to make sure everybody has 

prosperity in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this government is clearly out of 

touch with what’s happening in this province. Many of the 

people who are using the food bank are actually working, but 

they can’t earn enough to provide themselves and their children 

with basic necessities. 

 

We know today that, Mr. Speaker, a single person working full 

time at a minimum wage job in our province spends 

three-quarters of their income on rent and food costs. And these 

just aren’t students working part time. The government’s own 



6410 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2010 

figures show that nearly 40 per cent of minimum wage earners 

are over 25 years old. Many have families to support. Yet this 

government has frozen the wages of the working poor in our 

province until after the next election. 

 

To the minister: will she realize that a lot of working people in 

our province can’t make ends meet, and index the minimum 

wage? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we’re very aware that there 

are many people that have discomforts in the way they’re living 

right now, and that’s why we have reduced the provincial 

income tax. And we removed 80,000 people off the tax rolls. 

Mr. Speaker, 80,000 people. Fewer are paying taxes in this 

province now than under the previous government. 

Low-income single parents right now will save $2,800 

annually. Senior couples . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. It’s getting difficult to hear. 

There’s too many people who want to answer the question. I’d 

ask, allow the minister to respond. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, senior couples can now 

keep $2,200 annually in their pockets because of the decisions 

that we’ve made. Mr. Speaker, we’ve doubled the number of 

seniors that are eligible for benefits under the seniors’ income 

plan. Under the previous government, they had made no 

movement on that file at all, totally ignored the file for 16 years. 

And now all of a sudden they’ve decided they’ve come up with 

some new information. Mr. Speaker, there’s more work to do, 

and we are working on it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we have yet to see proof about the 

80,000 number that they often throw out. And she knows that 

single senior women are often the ones who are facing the 

toughest times when it comes to food banks. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Regina Food Bank noted that the rising 

cost of housing is one of the main reasons that many 

Saskatchewan families have to rely on food banks. And we 

know CMHC [Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation] 

reports that the average cost of a two-bedroom apartment in 

Regina is now approaching $900 a month, and it’s even more in 

Estevan and Saskatoon. But this government even refuses to 

debate the issue around rent control. 

 

To the Premier: will he understand that people are going hungry 

in this province because of the high cost of housing? And 

what’s he going to do about it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

know, or they should know, that we’ve increased funding for 

housing programs by 45 per cent since we became government. 

We’ve partnered with the federal government and invested $161 

million into new and existing housing over two years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are 700 more affordable units in our 

province, and we’re working on 1,250 more units. We’ve 

increased the shelter rate, we’ve increased the supplement rental 

rate, and we’ve indexed them. We made sure that there are 

more seniors that are eligible for social housing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite continue to holler about 

work that should be done. For 16 years they ignored the needs 

of this province — 16 years. We’re working on it. We can’t 

change overnight what they left for 16 years of neglect. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we can talk a lot about 

things we did in the 16 years. And we’re proud of our record. 

But I can tell you, I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the growing 

number of people living in hunger, who are hungry in our 

province today will put pressure on our health system in the 

years to come. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, a recent study by the Public Health 

Nutritionists of Saskatchewan estimated it cost $185 a week to 

provide a family of four with good food here in Regina and 

$250 a week in northern Saskatchewan. And when these people 

can’t afford nutritious food, their health suffers. Canadians with 

the lowest household incomes are nearly three times more likely 

to have diabetes, for example. And we know that diabetes leads 

to increased risk of heart disease, stroke, blindness, and kidney 

failure. 

 

To the Premier: why is his government condemning 

low-income people to poor health all because they won’t take 

action to make life more affordable for families struggling to 

make ends meet here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, one of the initiatives that 

we started as this government is recognizing that every ministry 

is not a silo. It’s an enterprise approach we have when it comes 

to working with poor people and with people that are 

disadvantaged. That’s why we made sure that we’ve increased 

the minimum wage three times since we became government. 

We’ve increased funding to CBOs [community-based 

organization] . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The member 

from Saskatoon Centre had the opportunity to present the 

question without interference. I ask the members to allow the 

minister to be able to respond. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we know that there’s work 

to do. We know that there is no issue that’s standing alone in 

this government. We know that we have to have more houses. 

We know that there is, money needs to be going to CBOs and 

that’s the work we’ve started. We’ve also worked on programs 



December 7, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6411 

like ACE [accelerating connections to employment] to make 

sure the people who are on social assistance have a chance to 

get into the employment line. We’ve actually made sure that we 

decreased the portion, education portion of property tax so 

people have more money in their pocket. 

 

There’s more work to be done, Mr. Speaker, but every ministry 

is working together to ensure that every person in this province 

can benefit from being a Saskatchewan citizen. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Kidney Donor Paired Exchange Program 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister has 

mismanaged Saskatchewan’s world-renowned kidney transplant 

program to the point where it shut down in July of ’09 and has 

only reopened on September 1st of this year. Now we’re being 

told that it is only doing one transplant per month. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people are being encouraged to sign up for the 

national living donor paired exchange registry, which matches 

living kidney donations between patients with a willing but 

incompatible donor and another pair in the same situation 

across Canada. Mr. Speaker, but what the minister isn’t telling 

people is that he’s not covering the travel and lodging expenses 

for the donors or their support person that goes with them. Mr. 

Speaker, since the minister is leaving people with little choice 

but to access the national paired program, is he going to cover 

the associated costs for the kidney donors? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the living donor paired exchange program is relatively 

new. It just started in the year 2009, so a little over a year old. 

We’ve looked at it and are looking at the possibility of covering 

some of the costs of people that have to travel to donate their 

kidney for the paired living program. Some provinces are 

covering it. Some provinces are not covering it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re looking at the program, as it’s relatively a new program, 

through the Canadian Blood Services, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

working with them and other provinces to try and come up with 

a uniform program across the nation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, given how long the minister takes 

to make any decision and how many times he observes and 

reviews and all that sort of thing, people aren’t encouraged by 

that answer. 

 

The living donor paired exchange program is a wonderful 

program that provides an avenue for people who need to get a 

kidney to actually get the transplant. One person who used the 

program says the concern is, and I quote, “There are people 

who could be giving their kidneys to other people, but they 

can’t afford to do it.” 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: when is he going to protect 

Saskatchewan people and start properly funding the paired 

program so that the donor’s expenses are covered and 

Saskatchewan people who need a kidney transplant receive the 

care that they deserve? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already answered 

that question, Mr. Speaker. I said that the program is relatively 

new. It’s through the Canada blood services. It’s a living donor 

paired program. It’s new. All provinces are looking at it. Some 

provinces are covering expenses; others aren’t. We haven’t to 

this point, Mr. Speaker, but we’re certainly looking at it to see 

whether that would be a good use of money, Mr. Speaker, as we 

move forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, this may be some information that 

might be an incentive to actually make a decision in a timely 

fashion. The province pays between 30,000 and 35,000 per year 

for someone to be on peritoneal dialysis and 55,000 for 

someone to be on hemodyalisis per year. According to the 

kidney transplant program, a kidney transplant saves the 

province substantial dollars in comparison to chronic kidney 

disease treatment. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, properly funding the expenses of donors who 

participate in the living donor paired exchange program would 

save Saskatchewan taxpayers thousands of dollars. And kidney 

patients would save them the unnecessary pain and stress 

associated with having to wait for a donor who can afford to 

cover their own expenses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is the minister going to do the responsible thing 

and properly cover the expenses of donors to save not only the 

taxpayers thousands of dollars but kidney transplant patients 

extra stress and pain? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, since September we see 

that there have been four living donor candidates. Since that 

time two had cancelled out because they were deemed unfit, 

Mr. Speaker. There have been two. We’re looking into those 

two. 

 

We’re looking at whether that would be a program that we 

should move on in the province. As I said, it is not uniform 

across the nation. This is a national program. We’ll certainly 

look at it and consider funding into the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Funding for Foster Home 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, is the minister aware of 

nearly $100,000 wrongly paid out by the government to an 

organization that does not even have a contract with the 

government? 



6412 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the member 

has posed a question to the Minister of Finance. I don’t know 

anything about that particular file, and I’ll take notice. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last spring the 

Sask Party government gave the Rising Stars youth ranch over 

92,000 to provide care for children, but the reality is that no 

contract was in place and no children were even at the facility. 

To the minister: why was 92,000 paid out without a contract 

and without any care provided to any children? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot comment on the 

specifics of this case because it is a zoning dispute between 

Rising Stars and the RM of Prince Albert, and the ministry has 

no jurisdiction over it. 

 

I can tell you that there was standard practices followed and that 

our ministry is announcing the funding and proceeding with the 

construction. Mr. Speaker, this is a specific issue and I know 

that the members opposite brought up the issue last year. It is 

between the RM and the Rising Stars, and I think that the 

members opposite should be making sure that their messaging 

is correct. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s about mismanagement 

of this government. It’s about lack of due diligence. It’s about 

transferring almost half a million dollars of taxpayers’ money to 

a facility that never even had the zoning in place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Last week the auditor’s report came out and it made it 

abundantly clear that we need more foster homes, and the 

opposition fully recognizes this. But all we’ve seen from this 

government on this front is incompetence and mismanagement 

like so many other files, Mr. Speaker. They spent 350,000 to 

build this home last fall when the proper zoning wasn’t even in 

place. Then in the spring they spent another 92,000 for 

operating expenses, but nothing was operating yet and no 

children were benefiting. No contract was in place. 

 

Meanwhile, foster homes are overcrowded and the auditor says 

children are at risk. To the minister: why should children and 

foster parents have to pay the price for the Sask Party’s 

mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — I can assure the members opposite that 

there are children that are being transitioned to the P.A. [Prince 

Albert] group home. There are children that . . . All of our 

children are looked after. We know where the children are. We 

know the names of the children. We are looking after the 

children. I assure the members opposite there are no children 

that are in danger. 

 

This home, this home was opened. There was a zoning dispute. 

We are making sure that there are spaces for children ages 6 to 

12. There is room for 10 of these children. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I’m looking forward to the day when they are open. But in the 

meantime, this is a zoning dispute. And I assure you that we are 

looking after the children, and we are working hard to. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we heard last week and we 

had confirmed last week that this government has thousands of 

children in care — a massive increase, Mr. Speaker. What we 

heard is that the circumstances aren’t being verified, Mr. 

Speaker. And what we heard, Mr. Speaker, is that this 

government doesn’t know where those children live. They don’t 

know whether they’re going to school. They don’t know about 

the care and well-being of those children. 

 

What kind of a parent would we call that, Mr. Speaker? In fact I 

think this government would be intervening, Mr. Speaker, with 

that kind of negligence, and taking the children from those 

parents. 

 

This government, who’s the permanent ward for these children, 

have no idea where they are. Yet we see the mismanagement 

continue in this year, spending half a million dollars, Mr. 

Speaker, for a program that’s not operating and doesn’t even 

have the authority to operate without a contract as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I look to the Finance Minister: how do you answer for this, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, when we became 

government, we were well aware of the fact there were children 

in overcrowded foster homes. There were children that were 

where it was easier to track a library book than to track children 

under those people. Because there was no computer program in 

place, there was no way to actually know what was happening 

on reserves. 

 

We have spent just about $18 million to ensure that we have a 

program set up so that we know where our children are at the 

drop of a hat, Mr. Speaker. There is a complex database in place 

right now. We know where the children are. We know how 

many children are in our care, but it’s not as easy as it should 

be. 

 

We are the last jurisdiction in Canada to actually have the right 

kind of data system. Our children deserve more, and we’re 

working on it. Mr. Speaker, we have increased the amount of 

money given to child and family services by 106 per cent. Have 

we got more work to do, Mr. Speaker? Yes we do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 



December 7, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6413 

Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, last year the Saskatoon Health 

Region spent more than $82 million on affiliated health care 

facilities like Oliver Lodge, Sherbrooke nursing home, 

Sunnyside nursing home, among others. About 75 million of 

that was for operating costs for those homes, and there was 

almost $7 million spent on capital. Now we know all of this 

because the information was included in the Saskatoon Health 

Region 2009-10 annual report. You just have to turn to page 

105 and there it is. 

 

To the minister: will the full cost of the Amicus deal be 

included in future annual reports? Will it include the cost of the 

loan guarantee or, if the minister prefers, the contingent liability 

in those statements? And if not, why not? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the member is right 

when it identifies a few of the affiliate long-term care facilities 

that we have in the province. Unfortunately when you add up 

the number of those beds, it simply wasn’t enough to manage 

the demand that we saw in the Saskatoon Health Region. Those 

facilities have been up and running for many, many years. 

Unfortunately we also saw that within acute care centres we’d 

have anywhere up to 60 seniors living in an acute care centre 

simply because, under the former government, they just didn’t 

supply enough beds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the Saskatchewan Party government we 

have, between the Saskatoon Health Region and the Catholic 

Health Ministry, entered into an agreement to build Samaritan 

Place where seniors will leave, be able to move out of acute 

care centres and live in a proper facility such as Samaritan 

Place, Mr. Speaker. It’s a good deal for seniors in 

Saskatchewan. It’s a good deal for Saskatchewan residents. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, no one is talking about the 

need. We’re not talking about the lack of need for long-term 

care beds. We know we need more long-term care beds in the 

province. 

 

Now the minister takes every chance he can to duck behind the 

Catholic Health Ministry. Yet the cost to taxpayers of the 

government’s arrangement with affiliated health care facilities 

like those run by the Catholic Health Ministry, like St. Ann’s in 

Saskatoon, is out there for everyone to see. What’s different 

about Amicus, Mr. Speaker, is the lack of openness, 

transparency and accountability, which is something the Sask 

Party promised in the last provincial election. The government 

doesn’t want taxpayers to understand exactly how much debt 

we will all be piling up in this deal. 

 

So to the minister: why is he trying to hide the true cost of this 

insider deal? And if he’s not trying to hide it, then why isn’t 

Amicus an affiliate? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there are many different 

arrangements within health regions to provide various types of 

care, whether it’s non-government organizations, whether it’s 

affiliates that the member opposite mentioned, whether it’s 

health care organizations that provide long-term care to health 

regions, Mr. Speaker. You have to look at Extendicare. It’s not 

an affiliate. It’s a health care organization, Mr. Speaker, that 

supplies care. 

 

What we do through the Ministry of Health is supply global 

budgets to health regions. They then move and supply the 

services that they see are fit. I find it curious though, Mr. 

Speaker, on one hand, she’ll say we need more beds, Mr. 

Speaker. We need more beds, even though for 16 years they 

didn’t build a new bed. And then on the other hand, she said 

she’d scrap the deal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in the annual report of the 

Saskatoon Health Region, they clearly lay out all of the 

organizations that are affiliated nursing homes. These are 

privately owned affiliates, Mr. Speaker. What we want to 

understand is why wasn’t Amicus an affiliate through the 

Catholic Health Ministry? All the other facilities owned by the 

Catholic Health Ministry are affiliates. Why isn’t Amicus an 

affiliate, and isn’t it because they were trying to hide the details 

of this deal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I explained to the 

member in the previous question that there are different 

arrangements with health regions to supply certain type of care 

within their health region. Mr. Speaker, some are through an 

affiliate arrangement. Some are where a health organization 

affiliate such as an Extendicare for example, that supplies 

long-term care to many health regions, does a very good job of 

supplying that care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an arrangement that the Saskatoon Health 

Region, through the Catholic Health Ministry, have entered into 

to build a Samaritan Place to make sure that we can ensure there 

are enough beds in Saskatoon so that seniors do not have to live 

in acute care centres, that they can live in an appropriate care 

centre, Mr. Speaker. We know where the NDP would be on 

this. They would scrap it, absolutely, Mr. Speaker. But not only 

would they scrap it, they just wouldn’t supply the proper beds. 

Haven’t for a long, long time, Mr. Speaker, and if they’re ever 

elected again, they won’t then either. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the government likes to 

describe Amicus as an example of new and innovative funding, 

but it’s neither new nor innovative to ring up debt while trying 

to hide it, Mr. Speaker, certainly not from conservatives in this 

province. 

 



6414 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2010 

Now the cost to taxpayers of government arrangements with 

affiliated health care facilities is published every year. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I note that Extendicare is privately owned. I believe 

it’s even on the Toronto Stock Exchange. Now Amicus is, 

“owned by the Catholic Health Ministry.” Now, under affiliates, 

all of that information is published every year, Mr. Speaker. We 

know how much it costs. What we don’t know and what the 

government won’t tell us is what elaborate lengths they’ve gone 

to to hide this deal.  

 

So to the minister: why doesn’t he make it all clear? And why 

doesn’t he lift the blackout of the 1,800 pages that they blacked 

out, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I know the opposition 

has a real issue when you have third-party deliverers within the 

system, Mr. Speaker. They don’t want to see the Catholic 

Health Ministry with the health region supplying Samaritan 

Place. We heard the same cries and groans, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I believe it’s only fair 

and right that the minister be allowed the same opportunity to 

respond without a lot of interference as the member had to place 

the question. 

 

I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we heard concerns when 

this government, for the first time, Mr. Speaker, entered into an 

agreement with a third-party deliverer to supply surgical care in 

this province, Mr. Speaker. We see what is being done in 

Saskatoon, over 100 procedures already done. Whether it’s in 

Omni here in Regina, many procedures being done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we go back, if we go back to the NDP days, Mr. 

Speaker, there’ll be hundreds more on the wait-list, Mr. 

Speaker. And there’ll be hundreds of people living in acute care 

centres because they just don’t supply the proper facilities. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the . . . Order. Order. Order. Why is 

the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Michelson: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw North has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The leave has been granted. I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw North. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, in the west gallery 

are two special people to me. One is my wife Debbie sitting up 

there, and with her is our grandson Jacob. Jacob, why don’t you 

give us a little wave? 

 

Mr. Speaker, Jacob is five years old. He turned five in 

September. And when we were driving down the streets of 

Melfort, he said, Grandpa, I can’t wait to be six years old 

because that’s when the Moose Jaw Warriors will be playing in 

the new rink. So that’s what kind of a sport he is. 

 

They’re just on their way to visit great-grandma who turned 99 

in October. And they decided to stop and say hi. Would 

everybody welcome them to their Legislative Building. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Changes to Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to make an announcement regarding the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan. Mr. Speaker, as we noted in our 

2010-11 budget, Saskatchewan is already a leader in pension 

innovation in Canada. For example, the rules governing pension 

plans in Saskatchewan are among the most flexible in the 

country with regard to pension payouts and the unlocking of 

pension funds. 

 

Saskatchewan has the highest rate of coverage of occupational 

pension plans in the country. Saskatchewan is home to the 

largest defined contribution pension plans in the country, and 

these plans account for about half of the total membership in 

Saskatchewan’s occupational pension plans. Also 

Saskatchewan created the Saskatchewan Pension Plan in 1986 

to provide a unique retirement income savings vehicle for 

individuals with little or no access to employer-sponsored 

pension plans or other retirement savings arrangements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the SPP [Saskatchewan Pension Plan] is the only 

plan of its kind in Canada. Employer contributions are not 

required and member contributions are voluntary. 

 

Some of the key features of the SPP are, membership is open to 

any resident between the ages of 18 and 71. Contributions are 

tax deductible within RRSP [Registered Retirement Savings 

Plan] limits, and earnings are tax sheltered until received as 

retirement income as early as age 55. The SPP’s investment 

activities operate at arm’s length from government. The SPP 

offers plan members professional investment management at 

institutional costs where private sector investment managers 

actively invest member funds in accordance with the investment 

policies established by the SPP board of trustees. Also the 

five-person board of trustees is appointed by the government by 

order in council, and the board reports to the legislature through 

the Minister of Finance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, participation in the SPP does not depend on 

employer involvement. In addition, the contribution limit is not 

tied to the contributor’s employment income. In the past this 



December 7, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6415 

provision has allowed the SPP to market itself as a retirement 

savings vehicle for homemakers and others who do not earn 

employment income. However this feature of the SPP is no 

longer required as a result of the introduction of tax-free 

savings accounts by the federal government in 2009 which 

allow individuals to contribute up to $5,000 in annual 

tax-sheltered savings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because the SPP specializes in handling a large 

number of small accounts in an efficient manner, it can be an 

attractive pension alternative for small businesses and their 

employees. However, SPP’s effectiveness to serve in this 

capacity is hindered because contributions to the SPP are 

limited to $600 per year. This limit is set out in both the SPP 

regulations and the federal Income Tax Act, and has not 

changed for 24 years. 

 

To address these issues and to improve the SPP’s attractiveness 

to small business and the self-employed, Saskatchewan’s 2010 

budget proposed amendments to the federal Act. These 

amendments will increase the annual SPP contribution limit to 

$2,500 with contributions fully dependent upon the 

contributor’s earned income. 

 

I am pleased to announce today, Mr. Speaker, that the federal 

government has agreed to Saskatchewan’s SPP proposals. 

Effective the 2010 contribution year, the SPP contribution limit 

is being increased to $2,500 subject to an individual’s registered 

retirement savings plan contribution room. 

 

In addition, the federal changes will permit transfers from other 

registered plans to the SPP. We are putting a $10,000 annual 

limit on these transfers, Mr. Speaker. Also similar to our 

RRSPs, SPP funds will now be eligible for rollover into the 

RRSP or registered disability savings plan of a financially 

dependent infirm child or grandchild. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, SPP annuity payments are now 

eligible for the pension income credit and for pension income 

splitting. These changes to the SPP improve the retirement 

savings options in Saskatchewan by offering a proven, 

cost-effective, fully portable savings option to a wider segment 

of Saskatchewan residents. It also provides more people with 

the opportunity to create an adequate level of retirement 

savings. 

 

This is good news for young wage earners, part-time 

employees, and all of those who do not have access to an 

employer-sponsored pension plan. This is good news for small 

business in Saskatchewan that want to help their employees 

save for retirement but cannot afford to administer their own 

pension plan. And this is good news for all Canadians because 

the SPP now provides an example to other governments of the 

kind of pension innovation that could offer Canadians more 

flexibility in saving for retirement. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 

the minister for providing the statement to me prior to question 

period here today. I welcome, as we did prior, to the 

administrators of the pension plan that are here today as well, 

who provide great service to Saskatchewan people within this 

specific instrument, Mr. Speaker, and good governance that has 

been a history of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

When we look at the changes that are here today, there’s some 

housekeeping changes, Mr. Speaker, that reflect changes in the 

federal climate, changes in new instruments that have been 

brought forward on a federal level, the TFSA [tax-free savings 

account], Mr. Speaker. The Premier looks perplexed. What I’ll 

explain to him here, if he wants to look perplexed, is in fact one 

of the most significant changes here today is in direct response 

to the introduction of the TFSA, Mr. Speaker. And so then we 

needed to refine our Act here, Mr. Speaker, and our plan here. 

And we see that today. 

 

Beyond that, we see some other refinements, Mr. Speaker, some 

updates, might I say, modernizations, Mr. Speaker. And 

certainly at face value and in quick study, we would welcome 

these modest refinements, Mr. Speaker. But at the same point in 

time, I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that we should hold close 

to this discussion at all points in time the challenge of income 

security, Mr. Speaker. And certainly while we welcome the 

refinements, the updates, the modernization that we see here 

today, this certainly doesn’t go any distance, Mr. Speaker, in 

addressing what is a critical challenge for Saskatchewan people. 

 

And we can be proud of the leadership that Saskatchewan has 

played, Mr. Speaker, and the role that we have played as a 

province, Mr. Speaker. But we need to as well look at where 

we’re going, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know when I look at the Access and Affordability report that 

was released today by the Saskatchewan food banks and many 

partnering agencies, university as well, Mr. Speaker, what we 

see in that is that many seniors, Mr. Speaker, are barely able to 

make it by, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the costs of food and 

housing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know the Premier’s chirping from his seat, Mr. Speaker, 

because of course this runs counter to his cheery view that he 

likes to sell of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that’s a disconnect 

from the reality for so many. Mr. Speaker, when we look at 

what this report highlighted here, Mr. Speaker, is that a senior 

here in a case study from the report of Access and Affordability, 

Mr. Speaker, is that 51 per cent of a senior’s budget . . . And a 

70-year-old woman is spending 51 per cent of that money on 

rent, 14 per cent of that on food, Mr. Speaker. And these are 

things that we need to be watching for, Mr. Speaker, and 

making sure that we’re responding to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Further to that, we should look at the context that we’ve seen, 

Mr. Speaker, which is the increase to the cost of housing and 

food. I believe this study also puts out that from 2002 to 2009, 

Mr. Speaker, food has increased by 22 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 

and that housing has increased by 38 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as I’ve said from the moment I took my feet, Mr. Speaker, 

we welcome the updates that we see as we take them, look at 

them after a quick study, Mr. Speaker, they’re modernization to 

a plan. But we certainly should never see this as the panacea to 

provide income security to the many across this province. It 

doesn’t do anything to address the . . . And I don’t believe the 

minister was suggesting that it did. But it certainly doesn’t do 



6416 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2010 

anything to address the circumstance for the many seniors right 

now, Mr. Speaker, on fixed income, that are finding it difficult 

to get by. And certainly even as we look to the younger 

generation, we certainly need to do more. 

 

We know that there’s upcoming meetings, Mr. Speaker, of the 

ministers of Finance. We know that our Finance minister will 

be attending those meetings. And certainly it’s going to be 

important that as the minister speaks about leadership from 

Saskatchewan, that certainly this is a time for the minister to 

exemplify that leadership. We hope that this isn’t what the 

minister calls as leadership. This is refinement, modernization, 

and updating, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We do need to look for a pan-Canadian solution, Mr. Speaker, 

make sure that this Finance minister goes there — and I’m 

certain that he or I’d hope that he will be — Mr. Speaker, to 

work co-operatively with Finance ministers and from a position 

of leadership, to find a solution that’s portable, that’s secure, 

and that works for all Canadians across Saskatchewan, 

recognizing the many, many challenges and changes in our 

workplace, the fact that many individuals move from province 

to province. 

 

We should be considering in a significant way, Mr. Speaker, the 

merits in looking at expansion of the Canadian pension plan, 

Mr. Speaker. There are some significant benefits to expansion 

of this plan when we look at it from a cost-efficient perspective, 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at it from an administrative 

perspective, and when we look at it from what it provides 

workers across Saskatchewan in security of both individuals 

now, but well into the future. It’s indexed, it’s secure, and it’s 

portable, Mr. Speaker. So I’d hope that this minister is fully 

ready to engage in those discussions and look for a 

pan-Canadian solution. 

 

But as it relates to this Bill right here, as long as we’re crystal 

clear that this certainly is no sort of panacea, Mr. Speaker, we 

welcome updates to what is an important piece and an 

important tool for some within this province, Mr. Speaker. So 

we welcome it at this point in time. We look forward to further 

questions on it. Thank you. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 

 

[14:45] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 619 — The School Bus Drivers of Saskatchewan 

Appreciation Day Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 619, The 

School Bus Drivers of Saskatchewan Appreciation Day Act be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved first 

reading of Bill 619, The School Bus Drivers of Saskatchewan 

Appreciation Day Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Human Services to present its ninth 

report. I move: 

 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services now be concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair of the Human Services Committee 

has moved: 

 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report that it has considered certain estimates and to 

present its ninth report. I move: 

 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred. 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair of Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice has moved: 

 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



December 7, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6417 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 158, The Correctional Services 

Amendment Act, 2010 with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Corrections. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and 

that the Bill and its amendments to be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Corrections and 

Public Safety has requested leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 158, The Correctional 

Services Amendment Act, 2010 with amendment and that the 

Bill and its amendments be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 

time? 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 158 — The Correctional Services 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. I recognize the Minister Responsible for Corrections 

and Public Safety. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 158 — The Correctional Services 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 

No. 158, The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010 with 

amendment be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I’ve got a response 

to a request made on orders. Members, before orders of the day, 

I would ask your attention as I am prepared to make a statement 

on a point of order raised by the Deputy Government House 

Leader. 

 

The Deputy Government House Leader’s point of order 

concerned the use of the word deceive by the Leader of the 

Opposition during question period in an exchange with the 

Minister of Agriculture. I have reviewed the verbatim, and I am 

prepared to make a statement regarding the exchange. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition said, and I quote from page 6374 

of Hansard: “The minister signed AgStability. He’s the minister 

who signed, so let’s get that clear. And let’s not deceive the 

public . . .” 

 

In Beauchesne’s, 6th edition, paragraph 490, the word deceit is 

listed as unacceptable, while in paragraph 489, the same word is 

listed as acceptable by the House of Commons in Ottawa usage. 

The reason for this is that the context and use of the word is key 

to determining whether or not it is acceptable. 

 

One of the acceptability tests is cited in the House of Commons 

Procedure and Practice, 2nd edition at page 614, which is as 

follows: “Remarks directed specifically at another Member 

which question that Member’s integrity, honesty or character 

are not in order.” 

 

In a ruling dated November 19th, 2004, Speaker Kowalsky 

stated the following about the use of the word deceit. And I 

quote: 

 

With respect to the use of the word deceive or deception 

that was called to attention once, but also used again by 

the member for, I believe, Arm River. The definition of 

the word deceit in the Oxford dictionary is, to believe what 

is false or to mislead purposely. With misleading . . . we 

are often misled, not whether it be intentionally or not 

intentionally, but using the word deceive then implies 

intention. So I would ask members not to use that word in 

this Assembly. 



6418 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2010 

In response to the point of order, the Opposition House Leader 

asked that the use of the term hypocritical by the Minister of 

Agriculture in the same exchange also be reviewed by the 

Speaker. On page 6374 of yesterday’s Hansard, the Minister of 

Agriculture said, and I quote, “I find it somewhat amazing and 

hypocritical of the Leader of the Opposition.” 

 

In passing, I want to remind the Opposition House Leader that 

this was in effect a separate point of order. In future, I remind 

members that a new point of order should not be raised when 

speaking to another point of order. Rather it should be raised as 

a separate point of order. 

 

Having said that, I did also review how the word is used. Again 

the word hypocrisy can be found in both the acceptable and 

unacceptable lists in Beauchesne. The same standard for context 

must be applied. Interestingly, this word was also addressed by 

Speaker Kowalsky in the ruling I’ve just cited. Speaker 

Kowalsky ruled that the word hypocritical, when applied to an 

individual, is not in order. 

 

I ask both the Leader of the Opposition and the Minister of 

Agriculture to be careful in their choice of words. It’s not 

acceptable to question each other’s integrity, honesty, or 

character. In Beauchesne’s paragraph 491, it says, and I quote: 

 

The Speaker has consistently ruled that language used in 

the House should be temperate and worthy of the place in 

which it is spoken. No language is, by virtue of any list, 

acceptable or unacceptable. A word which is 

parliamentary in one context may cause disorder in 

another context, and therefore be unparliamentary. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 

Assistance for Livestock Producers 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave, seek leave to, 

under rule 59, to move a motion of urgent and pressing 

necessity on the issue of the much-needed assistance for 

livestock producers in the province. Mr. Speaker, yesterday we 

had a group of farm families, beef producers here in Regina, 

and they left very dissatisfied with the answers they received 

from the government. So today I’m proposing a motion. I’m 

asking the Premier and the Sask Party MLAs to support this 

motion. And I’ll briefly read the text of the motion now, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

That this Assembly calls upon the federal and provincial 

governments to work together to provide Saskatchewan 

livestock producers with an immediate assistance payment 

of $150 per head for breeding stock. 

 

And further, that in making this call, the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan assert the following: first, that 

the beef industry in Saskatchewan remains in a crisis due 

to the state and the BSE [bovine spongiform 

encephalopathy] issue, as well as the high Canadian dollar, 

previous years of drought; and secondly, that many 

livestock producers have been hit hard by this years 

flooding; and third, that cattle numbers in this province 

have declined from 3.6 million in 2005 to 3.1 million in 

2010; and four, that livestock producers and the 

Agriculture Producers Association of Saskatchewan have 

asked for an assistance payment of $150 per head for 

breeding stock due to the dire situation facing many 

livestock producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Premier and the Sask Party MLAs will allow 

me to do this and move this motion, I think the people of the 

province would appreciate that very much. So I ask for leave to 

move the motion. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has asked for 

leave to move a motion under rule 59. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has not been granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 470 through 632. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 

Unfortunately I was unable to hear the response from the 

member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 470 through 632. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers to questions 470 through 632 are 

tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 161 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 161 — The 

Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So the reason that any 

government would ever . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 



December 7, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6419 

Order. The member from Regina Coronation Park has been 

recognized. Allow the member to speak. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So the only reason that 

any government would introduce a Bill around The Election 

Act, the only reason any government should introduce a Bill 

around an election Act is to protect and enhance our democracy. 

To make it easier for people to vote, to make it more effective 

to grow the number of people who participate actively in our 

democracy. To help people vote, to help them choose who is 

going to be their representative in the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan. And Bill No. 161 fails miserably on that test, 

Mr. Speaker, because it does not enhance the right of anyone to 

vote. In fact, one of the most offensive parts of Bill 161 is that it 

requires . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. There’s a couple of members 

who are having a separate debate. I’d ask the members to go 

behind the bar and have that discussion. Allow the member 

from Regina Coronation Park to speak, please. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill 161 has a very 

offensive part to it. And the offensive part is that it requires 

photo ID. 

 

And now I have to ask myself, and government members 

should ask, who is it that is asking to be required to provide 

photo ID when they go to vote to elect their MLA? Who in their 

right mind would say, oh put me through some more hoops, 

make me answer all kinds of questions? Not a single person. 

You cannot point to a single person in Saskatchewan that said, 

force me to provide photo ID so that I can vote and elect my 

MLA. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I know of three homeless people in 

Regina that have frozen to death in Regina this year. Three 

people frozen to death. . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . What are 

you talking about, the Minister of Health says. I’m talking 

about how you effectively have disenfranchised people that are 

unlikely to vote at the best of times but certainly will not vote if 

they’re required to provide photo ID. 

 

We need to give voice to the voiceless. That’s our jobs, to give 

voice to the voiceless. We need to stand up for the most 

downtrodden people, individuals in our society. And any 

government that fails to do that does so at their own risk, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

This election Act fails miserably in every single test. And I 

want to point out that the minister responsible . . . I’m going to 

quote from December 1st Leader-Post, and the quote is, “We’re 

going to make sure we continue consulting with the stakeholder 

groups to ensure that we have all the avenues covered off to be 

more inclusive versus exclusive.” That’s what he said talking 

about The Election Act amendment. 

 

Well you cannot produce a single person, a single expert that 

can tell you how forcing individuals to come up with photo ID 

is going to be inclusive in the slightest way, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 

only been elected through six general elections. Only six. But 

you know, if I ran a seventh time, maybe that would be the first 

time one of my constituents might ask me to force them to 

provide photo ID so they could vote for me. You know, there’s 

always a first. 

 

On the other hand, maybe I might have someone who works at 

a polling station that says, you know, this is going to be 

inclusive. We’re going to be more inclusive if you would just 

force everybody to have a photo ID. You know, the absurdity of 

it, Mr. Speaker. It’s just bizarre that the Sask Party government 

is asking us and the people of Saskatchewan to believe that 

somehow or other there’s a big call for photo ID under The 

Election Act of Saskatchewan. It’s just bizarre. It’s 

non-existence, it’s nonsensical that that is happening. It’s just 

not. 

 

I will tell you, Mr. Speaker, of one of the saddest incidents that 

happened in one of the previous six elections that I ran in. And I 

had a voter, happened to be a woman, who had come to a 

polling station and was told, no you have to vote at, and was 

sent to a different polling station in a different . . . It happened 

to be, both of them, in schools in the constituency, but you have 

to go this other school. Well she went over there, and they said, 

no that’s a mix-up. You have to go back to where you presented 

yourself in the first place. And then she was sent back again to 

the other place and then back to where she’d first shown up. 

 

And I happened to be there just sort of thanking some of the 

people that were working on my campaign and scrutineers and 

that sort of individual. I happened to be there, and this woman 

recognized me, this constituent, and she tore a strip off of me, 

Mr. Speaker, because I couldn’t run the election. Members 

know that that’s not the way it works. We select the Chief 

Electoral Officer to run the election, and they are the ones that 

are responsible for all of those details. 

 

You know, there was nothing that I could do, but it bothers me 

to this day that one of my constituents showed up to vote and 

was unable to vote because of a mix-up. Now it has nothing to 

do with photo ID, but you just throw one more issue into the 

electoral process, and it’s just a recipe for mistakes. It’s a recipe 

for disaster. 

 

Photo ID wouldn’t have helped in this case one iota, and it 

didn’t hurt because the end result was this woman, my 

constituent, did not vote in that general election. If she is 

watching, I apologize, though I don’t know what I can 

apologize for. I feel distressed that she was effectively 

disenfranchised during that election. And I thank her for 

making the effort to vote, and I encourage everyone to make the 

effort to vote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I wonder if any of the increased usage, people who are 

increasing the usage at the Regina Food Bank by 20 per cent, I 

wonder if one of those individuals said, you know, sure wish I 

had to use photo ID so I could vote. I wonder if they’re feeling 

more inclusive, if they’re getting the warm feeling from the 

Sask Party government. I wonder how warm they’re feeling 

about their right to vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no question, zero question, that what Bill 

161 is all about is disenfranchising the poorest voters in 



6420 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2010 

Saskatchewan, and I say, shame on the Sask Party government 

for even contemplating such a thing. They need to withdraw 

this notion of photo ID and withdraw it at the earliest 

opportunity. Then we can look at The Election Act because The 

Election Act should be looked at. We should be doing the things 

that we can to make it more inclusive, the very things that the 

government claim to be doing. We should be making it more 

inclusive, but this Act is doing exactly the opposite, exactly the 

opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I talked about the three homeless people that have 

frozen to death in Regina this year. And it’s just . . . It’s a 

tragedy of epic proportions. Homeless people, I think it’s safe 

to say, lack the safety net of family for the most part. I think it’s 

safe to say that they lack an effective circle of friends to help 

out in a time of need. And I can tell you that we should be 

spending a lot more time dealing with homelessness than we 

should with trying to figure out how we can make sure that 

homeless people can’t vote or how we can try to make sure that 

poorest people have difficulty voting, make sure that . . . 

 

The government has come up with a proposal that says that you 

have to have a photo ID to vote. Well you know, we have photo 

ID in our drivers’ licences, but what about the thousands of 

people eligible to vote that don’t drive? What do they do, Mr. 

Speaker? Do they have to go out and pay $25 to get a photo ID?  

 

What about some of the increased numbers of people that are 

using the food bank, that are struggling just to get from 

wherever it is that they call home to the food bank and back 

with a meagre supply of groceries. And we’re often talking not 

three or four or five blocks; we’re often talking 3, 4, and 5 

kilometres, and in many instances further. These people have a 

struggle, Mr. Speaker, to try and figure out how it is that they’re 

going to get some food on the table for their children if they 

have children. And indeed the statistics show that half of the 

users of the food bank of Regina are children. The adults need 

to not have another problem put in their way. They don’t need 

to have to worry about paying for or presenting themselves 

somewhere to get a photo ID, if they knew where that was, if 

they knew where that was. 

 

You know, some of them might present themselves for a photo 

ID, although the logic of why anyone would subject themselves 

to that escapes me. You know, we’re talking about people that 

. . . some of whom have little trust in our system, and frankly 

I’m not sure that there’s a great deal of reason why they should 

have a lot of trust in our system. 

 

The system has not exactly treated them like kings and queens. 

The system has not exactly led them to huge wealth and 

prosperity. It hasn’t led these users of the Regina & District 

Food Bank to grand homes and grand incomes and three weeks 

annual vacation every year, and all of the other things that many 

people in our society have come to expect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve got, in this election Act we have got shades 

of 25 years ago. And I hate even making the comparison 

because it sounds like I’m trying to live in the past. I’m trying 

to learn from the past to help point out so that we don’t have to 

renew the same mistakes that were made 25 years ago. 

Twenty-five years ago civil servants in Saskatchewan felt 

disenfranchised. They were afraid to hold party memberships. 

Certainly in the then opposition party, the New Democratic 

Party, they feared for their jobs. They were refusing in mass to, 

just to a person virtually, to have a lawn sign. And yet the proof 

of the pudding was when the election was called, they 

overwhelmingly and massively supported the New Democratic 

Party of Saskatchewan. And that’s both in 1986 and again in 

1991 when we formed the government. 

 

The fear troubled me. The fear of participating in the electoral 

process troubled me. And it was a very real, a very real fear, 

Mr. Speaker, a very real fear. What you only needed to do was 

spend a little time in your constituency going knocking door to 

door and listening, genuinely connecting with constituents, 

connecting with people. Not everyone will open up. Not 

everyone even likes you or your party, but a surprising, a 

surprising number of my constituents did open up to me and 

would express their hopes. They would express their concerns, 

and I’ve tried to deal with that throughout the years. 

 

Not one of those constituents, Mr. Speaker, thought that we 

needed photo ID in The Election Act. Not one of them. My 

constituents felt that we needed many things in our province, 

but photo ID for an election Act was not one of them. 

 

My constituents asked for integrity, truthfulness, honesty, as 

much transparency as we could do. And they in turn said, we 

want to be able to trust our MLA. We trust that you’ll not 

always say the things that I want you to say but that you will be 

saying things with us in your heart, with the constituents of 

Regina Coronation Park in my case, and of the people of 

Saskatchewan. And I’ve tried to honour those requests that I’ve 

run into every time I’ve gone canvassing. I’ve tried to serve my 

terms like that, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve tried to be as 

straightforward with my constituents as I can. 

 

And I want to contrast that with today. We’re told that, you 

know, the Saskatchewan economy is booming. Well the reality 

is that today’s production of gas and oil is lower than it was 

three years ago when the Sask Party formed government — less 

oil, less gas being pumped out of the ground today than there 

was then. 

 

The reality is Saskatchewan’s gross domestic product is lower 

today than it was three years ago, lower today by every measure 

than it was three years ago.  

 

The reality, Mr. Speaker, is that the debt in Saskatchewan is 

going up. What is the debt going up — $448 million? Member 

for Rosemont? Member for Rosemont? The debt is going up 

$448 million this year . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank 

you. $4.2 billion over the next four years, but $448 million this 

year alone. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if I were a member of the Sask Party 

government, I would want to disenfranchise people that might 

be paying attention to those things. I would want to make sure 

that they didn’t vote. I would want to make sure, if I was a Sask 

Party government member, that Bill 161, The Election Act 

amendment got passed — this amendment particularly, the one 

requiring photo ID. 

 

[15:15] 

 



December 7, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6421 

Mr. Speaker, seniors have worked, typically worked all of their 

lifetime making our province what it is today. I think it’s safe to 

say we’re all grateful for people who are seniors — I’m 

reluctant to say much older than some of us are, but — the 

people who have built this province. And the seniors I can tell 

you are one of the . . . Many seniors are more offended when 

you don’t recognize them by name than many younger people 

are. They expect to be known. 

 

And I know that this is, I know this is absolutely true when it 

comes to rural Saskatchewan. I remember the first vote I made 

in Broderick in 1975. And I showed up at the polling station, 

and we had the assistant clerk introduced me to the others. And 

I hadn’t been in town but for . . . Let me get this right. I’d been 

in town about three months. I moved there from another 

beautiful part of the province, Mr. Speaker. I’d moved there 

from Whitewood. But I remember how shocked I was at being 

recognized because it just, it just shocked me. But I was very 

pleased that they knew my name, and the voting was very easy 

to do and very straightforward. 

 

That’s how you make voting inclusive. They didn’t say, oh, 

show us your driver’s licence. Oh, show us your photo ID, 

worse yet. They said, here’s who you are and here’s how you 

vote. Here’s your ballot, go to it. And I did. And I left there as I 

was . . . Obviously in 1975 we were all much younger then. But 

I left there feeling real good about the electoral process. I felt 

like I had been included. 

 

And you know, I’ve not missed a single ballot subsequent. 

Every time I’ve been eligible to vote, I have voted. I’m talking 

about municipal, provincial, and federal votes. And I feel really 

good about the participation that I’ve been able to engage in so 

far. That’s what we need a lot more of. We need to have the 

participation level up. 

 

I think of students, Mr. Speaker, that are often away from the 

town or city or farm of their upbringing. I’m thinking 

particularly of post-secondary students trying to vote in their 

very first election. We’ve made provisions for how they can 

vote. We have tried, the last time that The Election Act was 

amended, we tried as diligently as we could to be as inclusive as 

we could for those students because we knew, New Democrats 

knew, that if you can get somebody voting for the first time . . . 

I’m not saying vote New Democrat. That’s not what I’m saying 

at all, Mr. Speaker. If you can . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Better if they do. But that’s not, that really isn’t the point of 

what I’m making. 

 

The point I’m making is that we want to have first-time voters 

vote as soon as they’re eligible, and they’re far more likely to 

participate in our democracy each and every election thereafter 

whenever they can. And that’s what we believe in on this side 

of the House. And I know I heard one of my, I heard one of my 

colleagues suggest, on this side, suggest that he has even 

encouraged people to vote for the other party as opposed to not 

voting at all. And frankly, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I find that 

a difficult argument to fight against because at least if you’re 

participating, if a voter is participating, they can learn and can 

make either the same choice if they’re satisfied with that or 

change the choice in a subsequent election. And that’s the 

system that we have. Pay attention to what you ask for because 

you just might get it. 

So, Mr. Speaker, we need to be more inclusive, and I can’t 

think of any way of telling young people, first-time voters, that 

they’re welcome to vote; I can’t think of any way of doing it 

other than making them welcome. Let’s not create unnecessary 

roadblocks, unnecessary hoops, unnecessary problems for 

people who want to vote. Let us make it as seamless and as 

painless as we can. Let us encourage our future taxpayers, many 

of them paying taxes already, but let’s — the future leaders of 

our province — let’s encourage them to vote. Let’s not be so 

blind as to say we need to make ever more rules. 

 

I haven’t heard in this debate, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t heard a 

single cogent argument about how photo ID is going to help. 

Not a single cogent argument. There isn’t a person in this room 

that can tell me how a photo ID is going to enhance the voting 

prospect. 

 

Oh, you can cut people out, Mr. Speaker. That’s what you can 

do. You can cut people out from voting. You can disenfranchise 

people from voting, and that’s what photo ID is all about. 

That’s what the Sask Party Bill 161 is all about. Make no 

mistake. It is solely about disenfranchising the poorest, 

disenfranchising the voiceless, and disenfranchising the people 

that they think, on odds, are less likely to vote Sask Party. 

 

I don’t know if that’s absolutely accurate or not. I don’t know. I 

don’t know. I could speculate on it. I could speculate on it, Mr. 

Speaker, but that would be pointless. I do know, I do know that 

the only reason for Bill 161 is to disenfranchise certain people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve made the points I want to. 

 

I just wanted to . . . Before I close, I want to again go back to 

the minister responsible who’s quoted as saying, “We’re going 

to make sure we continue consulting with the stakeholder 

groups to ensure that we have all the avenues covered off to be 

more inclusive versus exclusive.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I ask the Sask Party government to be in 

fact more inclusive. I ask that you withdraw the photo ID, the 

most offensive part of this election Act. Withdraw that, accept 

an amendment that would negate the requirement to have photo 

ID to vote in Saskatchewan, and then we can talk about The 

Election Act. 

 

I invite them to be inclusive. Put some wheels where the words 

are. Do it. And you have the ability to do that. You can in fact 

make this Bill much more inclusive and a much better Bill for 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I realize that I’ve missed a number of points. One 

is, and I regret having missed it because we had a few years 

back, we had a First Nations ceremony, and we have the First 

Nations addition to the table here in our legislature. Earlier, last 

week, we had a ceremony and we welcomed the Métis sash at 

the table along with the mace. Mr. Speaker, these are 

tremendously important additions to our legislature. 

 

But what it symbolizes for me is not only our heritage in 

Saskatchewan but the hope that together we can in fact create a 

better province for everyone whether . . . regardless of our 

nationality, our background, our religion, our race, whatever. 

We have to be more inclusive. 



6422 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2010 

And Métis and Indian people, many of them will have difficulty 

having photo ID. Many of them will not have a photo ID and 

indeed, indeed, what Bill 161 does is disenfranchise those very 

people. Those very people, some of whom . . . I know we’ve 

honoured First Nations war vets, Métis war vets, as late as 

Remembrance Day. And these are men and women that, quite 

frankly, were good enough to fight for our democracy and yet 

now we say, but you can’t vote. You can risk your life for our 

democracy but you can’t vote. Or some of you may not vote or 

some of your ancestors, some of your offspring and your 

grandchildren will not be able to vote because we demand that 

you have a photo ID. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s just nothing short of shameful that in a 

province that has so much and in a province that has such a rich 

history of electoral success . . . I’m not talking who wins, I’m 

saying our rich history of electoral success is that every four 

years, give or take, we’ve had successful elections. The 

outcome’s always been clear; the people of Saskatchewan have 

always gotten what they’ve voted for. 

 

I say that even notwithstanding the very first election that I 

participated in — Grant Devine’s Conservatives won more 

MLAs and Allan Blakeney’s New Democrats won more votes. 

We actually had more votes than the government of the day, but 

I would argue that that’s kind of the way it works. Every once 

in a while you’ll have a bit of an anomaly and I’m not 

quarrelling with that outcome. I’m saying that the people of 

Saskatchewan deserve to be trusted. The people of 

Saskatchewan deserve to have the ability to vote. The people of 

Saskatchewan need to have their vote counted. They need to be 

allowed to vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Election Act includes a number of changes. I 

know I’ve heard some colleagues suggest that what one of the 

things that we should be moving into is an electronic vote or 

where people can vote online. Frankly, I think that’s worthy of 

looking at. I wouldn’t leap to it personally. I wouldn’t leap to it 

as necessarily the way that we want to proceed, but I’m 

certainly not opposed to it. We should look at online voting as a 

way of being more inclusive. That would be a far better 

measure than what we’re seeing under this where we’re now 

requiring to have a photo ID in Saskatchewan. I’d much rather 

see us look for ways to be inclusive as opposed to exclusive. 

 

And I know that there are problems, Mr. Speaker, with online 

anything. One needs only look at . . . One of the radio stations 

did a poll just last week and, lo and behold, members of the 

governing party’s loyal troops knew that this was happening, 

and members of our troops found out about it only as it was in 

progress. And the poll results showed favour for the 

government. And then I started getting reports of our people 

trying to phone in and the poll being shut down. It was a time 

limited poll. 

 

So I understand that when you’re going to do anything online or 

on the telephone or something, you have to be very crystal clear 

on how you’re going to do it so that it’s fair and so that it’s an 

open and transparent process. 

 

But elections don’t tend to sneak up on us. Certainly we know 

the date of the next general election here, Mr. Speaker. So we 

need then to simply find ways of being inclusive rather than 

exclusive. 

 

[15:30] 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I spoke earlier about my first 

provincial ballot that I cast when I, in 1975, voted in Broderick. 

I was a renter then. I voted for Don Faris, is who I voted for. 

Don Faris was the NDP. We called Don . . . This was in 

response to a heckle. Don Faris we called landslide Faris 

because he won in 1975 by 11 votes and then he won again in 

1978, this time by 13 votes. So some also referred to Don Faris 

as double-digit Don, but that was the history of how that went, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the point I was making about having talked about voting in 

Broderick, Mr. Speaker. I was a renter then. I was a renter. I 

suspect I had a power bill with my name on it and a phone bill 

with my name on it. The details of that escape me. But I know 

that I did not, in 1975, have a photo ID although, in many ways, 

I think I would have preferred the photo ID when I was that age 

than now. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A lot of years ago. 

 

Mr. Trew: — A lot of years ago, the minister says. And it was 

a lot of years ago. It was a lifetime ago. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, with this proposal to introduce photo ID, 

where does that leave renters? Potentially disenfranchised. It 

says that if you have the stability of home ownership or condo 

ownership, you have the stability of location. You’re more 

likely to have a photo ID. But if you’re a renter, you know, 

we’re going to just create one more hoop for you to run 

through. And if you’re one of the 20,000 people that use the 

Regina & District Food Bank, we’re going to make it very 

difficult for you. And if you are even more voiceless than that, 

we’re going to make it almost impossible for you to ever vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say shame. I say shame on that. I say that the 

government can fix this. The government, just all they have to 

do is withdraw this misguided notion calling for photo ID. Just 

withdraw that one incredibly offensive part of The Election Act 

and then we can have a very intelligent discussion around The 

Election Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other reason that we have some question 

around this is the very election Act and the Chief Electoral 

Officer that we had . . . An all-party committee did a 

Canada-wide search and possibly beyond. I’m not certain about 

that, but certainly a national look. Came up with a unanimous 

recommendation as to who the Chief Electoral Officer should 

be in Saskatchewan, only to have the government pull the rug 

on that and prevented Mr. Wilkie from being appointed as the 

Chief Electoral Officer of Saskatchewan. 

 

So we have some doubt, Mr. Speaker, around the government’s 

motives when it comes to elections. We have some doubt as to 

their desire and willingness to have a more open, inclusive 

electoral process. We have some doubt about the government’s 

commitment to democracy. We have some doubt where the 

very commitment that they need to have seems to be missing. 

The very commitment that says in a democracy that the 

majority will have its say and the minority will have its way so 



December 7, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6423 

that everyone is heard. 

 

And that was in fact the situation with respect to the Chief 

Electoral Officer. Everyone was heard. A recommendation went 

unanimously and the government said no. 

 

So I think people would have little difficulty understanding our 

consternation, our discomfort on this side of the legislature 

when the government then comes up with a proposal that quite 

clearly disenfranchises a significant portion of Saskatchewan 

people. It makes it difficult for many seniors to vote. 

 

I think of my recently passed-on mother-in-law who did not 

drive, did not drive; had a learner’s licence for part of her adult 

life, but at one point she realized that she did not belong behind 

the wheel of any moving vehicle. She belonged as a passenger 

and not as the driver. So why would she then continue to buy a 

learner’s licence? Why would she continue to worry about that? 

So I don’t think she had photo ID, and yet I know she voted in 

every election. She saw that as an important responsibility and 

an important duty. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why would we disenfranchise these seniors? Why 

would the government want to disenfranchise renters? I’ve 

already pointed out, renting renters tend not to have a photo ID 

necessarily with their current address attached to it. You know, 

these things take a bit of time. 

 

What about people who move six weeks before an election and 

haven’t got their new ID caught up? This can happen to any of 

us people who simply are in the process of moving, and the 

timing of that move is not great. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Bill 161 is full of . . . It’s a Bill respecting The 

Election Amendment Act. It’s a Bill that has some problems for 

us. And it’s a Bill that I genuinely — and I mean this — I 

genuinely invite the Sask Party government to withdraw the 

requirement that there be photo ID. 

 

The minister has claimed they’re talking, they’re consulting 

with the various groups. Well there isn’t a group or an 

individual that said photo ID is going to somehow enhance the 

voter’s ability to vote. There’s not one. I defy, I defy you, 

Minister, I defy you to come up with one group or one 

individual that has advised you, sir, that photo ID, that photo ID 

is going to enhance, enhance people’s ability to vote. That . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . No. Listen, listen carefully. There is 

not one individual nor one group that has said, photo ID will 

enhance the voter’s ability to vote, will make it easier for them 

to vote. You may have, you may have someone that said, we 

can cut some people out or we can make it difficult for a certain 

segment of our population to vote. But nobody has 

straight-faced recommended that photo ID is going to make it 

easier to vote. 

 

So I’m urging, withdraw that most offensive part of this 

election Act amendment, and you will see us co-operating in a 

very real way in getting this Bill to committee and seeing that it 

proceeds so that, if there are good things in the Bill, it can 

happen. 

 

The Bill . . . It’d be nice to have it scrutinized in committee. It 

would be nice to be able to ask the questions where we can get 

the answers directly back, Mr. Speaker. But as it stands, there is 

just no way that we on this side can support any wrong-headed 

notion that demands that electors have to have photo ID. It 

disenfranchises a significant part of our population. If it 

disenfranchises one person, that’s one too many in a 

democracy. And it clearly is going to disenfranchise many, 

many, many one persons. I predict it will be thousands of 

people that this Bill would disenfranchise from voting. And I 

say, shame to that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to give the government time to consider this 

request to withdraw that offensive part, that photo ID part, I’m 

going to move that adjournment of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 161. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 162 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Hickie that Bill No. 162 — The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

privilege to weigh in on debate here and in discussion in the 

Assembly here today on Bill No. 162, An Act to amend The 

Local Government Election Act and to make consequential 

amendments to other Acts, Mr. Speaker. And we have the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs in the Assembly here today and 

we appreciate that, Mr. Speaker, because we need to bend his 

ear and allow him to recognize the error that has occurred with 

this Bill being brought forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’m going to attach in many ways to the statements of the 

fine words from the member from Regina Coronation Park, Mr. 

Speaker, who has so eloquently and so passionately, Mr. 

Speaker, spoken about the disenfranchisement of the many, Mr. 

Speaker, in voting and being part of their democratic democracy 

here, Mr. Speaker. And it’s something that we’re concerned 

about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when we’re looking at 162, there are some other provisions 

that we will speak to, and we’ll speak specifically to some of 

those. There’s one aspect of the Bill that we’re able to likely 

support, Mr. Speaker, with some further questions. But there’s 

the crux of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is the piece that provides a 

challenge to so many, Mr. Speaker, to exercise their franchise, 

their democratic right, Mr. Speaker, and prevents them from 

being able to vote in the next election and subsequent elections, 

Mr. Speaker, and that’s a concern. And now they’re doing this 

of course at the municipal level, as well at the provincial level 

which allows discussion at this point in time at both of those 

levels. 

 



6424 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2010 

We see a government here right now, the Sask Party 

government, that has run roughshod over democratic processes 

in short order, Mr. Speaker. We see them intervene on the 

hiring process of an independent officer, the Chief Electoral 

Officer of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we see the 

long-standing court case go on, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 

millions of money that it’s alleged that this party holds on to, 

Mr. Speaker, that as suggested are rightfully the Progressive 

Conservatives’ dollars, Mr. Speaker — an example again of a 

government, if allegations are correct, that are fundamentally 

intervening in our democratic process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so we look at this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and we are very 

concerned with the implications for Saskatchewan people, the 

ramifications for the many that lose their franchise through such 

a decision, Mr. Speaker. And we see it as nothing more than a 

politically shrewd attack on individuals, Mr. Speaker, who have 

in many ways been attacked by this government. 

 

Because in a relatively short few years, Mr. Speaker, with 

reckless government and mismanagement, but as well 

misplaced priorities, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this Sask Party 

government fail so many, Mr. Speaker, across Saskatchewan; so 

many that in fact it would appear they’re now bringing forward 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, to prevent and limit those very 

individuals who may have been impacted and affected by the 

poor decisions of this government from exercising their 

franchise, Mr. Speaker. And we see that as absolutely 

inappropriate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look at the many that this government has failed, Mr. 

Speaker, we need not look very far, Mr. Speaker, in the day that 

we have here today where the food banks of Saskatchewan, the 

Regina Food Bank, and our universities have partnered, Mr. 

Speaker, to produce a report and a study — an even-handed 

study — of the circumstances within Saskatchewan as it relates 

to cost of living, Mr. Speaker. And what we see is a massive 

erosion, Mr. Speaker, of quality of life for so many, Mr. 

Speaker, across our province. We see massive increases to food, 

to rent, to utilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we’re hearing from those individuals on a daily basis as to 

how limiting and how challenging this is for so many, Mr. 

Speaker. And this isn’t just students. Of course it’s families, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s seniors across this province who have worked 

so hard to build the fine province that we should continue to be 

good stewards of, Mr. Speaker, and leave in better shape than 

. . . when we’re so privileged to be making decisions that have a 

profound impact on our future. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So we see this as a shrewd move to disenfranchise, Mr. 

Speaker, a mean-spirited move, Mr. Speaker, to disenfranchise 

many. We see it as anti-democratic, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

something that Saskatchewan people are hugely concerned with 

and speaking out about, Mr. Speaker, something that 

Saskatchewan people are concerned that their government is 

limiting the accountability that’s exercised through an election, 

Mr. Speaker, at any level, Mr. Speaker, whether that’s 

provincial or municipal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Many seniors across this province are sharing with us that 

they’re feeling betrayed on so many aspects, Mr. Speaker, in 

health care, Mr. Speaker, on the side of cost of living. And we 

see this as a shrewd move to potentially eliminate so many 

seniors who have built our province, Mr. Speaker, raised their 

families, contributed to our province both economically and 

socially, Mr. Speaker. And now they’re preventing those 

individuals from coming out and voting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know this government governs by polls, Mr. Speaker. 

They recognize who doesn’t support them, Mr. Speaker. And 

certainly they’d be recognizing that so many, Mr. Speaker, that 

are impacted by their mismanagement and misplaced priorities 

are not going to be supporting them, and then their move is to 

take away their democratic right, to take away their democratic 

franchise, Mr. Speaker. We think it’s a deplorable act of this 

government. We believe the objectives and intention are 

deplorable, and we see the result would be a shame, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So it’s an interesting time. We know that, we know that this 

comes from the list of broken promises from this government. 

And they’re hearing from so many who are frustrated and 

outraged and protesting, whether it’s outside of their offices or 

at their local political events, Mr. Speaker, and having their 

voice heard. And then what we see is a government that’s going 

to try to shut down those individuals from exercising their 

franchise, from voting in elections, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well we’re not going to tolerate this being passed without one 

heck of a fight, Mr. Speaker, because it relates to our very 

health of our democracy, Mr. Speaker, and something that 

we’re going to make sure we’re going to do our part to protect, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we think about the photo ID piece, there’s so many 

individuals that don’t have a driver’s ID, Mr. Speaker, young 

and old, Mr. Speaker. We can talk about so many seniors that 

may no longer have a driver’s licence. For this government to 

now suggest that that’s somehow required for them to vote is 

irresponsible and simply can’t be trusted at face value, Mr. 

Speaker. We recognize the true intentions. It’s shrewd, it’s 

specific, and it’s to keep individuals who are marginalized from 

. . . in many cases, lower socio-economics, but not specifically, 

Mr. Speaker, because this is a challenge that’s going to affect 

individuals with mobility as well and right across the piece, Mr. 

Speaker, and preventing them from coming out to the polls. 

 

You can hear, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite start to get a 

little noisier as we speak here, Mr. Speaker. They likely feel the 

pressure, Mr. Speaker, because if a fraction of the individuals 

who are phoning our offices on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker, from 

their constituencies, Mr. Speaker, were phoning theirs as well, 

then it would put a lot of pressure and a lot of heat on these 

individuals. 

 

What we’re concerned is that they’ve been able to very 

specifically identify who they have hurt, Mr. Speaker, who they 

don’t care about within our society, Mr. Speaker, and they’re 

going to make sure that those individuals aren’t the individuals 

who are coming out to vote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We can look at . . . Basically it goes across the piece, all walks 

of life, Mr. Speaker. We see students that are concerned with 



December 7, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6425 

the rising costs of tuition, Mr. Speaker, their rent and utilities. 

The housing side of the equation as it relates to students is 

incredibly onerous, Mr. Speaker, and increasing in 

disproportional ways, Mr. Speaker, burdening this generation 

with more debt than any generation before it, Mr. Speaker, 

challenging, creating huge challenge to enter into home 

ownership, Mr. Speaker, and into positions to really grow their, 

grow their families and live their lives in Saskatchewan in the 

manner that they should, Mr. Speaker. We should be able to be 

enhancing the quality of life in Saskatchewan, not driving it 

backwards and then disenfranchising those individuals from 

voting, Mr. Speaker. And we need to recognize that. 

 

So we see across the piece, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s students, 

Mr. Speaker, whether it’s the poor, whether it’s working 

families, whether it’s seniors, we see so many individuals that 

have been impacted negatively by this government, very 

directly by this government and certainly fully contemplated, 

Mr. Speaker. A Saskatchewan that in many ways doesn’t 

include progress for all, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t reflect the needs 

and challenges for seniors within this province. 

 

We talked about students, and we talked about debt load, Mr. 

Speaker. The other aspect that we should be talking about is the 

barriers to so many students, Mr. Speaker, that are now in place 

that are preventing so many from even going forward and 

having the opportunity to study, to pursue opportunities from an 

educational perspective, and to then subsequently from that to 

contribute to our province, Mr. Speaker. And that’s how it 

works — contribute to us economically, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we need to make sure that those are the very individuals 

that are allowed to exercise their franchise, Mr. Speaker. And in 

fact what we should be doing with those individuals is we 

should be handing them new roles and taking a leadership role 

within our democratic process, Mr. Speaker, and shaping our 

society, Mr. Speaker, and shaping the bright future that should 

be our Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we shouldn’t be 

eliminating their voices, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We should be looking at new ways to harness the energies and 

the education and the abilities and the perspectives of our 

young, youngest within our province, Mr. Speaker, not 

disenfranchising them and putting in mechanisms that are going 

to prevent them from showing up at the polling station, Mr. 

Speaker, in your constituency or mine, to cast their ballot. 

 

And when I talk about disenfranchising somebody from a vote, 

I don’t care who somebody votes for in the sense of protecting 

democracy, Mr. Speaker. The voters need to be able to make 

that decision. That’s their decision to make. But to very 

specifically go after very select groups that this government has 

hammered in their short term in office, Mr. Speaker, and then 

prevent them from showing up at the polls at your polling 

stations, Mr. Speaker, or mine, is inappropriate and it’s 

deplorable.  

 

When we look at the discussion as far as protecting democracy, 

and certainly not far off from a government that has, as I’ve 

said, run roughshod, Mr. Speaker, over democracy every chance 

that it appears to be given, whether that’s intervening in the 

hiring of a Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. Speaker, whether that’s 

the worrisome allegations that relate to that Premier and that 

party sitting on millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, of the former 

Progressive Conservatives, Mr. Speaker. And as the allegations 

lay it out, if those are the case, Mr. Speaker, a party that in fact 

is preventing — and those individuals that are named in that 

lawsuit — preventing the health and well-being of our 

democracy here in Saskatchewan, preventing a party from being 

able to function, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we see it on so many fronts, and now we see them going 

after the very individual voters. And, Mr. Speaker, what we 

believe is that democracy . . . And what we need to be looking 

at is ways to make sure that we’re healthier. We need to see 

how we can improve voter turnout, how we can be exercising 

and utilizing new technologies, Mr. Speaker, and looking for 

best practice in jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, that allow more 

individuals to vote. 

 

We need to look at questions of mobility, Mr. Speaker, 

challenges of socio-economic circumstance, Mr. Speaker, 

challenges that relate to seniors, Mr. Speaker. And we need to 

make sure that we’re in fact enhancing their opportunity to 

participate by voting, exercise their franchise, Mr. Speaker, and 

take the leadership role, Mr. Speaker, that they always have, 

Mr. Speaker, in this province. And we don’t see that under this 

Bill. 

 

So we see a shrewd act of this Premier, Mr. Speaker, trying to 

prevent many for whom he’s failed from preventing in the next 

election. And I’ve gone through the list, whether that’s renters 

or seniors or young families, Mr. Speaker, working people. And 

the list goes on. 

 

We talk about the hunters and fishers, Mr. Speaker, that have 

been disgraced by this government as it relates to the sell-off of 

habitat lands, Mr. Speaker, and the 30,000 Wildlife Federation 

members across this province, Mr. Speaker; the fact that a new 

minister was brought in to this portfolio and has done nothing, 

Mr. Speaker, to address this circumstance and correct this 

circumstance, Mr. Speaker. Why a sell-off of lands potentially 

at over 3 million acres, Mr. Speaker, potentially at 3 million 

acres, Mr. Speaker? Removing the debate and discussion from 

this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and simply now on the whim of 

that minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we see a new Minister of Environment, and we see no 

action on that front, Mr. Speaker. And I know so many hunters, 

fishers throughout his constituency, Mr. Speaker, who were 

expecting more from the new minister, Mr. Speaker. And yet 

now we see this government, this government, Mr. Speaker, 

moving forward with a legislation that in fact is going to 

disenfranchise many for whom they failed, which include First 

Nations and Métis people, Mr. Speaker, on that same very piece 

of legislation and on so many other pieces of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we see a circumstance here in our province under this Sask 

Party Premier and government, Mr. Speaker, that seems more 

intent on governing by polls, on running roughshod over 

democracy to their shrewd political benefit than serving the 

public for whom they’re accountable to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this is of huge concern to Saskatchewan people. And I 

know it causes huge concern for the many members on that side 



6426 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2010 

of the Assembly who are getting call after call into their offices 

as it relates to the failures in the health care, the broken 

promises across the piece, the pressures as it relates to raising a 

family, Mr. Speaker, and the many pressures in affordability. 

 

I hear a couple of the members shout out that they don’t receive 

many phone calls. But of course what we know, Mr. Speaker, is 

that our offices field call after call, Mr. Speaker, in many cases 

from their constituents, from their constituents. And I think it’s 

fair to say an increase in calls that’s probably representative of 

the same increase in social assistance numbers, Mr. Speaker, 

that we see under this government — massive increases to those 

individuals reliant on government that are on social assistance, 

Mr. Speaker, that have challenges to the quality of their life, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And of course this disconnects, Mr. Speaker, from the cheery 

spin that this Premier spends millions on, Mr. Speaker. There’s 

a real disconnect on fronts like that or disconnects when we talk 

about . . . This probably connects to when we see, I believe, is 

that almost 10,000 increase for the Regina Food Bank here this 

year, the food bank usage up by the thousands across this 

province, Mr. Speaker, and the pressures that that . . . the 

pressures, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan families are feeling 

as a result of these failed policies, misplaced priorities of this 

Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what does this Premier do, Mr. Speaker? Well he does some 

polling, and he recognizes that in some very specific groups — 

seniors, young families, young individuals, those living on the 

margins, those trying to find work, Mr. Speaker, those on social 

assistance — that in fact they are not going to be voting for 

him, Mr. Speaker. And so what does this Premier do? Well he 

eliminates the opportunity for them to exercise their franchise, 

once again intervening in our democratic process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’re concerned by this, Mr. Speaker. And we see that it’s 

going to be harder for many to cast their ballot, exercise their 

franchise under the legislation as proposed here, Mr. Speaker, a 

legislation that we see as not only politically shrewd but 

mean-spirited and not in the best interests of Saskatchewan 

people because it’s not in the best interest of democracy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Because it’s fine for us to have a debate in this Assembly and 

for them to lay forward their platform and for us to lay forward 

ours. And if it’s going to be as simple as the Premier saying 

everything’s great in Saskatchewan and running expensive ads 

to do that, while we’ll stand up on the side of making sure that 

our economy’s sound and healthy, Mr. Speaker, making sure 

that we have progress for the many, Mr. Speaker, making sure 

that the social well-being of Saskatchewan people is being 

progressed, making sure that quality of life is something that’s 

improving, not deteriorating. 

 

Making sure that students are finding opportunities and as 

accessible as they can be, Mr. Speaker, to pursue further 

education and contribute subsequently to our fine economy and 

to build our fine province, Mr. Speaker. To make sure that 

seniors live with the health care system that they deserve, Mr. 

Speaker, and to make sure that they’re protected from an 

income security side of the equation and not put in a situation, 

Mr. Speaker, like so many are where they can’t make ends meet 

and they’re making decisions at the grocery store, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s something that is hard to see. 

 

And it’s in rural Saskatchewan, and it’s in other circumstances 

across our urban environments. So if we’re going to stand up 

and make sure that we’re representing those individuals, I’ll 

take that debate any day of the week, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

But the sad state of affairs is that this Premier’s trying to shift 

the political landscape, trying to shift the . . . And it’s not even 

the political landscape, Mr. Speaker. He’s trying to shift our 

democratic landscape to make it less democratic, Mr. Speaker, 

and to actually prevent so many that he’s harmed in his few 

short years, Mr. Speaker, from coming out and having their say, 

from coming out and saying no, that’s not right, Mr. Premier, 

when you went and sold off all those habitat lands. No, that’s 

not right, Mr. Speaker, that you can rack up the costs of rent on 

individuals and harm families the way that you are. 

 

The many, Mr. Speaker, that might say, Mr. Premier, it’s not 

fair for you to be spending millions telling me how cheery 

Saskatchewan is when I’m making decisions as it relates to the 

food my children are going to eat at home. And that’s the kind 

of election that it will be for so many, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And of course there’s another side of the discussion in 

Saskatchewan that we’re always proud to also engage in and be 

proud of, Mr. Speaker. And we’re always excited to talk about 

making sure that the economic record is one of pride, Mr. 

Speaker, making sure that Saskatchewan people are served well, 

something that we’re simply not seeing under this reckless 

Premier, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the list of individuals who have been failed by this Premier 

is long. And there’s many individuals that certainly wouldn’t be 

casting their vote for him and his party, Mr. Speaker. But we 

believe that they have the right — whoever they vote for, them 

or us or whoever — to show up at the polls and to make that as 

accessible as we can, Mr. Speaker. And that’s our responsibility 

to make sure that the health of our democracy’s protected 

because we simply believe, Mr. Speaker, we’re at our best when 

all are participating in the choosing of governments, in the 

choosing of the subsequent laws and platforms, Mr. Speaker. 

And to drive us backwards as a jurisdiction and to remove our 

democracy, Mr. Speaker, is something that we see as hugely 

shameful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what I’d like to say at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, there’s 

some other provisions of this Bill that we certainly can lend 

some support to. But it’s really clouded when we have the 

whole crux of this Bill is to eliminate many, Mr. Speaker, from 

voting — seniors, young people, those living on the . . . 

[inaudible] . . . right across Saskatchewan — from voting in the 

next election, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to stand up and make 

sure that they can be served. 

 

Certainly as it relates to some of the term limits that are being 

proposed, Mr. Speaker, there’s possibly some merit in this and 

something that we can likely support. But we need to make sure 

on those fronts is that the consultation has occurred, unlike 

when the habitat lands were sold off and the minister pretended 



December 7, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6427 

that she had consulted with First Nations and Métis and with 

hunters and fishers and with environmentalists, Mr. Speaker, 

and different groups across Saskatchewan, landowners, Mr. 

Speaker. We need to make sure that that consultation has gone 

on in that front. Because we know at one point in time, there 

was some opposition that this government expressed to moving 

to four-year limits, Mr. Speaker. We need to understand fully 

what that opposition was, how this legislation has addressed 

that opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But all of these are sort of secondary to the main debate that 

needs to occur on Bill 162, Mr. Speaker, and that is that we 

have a government that’s again running roughshod over 

democracy, that’s removing democracy from Saskatchewan, 

that’s taking away the democratic right and the franchise of so 

many across this province, and doing it for shrewd political 

benefit, Mr. Speaker, and certainly not in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people. And we’ll stand opposed to that. We’ll 

continue to stand up for democracy, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 

certain in doing so, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan’s better off 

when all Saskatchewan people have a say in how it’s governed. 

 

At this point in time, Mr. Speaker, with many questions on this 

Bill and with many, many, many members that want to speak to 

this Bill with the amount of opposition that we hear from across 

this province, I will adjourn debate on Bill No. 162, Mr. 

Speaker, and allow another person to speak. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 162. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 159 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 159 — The 

University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to speak about Bill No. 159, An Act to amend The 

University of Regina Act. 

 

The reasons for this particular Bill have been set out by the 

minister and by various comments from the president of the 

University of Regina, Dr. Vianne Timmons. But I think her 

simple quote says it all. She says, “The University of Regina 

continually strives to increase our administrative efficiency and 

enhance our productivity as outlined in our strategic plan, 

mâmawohkamâtowin: Our Work, Our People, Our 

Communities.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the purpose of the University of Regina, as 

stated in their plan, is that they are intended to “. . . position the 

University of Regina at the centre of this new Saskatchewan, 

rooted in and responding to the needs and aspirations of our 

students, our people and our communities and reaching out to 

the world around us.” And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they then set 

out what their goals are, their vision, their mission, values, quite 

a number of points. 

 

But on page 6 of this University of Regina strategic plan from 

July 2009, they talk about a goal of increasing our 

administrative efficiency and enhancing productivity. And it 

talks about what a complex organization a middle-sized 

university like the University of Regina is and how it has many, 

many reporting and audit requirements as well as all of the 

other rules and things that are in place. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this particular legislation that we have here, 

this Bill 159 appears to be trying to put The University of 

Regina Act in a similar place as was done previously with The 

University of Saskatchewan Act, especially as it relates to the 

chancellor of the university, the issue of the visitor, and the 

senate. 

 

And I think it’s important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to reflect 

somewhat on the history of these types of institutions that are 

located within universities and why, at this stage early in the 

21st century, there are some requirements that require change 

and also in that process to identify where there may be some 

questions that are asked as this particular Bill is moved forward. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, universities are old institutions in the 

Western world. Many of them were established in the Middle 

Ages, the 12th, 13th, 14th century. And in many ways, the 

structure of the universities was created at that time, quite often 

coming out of the medieval church organization. And so what 

happened is that in many places the universities developed 

structures of control and of influence and decision making that 

were layer on layer. And so you end up with some of the most 

complex decision-making structures in our community are those 

decision-making structures within the university. 

 

What we have here is an attempt, I think, working with all of 

the various people involved to make sure that this structure 

continues to follow some of the traditions that are there. But it 

also recognizes that as the numbers of university graduates in 

the community increase, as the diverse places that these people 

go and where they work and how they serve not just in 

Saskatchewan but right around the world, as all of these things 

happen, that there needs to be some changes around how the 

legislation is written. 

 

So let’s take a look at the Bill and the changes that are there. If 

we follow the short title . . . And if people want to follow along, 

they can go on to the legislative website and look up Bill 159 

and read some of these particular sections as they proceed. 

 

But one of the first things that happens in this legislation is that 

the section 9 of the existing provision respecting the visitor is 

repealed. Now the visitor is an old term that we don’t use very 

much any more. And in fact when you read the information 

provided from the University of Regina, they in fact have never 

used the visitor since it’s been the University of Regina. 

 

But the visitor is effectively a judge who is outside of the whole 

structure who can make decisions around disputes within the 

university. And under the present structure at the university and 



6428 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2010 

what was formerly at the University of Saskatchewan, that 

visitor was the Lieutenant Governor. What happened, though, 

any time an issue arose that was supposed to go to the visitor, 

Lieutenant Governor had the ability to refer it, and they 

immediately referred it to a court and a judge of the Court of 

Queen’s Bench. 

 

And so effectively what this Bill does is eliminate the term 

visitor, the concept of visitor, and says that if there are disputes 

they will go not through the Lieutenant Governor as visitor, but 

they’ll go directly to a judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench. 

 

Now for lovers of old institutional methods of resolving 

disputes, it’s a bit sad to lose the term, visitor, and the position 

of visitor. But in all practicality it doesn’t make any change for 

the people who are involved in disputes. The disputes will be 

resolved the same way. So that’s the first change. 

 

The second change relates to the number of people who are 

required to sign to have a special meeting of convocation. Now 

convocation is all the graduates of the University of Regina, and 

I think I saw that the number is somewhere around 56,000 

people. And right now if 25 of those graduates signed a petition 

effectively — we’re used to that term here in this legislature — 

they could force the calling by the chancellor of a special 

meeting. This legislation is going to double that number to 50. 

Now I’m sure it’s still quite a small number compared to the 

56,000 people who have convocated at the University of 

Regina, but it’s obviously setting out the sense that if this is 

going to happen, it needs to have a larger group of people than 

is presently there under the rules. So that’s a second provision. 

 

The next provision relates to the chancellor, and it effectively 

sets out how the chancellor should be selected. And this is one 

of the areas where there has been some discussion about the 

process. It was traditional that, and under the legislation as it 

sits right now, that the chancellor would be selected by 

convocation. What that meant was there had to be a mailing to 

all of these people that they could locate who had ever been 

graduates of the University of Regina. And the estimate is that 

this mailing alone just to send out the ballots would cost about 

$50,000 each time a chancellor was selected. 

 

The proposal in this legislation is to have that job done by the 

senate which is a group of just around 100 people and reflects 

. . . It’s made up of representatives of various groups that are 

within the university and within the community. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this proposal appears to make sense in the 

sense that it will still get voices from many different angles and 

different spots within the university. What it does lose though, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this ability to keep all of the graduates, 

all of the people who convocated, informed of what’s 

happening at the university. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Now I think when this legislation was created about 35, 36 

years ago and it was built on the University of Saskatchewan 

legislation, there wasn’t the same emphasis on keeping track of 

alumni through an alumni relations type of group that now 

exists at the University of Regina. And so one way for the 

university to do that was to make sure that the convocation list 

was as up-to-date as possible, because the Act required that 

people would have to be notified when there was a change in 

chancellor. And I think, I’m not exactly sure, but I think the 

term of the chancellor’s election was five years, and so that 

meant for sure that you ended up having to contact everybody 

who had convocated at the university every five years. 

 

Now the proposal that’s in this legislation I think is reasonable, 

and it clearly eliminates the forced spending of money to mail 

out the ballot. Now I think what we’ll see is that kind of contact 

being replaced by the alumni magazine, by alumni requests, by 

things like that, but it won’t have the same necessity of doing it 

in the process of electing a chancellor. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there may be some people who aren’t totally 

at ease with this, but practically it seems to make sense. And so 

we have a whole number of the sections in this legislation that 

relate to this adjustment to how the chancellor is selected and 

dealing with this list of all people who have convocated. 

 

Now another area in the legislation relates to the senate and 

how members of senate are selected. A certain number are 

selected as representatives of all the graduates in a particular 

district in Saskatchewan, and the changes will make it such that 

those people who select that person are the graduates located in 

that district as opposed to graduates at large or graduates 

throughout all of the possible electoral areas, and so that 

requires that the legislation be changed to reflect that. 

 

Once again it’s an administrative efficiency that seems to make 

sense. The goal clearly is to have as much representation as 

possible from those people who are interested in being involved 

in university governance after they’ve graduated, but at the 

same time not being unduly expensive and difficult for the 

university itself to administer. 

 

Another section relates to how the senate itself operates, and 

effectively the rules are going to be kept in the senate bylaws as 

opposed to the legislation. This will allow for the ability to 

make amendments where that’s required, through the senate, as 

opposed to coming back to the legislature for those kinds of 

procedural amendments. That’s very similar to much of the 

corporate legislation that we do in this legislature, and that also 

seems to make sense. 

 

So when you end up with all of these different pieces, what you 

have is 21st century legislation that attempts to still capture the 

whole history of the university with all of the complex centres 

of power, if I can put it that way, that operate at the university, 

but doing it in a way that is more efficient in cost and also in a 

more practical way. 

 

So the purpose obviously of doing all this is to make sure that 

the university is strong and can fulfill its purpose of providing 

careful teaching of students, that it’s providing activities for 

students, so that it can provide research for the whole 

community, for the country. And any time any of this kind of 

legislation comes forward, we have to look at it very carefully 

to make sure that we aren’t disrupting the balances that have 

developed over many years. 

 

I know that there have been some questions raised, but I also 

know that there’s a fair consensus on moving forward with the 

things that I’ve just described. But I also know that there are 



December 7, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6429 

areas where we are going to continue to have to ask some 

questions because it may be that there are one or two of the 

suggested solutions that don’t quite match what everybody 

thought was going to happen. 

 

And so I know that I may well have another chance to speak at 

this at another time. But I know some of my colleagues will 

want to speak about this after we’ve had some further 

conversations with people both at the university, but also those 

who are members of convocations. So at this point, I will 

adjourn the debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 159, The University of 

Regina Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 160 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 160 — The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wanted 

to put my comments on the record with regard to the 

amendments that are being proposed by the Sask Party 

government to the Human Rights Code. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that there are a number of 

concerns that have arisen as a result of the Bill that was 

introduced into the legislature and the comments that were 

made by the minister. Mr. Speaker, at present the Human Rights 

Tribunal system is an independent, quasi-judicial provincial 

body that adjudicates human rights complaints under the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. The tribunal consists of a 

Chair and there are appointed members. Mr. Speaker, the 

Human Rights Commission, when they believe that there’s 

enough evidence that a right may have been violated under the 

legislation, has the ability to refer that complaint to the Human 

Rights Tribunal to be adjudicated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the government is proposing to do is to 

eliminate human right tribunals in the province of 

Saskatchewan and replace them with a court system. What 

would in essence happen is that if a complaint were launched, if 

the commission determined that there was enough grounds to 

proceed with the complaint, it would be sent off to a Court of 

Queen’s Bench judge to make a ruling. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it appears from the legislation that we will 

be the only province in Canada that is getting rid of the tribunal 

system. I understand from speaking to experts in the whole area 

of human rights that Quebec, I believe it was, at one stage had 

the process that the government is proposing here in this 

legislation. They experimented with the notion of getting rid of 

the tribunals and going to the courts, and then they determined 

that this was not an appropriate way to deal with human rights 

complaints and they abandoned that notion some time ago. At 

the end of the day, the Quebec government determined that 

courts were not an appropriate place for human rights inquiries. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that there are people 

who are experts in the human rights area that are concerned 

with what the government is proposing with the amendments to 

this particular piece of legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I noted with some care that the minister indicated 

that in the last few years there have been a reduction in the 

number of cases that are going before a tribunal. And in fact I 

believe in this fiscal year there have only been five, if I recall 

from the minister’s comments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that people who are experts in the human 

rights field believe that this notion of scrapping a Human Rights 

Tribunal along with the rules — and I understand that they’re 

more informal rules of evidence in favour of a Court of Queen’s 

Bench — will basically create some difficulties for 

complainants who may not be as sophisticated as some people 

in the province of Saskatchewan, and that this will become a 

more onerous process for those complainants. And the rules 

will be quite different than the rules that are presently before a 

Human Rights Tribunal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Presently in the province, discrimination complaints can be 

based upon race, colour, age, sex, sexual orientation, physical 

or mental disability, religion, marital status, family status, place 

of origin, or ancestry. And I understand that the Human Rights 

Code covers a number of contexts for those complaints because 

discrimination may be in a variety of ways. It may appear when 

it comes to tenancy or employment, employment 

advertisements, publications, public services and facilities, 

purchase of property, and discrimination by unions or 

associations. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that the minister in his remarks thinks 

that this is groundbreaking, that we’re about to launch into a 

groundbreaking way of dealing with human rights complaints in 

the province of Saskatchewan. But I note that the 

groundbreaker, Quebec, scrapped their groundbreaking decision 

to go to the courts some years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other area when you review the legislation that 

is concerning is that the government is proposing that 

complaints will go to mediation. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 

mediation works when you have two equal parties in a 

mediation process. But when you don’t have equal parties in 

terms of their power, place in society, mediation may not be as 

substantive, as useful as mediation would be for two parties that 

are fundamentally equal when it comes to their status or ability 

to have these kinds of complaints negotiated. So I’m not 

convinced at the moment, and I think we’ll have to hear more 

from the government that mediation is necessarily going to be 

what the government is suggesting it might be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it appears as though the Human Rights 

Commission wants to get into a lot of education, and that’s 

important. Education’s important, but the reality is that there are 

still grounds for discrimination in the province of 



6430 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2010 

Saskatchewan, and discrimination is moving in terms of how 

and why people are discriminated against. And while education 

is important, there will always be a need to be able to adjudicate 

these kinds of matters. And that’s why when you think about 

this province, we were the first province in the country to have 

a bill of rights. It was under a Saskatchewan Prime Minister that 

Canada introduced a bill of rights. And when you think about 

the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, we are a country in the 

globe that has a pretty substantive human rights record. 

 

And I would not want to see a piece of legislation that would 

water down our ability to have human rights that have been in 

this province for decades come to a point where people would 

be reluctant to go to the commission because they would have 

to go before a Court of Queen’s Bench judge because the 

tribunal system wasn’t there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that — and the argument has 

been made — that the tribunal system is time-consuming and 

takes some time. If the government wanted to deal with that 

issue . . . And the argument goes that lawyers that are appointed 

to adjudicate these kinds of complaints are busy people; they 

have private law practices. But if the government wanted to, 

they could appoint a group of lawyers who would basically be 

tasked with dealing with human rights adjudication, if they 

wanted to do that. I’m not convinced that a Court of Queen’s 

Bench judge will be any more timely when it comes to 

adjudicating these kinds of matters, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Certainly that is one change that I could see myself being open 

to: an appointment of a group of lawyers who could adjudicate 

these matters in a more timely manner, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. And I’ve been able to look at some 

of the comments that have been made on various blogs in the 

province about the amendments that the government is 

suggesting in this Bill. And it’s worrisome to see some of those 

comments in support of amendments to the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Commission or The Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code. 

 

Because many of the speakers in these blogs, if they had their 

way, there would not be a Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission whatsoever because they believe that it takes away 

from their ability to engage in what they call free speech. But 

we all know that, you know, what may be considered one 

person’s version of free speech may be discrimination against 

an individual, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the other thing that is worrisome is that, 

with this particular piece of legislation, is that we had a Human 

Rights Tribunal in 2009 that ruled that marriage commissioners 

were obliged to uphold the law and perform their duties to 

provide civil marriages to all Saskatchewan citizens, regardless 

of their personal beliefs. And, Mr. Speaker, what I’m talking 

about is marriage commissioners who are appointed under a 

piece of legislation in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And these marriage commissioners felt that they should not, 

because of their own set of personal beliefs, should not have to 

marry same-sex couples, Mr. Speaker. And we know what the 

government’s response to that tribunal ruling was. And the 

government’s response was to refer two pieces of legislation to 

the Court of Appeal that would allow marriage commissioners 

to basically continue to discriminate against some 

Saskatchewan citizens based upon their own personal beliefs. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what human rights are about. 

 

And it’s certainly not what human rights are about when it 

comes to citizens who are appointed by the state or the province 

or the government to uphold pieces of legislation. We can’t pick 

and choose when we perform a marriage, based upon our own 

personal beliefs. That is in fact, Mr. Speaker, discrimination. 

 

Now that was the government’s response to a ruling by the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Tribunal and it was a tribunal 

decision that they didn’t like. So it’s a little difficult to be not 

cynical about the government’s motives in this particular case, 

and when it comes to amendments to the Human Rights Code in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We have a number of questions about how these changes are 

going to work. As I said, the current process allows people to 

appeal a decision by the Human Rights Commission to the 

tribunal, even when the commission believes that there is no 

merit. But if the complainant continues to believe that there is a 

case, they have an opportunity to have their case referred to a 

Human Rights Tribunal. 

 

The new system, as I understand it, will involve the use of 

lawyers appointed by the Human Rights Commission 

representing complainants in court. The question is, how does 

this work in cases where the commission itself has decided that 

a complaint has no merit and the complainant wants to appeal? 

It appears as though the decision of the commission will be 

final when it comes to dismissing a complaint. 

 

Another question is, who’s going to represent the complainant? 

Does the complainant have to go find their own lawyer? I 

understand from the minister that these people will be paid for, 

but if I find my own lawyer, will my lawyer be paid for? That’s 

not clear. And I guess the other question is that there are a lot of 

people who may have been discriminated against that may have 

some difficulty finding a lawyer to represent them, particularly 

if they’re marginalized, and they’re trying to seek some form of 

justice. 

 

It’s also important to note, and I’ve said this earlier, that the 

assumption is that courts are a quicker process. And I’m not 

convinced that the courts are a quicker process. There are times 

when cases are dismissed under the Charter because people 

have not had access to a fair and speedy trial, Mr. Speaker. And 

as I said before, it’s true that there had been delays with the 

current system, but I do believe that the commission could have 

four lawyers or five lawyers that could be available to speed up 

this particular work. 

 

The other issue that’s contained in the legislation is the notion 

that you now will have only one year to determine whether or 

not someone has, in your view, violated your particular human 

right. And at present it’s two, and the government’s — two 

years — and the government’s reducing that to one year. And I 

think that we need to consider that change very carefully as well 

because there may be circumstances where a complainant may 



December 7, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6431 

not be able to file within a one-year period. And it appears as 

though, and you look at other pieces of legislation, that we’re 

trying to extend the amount of time that people have to file a 

complaint, not reduce it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is noted and the commission noted that it was 

important to have experts reviewing these cases that reflect a 

diversity of society. And I think it’s a pretty simple fact that 

judges and their appointments are not necessarily reflective of a 

diverse society. I think it’s fair that governments have worked 

hard to have more women appointed as judges. Governments 

have worked hard to see more First Nations and Métis people 

appointed as judges. But we’re still not there in terms of having 

a judiciary that is truly reflective of our society. 

 

And we know that when we have a diverse group of people who 

might be sitting in these kinds of situations, their views and 

where they come from sometimes inform and affect their ability 

to understand the life experiences of others. And so I wonder 

what kind of life experiences will the people who are going to 

adjudicate these complaints, particularly Court of Queen’s 

Bench judges, what kind of life experiences do they have? 

Who’s going to be assigning these judges to these cases? How 

will it be determined that these judges have the necessary 

expertise in terms of human rights law and the necessary life 

experiences to appreciate the people that may appear before 

them? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that there was an interesting article that 

appeared in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, and it was written by 

Ken Norman who is a professor of law at the University of 

Saskatchewan law college. Ken Norman is someone who would 

be considered in our country to be an expert when it comes to 

human rights. And I think it’s fair to say that Professor Norman 

has some very significant concerns with the decision or the 

legislation that we see before this House. And he is suggesting 

that the Government of Saskatchewan is marching to a different 

drum, and it’s a distant drum in terms of human rights 

complaints in the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that I think it’s fair to say that there are more 

people that need to be consulted with. There are human rights 

experts across the country that have been keenly involved in 

following Saskatchewan and its Human Rights Code and its 

Human Rights Commission. There’s no question that at times 

we have been leaders in the whole area of human rights and our 

Human Rights Commission. I’m not convinced that this 

legislation continues that kind of leadership. We need to be 

fully knowledgeable about what’s happening in the whole area 

of human rights. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I just think about the newcomers that are 

coming to our province. And they’re coming because of our 

immigrant nominee program. And it’s my view that with the 

diversity of the province that there may well be more 

complaints that may be coming forward as a result of the 

diversity that our province is reflecting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of the newcomers that are coming obviously 

don’t have English as their first language. English may be their 

third, fourth, fifth, or sixth language. They are coming to the 

province. They’re working in workplaces. And I really question 

whether or not this legislation, as it’s presently proposed by the 

government, is going to make it more difficult for those 

newcomers to go forward with complaints or less difficult. And 

my belief at the moment is that the legislation as it presently 

stands is going to make it more onerous for people who may 

have human rights complaints. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m certainly going to be interested in seeing what 

a province like Manitoba, which has a very large immigrant 

nominee program, I’m going to be looking at their legislation 

and talking to some of their human rights experts. Because 

they’ve had newcomers in their province for some time and we 

need to see how many of the complaints that the Human Rights 

Commission in Manitoba is dealing with are race-based or 

ethnically based and how many of them are complaints that are 

being put forward by newcomers in the province because I 

suspect, Mr. Speaker, that we’re going to have to make our way 

through a very changing and diverse province in Saskatchewan. 

And we’re going to have to have processes in place that allow 

people to confront discrimination. 

 

And I’m not convinced, and there may be some very 

well-meaning people that think getting rid of the tribunal 

system is going to be much better in terms of advancing human 

rights in the province of Saskatchewan, but I’m not convinced 

that blowing up or scrapping the Human Rights Tribunal — 

which is, as I understand, arms-length from the commission — 

and replacing it with a court system is going to advance human 

rights. 

 

And my final point, Mr. Speaker, is I think that this legislation 

also puts a lot of discretion on the part of the Chief 

Commissioner or the person that the Chief Commissioner 

decides to devolve his powers to. And I am not convinced that 

we should leave it to the commissioner to be determining with 

finality which cases go forward and which cases don’t. I think 

that that is problematic because once again, with all due respect 

to the Chief Commissioner, the Chief Commissioner is a judge. 

He comes from a particular background. He has a particular 

view of the world, and it’s my view that you need to have a 

diverse view of the world when you’re dealing with these kinds 

of matters. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to consult with folks, 

particularly in Manitoba. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll 

adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 160, The Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Bill No. 157 

 

[The Assembly resumed debate on the proposed motion by the 

Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 157 — The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 



6432 Saskatchewan Hansard December 7, 2010 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

am glad to rise in my place this afternoon to participate in the 

debate on Bill No. 157, An Act to amend The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Act. 

 

There are a number of things that are interesting about this Bill, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. Certainly it’s a fairly complex Bill, as one 

might expect of legislation with this scope. It’s got implications 

for a number of players on a number of levels. It’s also coming 

forward under the aegis of the New West Partnership and 

harmonizing certain of our regulatory regime with those that 

exist in Alberta. 

 

And of course there’s also a number of housekeeping measures 

contained in this legislation, measures that relate to more 

gender-inclusive language, changing department to ministry, 

etc., etc. So that’s I guess the sort of broad thrust of the remarks 

I’ll be making on this legislation this afternoon, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

But to return first to the question of the complexity of the Bill, 

certainly it’s important to maintain legislation that is current 

and applicable to the present environment, legislation where for 

example one of the items relates to clarifying between oil and 

gas waste and waste that is not related, pure and simple, to the 

functioning of oil and gas production and extraction. That is 

something that is clarified in this legislation. 

 

And again as problems arise with these things, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it’s important for the government of the day to step 

forward and provide that clarity in the legal language and to 

straighten the matter out. As well, with the interest on the part 

of the government of the day in terms of changing the reference 

to departments to ministries, that of course goes through the 

legislation and necessitates a number of change. Again not 

exactly something to write home about there, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Where we find it interesting is that the government is 

proclaiming this as a piece that modernizes the business and 

regulatory systems targeted at the energy and resource sector. 

It’s interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because on other fronts as 

it relates to resource extraction, particularly in the oil and gas 

sector in this province, we’ve heard from the government of the 

day that Saskatchewan is a leader and in fact that certain 

measures that the Government of Alberta has embarked upon 

were misguided, that ought not to be followed by the people of 

Saskatchewan. But surprisingly enough, on that side they 

proclaim the leadership of Saskatchewan. 

 

But when it comes to the regulatory regime, interestingly 

enough they have us taking our cue from the Government of 

Alberta. And in fact a number of the measures under this come 

forward as so-called prime initiatives that relate to the 

ministry’s efforts around oil and gas processes, data system 

redevelopment, consequent amendments to The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Act and to The Freehold Oil and Gas Production 

Tax Act. 

 

And certainly, you know, again if the system can be improved 

upon and refined and made to be more responsive to the needs 

of those stakeholders but to the citizens of the province and to 

those taxed with providing governance and oversight, fair 

enough. 

 

But again we see the government of the day proclaiming the 

leadership of the province of Saskatchewan on the one front in 

this sector, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And then on another front, 

we’re following very much behind Alberta, so much so that 

we’re becoming . . . As of the first prime project that was 

announced in November of last year, it entailed Saskatchewan 

becoming a full partner in the petroleum registry of Alberta. 

 

And again this may seem a bit pedantic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

but this one isn’t even coming forward under the aegis of the 

New West, so-called. This is where we join up their registry. 

And again, you know, language is important and if this is a joint 

project between two provinces, you’d expect that to be reflected 

in the language. But here again, this would seem to be an 

example of Saskatchewan followership and not leadership in 

terms of joining up in the petroleum registry of Alberta. 

 

And again, the registry in and of itself is perhaps not necessarily 

something that we wouldn’t want to be part of. It’s proclaimed 

as a joint government and industry strategic alliance enabling 

Canadian upstream oil and gas producers to carry out complex 

business and regulatory activities in an efficient and seamless 

manner. But again, if this is about a New West Partnership, how 

it is that we’re signing on to something that is dictated out of 

the province of Alberta, as opposed to coming from 

Saskatchewan, particularly when there’s been a fair amount of 

attention paid to the leadership that this province provides? We 

find that to be of interest, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Minister of Energy and Resources in his remarks 

introducing this legislation stated that this will develop more 

efficient, transparent, and consistent compliance assurance and 

enforcement processes. They state that it will expand the 

authority to licence, approve, and permit the drilling and 

operation of wells and other facilities; that it will streamline the 

legislative requirements required in the issuance of licences, 

approvals and permits; and that it will expand the scope of the 

Saskatchewan orphan well and facility liability management 

program to match Alberta’s. Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 

match Alberta’s, not necessarily that this is designed primarily 

with Saskatchewan’s interests in mind, but again following the 

province of Alberta. 

 

Again, you know, in terms of the assurance of compliance of 

the enforcement process, things in and of themselves fairly 

neutral, it depends what you do with them. But you would 

expect them to be put forward with the interests of 

Saskatchewan at heart and with the interests of Saskatchewan 

first and foremost. And that does not seem to be the case here. 

This would seem to be a case of followership rather than 

leadership. 

 

Again, you know, the minister in his introductory remarks 

around this piece of legislation talked about consolidating 

legislative requirements related to the issuance and transfer of 

licences in a logical order, modernizing the wording of offense 

provisions, increasing the maximum fine to a level where it will 

have a much greater deterrent effect. Again some of these 



December 7, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6433 

things are talked about in the legislation and indeed enabled in 

the legislation, but of course they rely upon the regulations, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And the regulations, of course, is often where 

we find the devil in the details. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member 

from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

for joining in the fray here. 

 

Again so Bill No. 157, in terms of harmonizing regimes, 

enforcement and licensing regimes, regulatory regimes between 

two provinces, not necessarily a bad thing to do, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But if this is yet one more example of the slavish 

devotion of those members opposite to things that are better 

designed for the people of Alberta than the people of 

Saskatchewan and, you know, another example of followership 

on the part of that government in terms of what is in the best 

interest of the people of Saskatchewan instead of leadership, 

and that being worthy of imitation and profit for the people of 

Saskatchewan, again we find that to be fairly curious. 

 

It’s important to note as well that this is taking place at a time 

when oil and gas production, oil production in particular and to 

the drilling levels . . . Since the change of government in 2007, 

we’ve seen a decline in the actual drilling on oil and gas since 

the peak that was achieved under the former Calvert NDP 

government in 2007. This of course accompanied a general 

contraction in the economy of 3.9 per cent in this past year 

alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And again when the economy 

contracts like that, that means that there are more people 

unemployed. It means that there are more people having a hard 

time putting the resources together to put bread on the table, 

and also as related, you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see that 

in increased food bank utilization, something that was reported 

on very forcefully today by the Regina and District Food Bank. 

 

So in terms of the way that, you know, an appropriate 

regulatory regime, an appropriate taxation regime can impact 

the well-being of an industry, we had seen certainly a peak of 

production and activity in the sector in 2007 and we’ve seen 

that decline since then, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And again that was 

reflected in this past year alone in the contraction of the 

economy at 3.9 per cent. It’s in such a state, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, where it was newsworthy when the Sask Trends 

Monitor stated that Saskatchewan has really had no economic 

growth since the change of government, and that the 

improvements in 2008 were largely as a result of inflationary 

costs. Again, Mr. Speaker, as the prices go up there’s an effect 

on the economy. And that doesn’t mean a real gain for the 

people of the province or the people of Saskatchewan; that 

means that they’re paying more. And that is somehow 

translated as an improvement in the GDP [gross domestic 

product]. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we find that to be fairly intolerable and a 

really poor approach to economic development in this province. 

And again all of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from a government 

that said, you know, we’re ready for growth and all that. Well 

what we’ve seen instead, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is in fact 

stagnation and decline and marching positive gains backward. 

 

I’m reminded as well that this came forward under the New 

West Partnership aegis, but again if that is more about 

synchronizing everything that we do in Saskatchewan to 

decisions that are made in Alberta, that’s not so much a 

partnership, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s when the one entity 

dictates to the other and we just try to catch up. So again, when 

it should be about leadership, this legislation in many ways 

would seem to be resonant of the followership. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m reminded by members on my 

side that there’s a great deal of interest in this legislation and 

that there’s a great desire for them to participate in this. So in 

the interest of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and in the interest of 

facilitating the progress into committee for the committees to do 

their work there, I would now adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 157, The Oil 

and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 

the House do now adjourn for committees this evening. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved a motion to adjourn the House. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands 

adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:58.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6403 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6404 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6404 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6404 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6405 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6405 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6405 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6405 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6405 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6406 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6406 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6406 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6414 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6406 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6406 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6406 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6406 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6407 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Food Bank Meets Community Needs 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6407 

 Public Servants Thanked for Help to Flood Victims 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6407 

 Homelessness in Saskatoon 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6408 

 Melville Football Coach Honoured 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6408 

 African-Canadian Heritage Museum Honourees 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6408 

 Positive Assessment of Saskatchewan’s Health Care System 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6409 

 Saskatchewan’s Forgotten People 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6409 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Low-Income People 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6409 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6409 

 Kidney Donor Paired Exchange Program 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6411 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6411 

 Funding for Foster Home 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6411 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6412 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6412 

 Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6413 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6413 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Changes to Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6414 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6415 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 619 — The School Bus Drivers of Saskatchewan Appreciation Day Act 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6416 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6416 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6416 

 



 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 158 — The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6417 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 158 — The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6417 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Point of Order 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6417 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 Assistance for Livestock Producers 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6418 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6418 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6418 

 Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6423 

 Bill No. 159 — The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6427 

 Bill No. 160 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6429 

 Bill No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6432 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


