




















































Hansard: May 20, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 65A  THURSDAY, MAY 20, 2010, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5649 

 May 20, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Members, if I could have the indulgence of 

the members I’d like to begin introduction of guests by bringing 

to your attention a number of guests we have in your gallery, 

guests from visitor service who are the front-line individuals 

who greet and meet our tours that come and tour our visitors as 

they come to the Legislative Chamber. 

 

And in the front row we have summer staff. They’re returning 

individuals, Marita Clark, Troy Smith, Amanda Dancsok, and 

Brittany Love. And new to the team this summer, Kayla 

DeMars-Krentz and Derek Tochor. 

 

And in the second row, we have full-time staff. I’ll begin with 

Arnold McKenzie who will be celebrating 25 years working for 

visitor service, in the Chamber; Kelly Liberet, Marianne 

Morgan, and Lorraine deMontigny. I’d ask members to 

welcome our visitor services personnel who have joined us this 

morning. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you 45 students seated in the 

eastern gallery. They’re from the fine school of Wascana. If you 

could give us a wave there — 45 students. Yes. Okay. They’re 

accompanied by the intrepid teachers, Ms. Von, Ms. Embury, 

Ms. McCulloch, and Mr. Hack. 

 

They spent the night at the Science Centre and then they walked 

over here. That’s a tall order, I’m sure, but the students are still 

ready and raring to go. They’re a good-looking bunch. We met 

before question period. We had a good question-and-answer 

session. And it’s always good to see some students from the 

fine riding of Elphinstone-Centre here at their Legislative 

Assembly. So would all members please join me in welcoming 

these students to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone, the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you I want to introduce two 

constituents of mine. Mr. Speaker, the one of course is no 

stranger to this House. He’s no stranger to the chair that you 

happen to be occupying right now. He’s sat on both sides of the 

House. He’s now the mayor of Fort Qu’Appelle, Ron Osika. 

And accompanied with Ron is his wife, Barb, who are living in 

Fort Qu’Appelle. 

 

And Ron is doing a great job in Fort Qu’Appelle as the mayor. 

We have lots of conversations, and he’s always very 

welcoming. And he’s got probably, I think, one of the most 

gorgeous towns to oversee in the beautiful Qu’Appelle Valley. 

So I’d like all members to welcome a former colleague in this 

Assembly and his wife Barb — Ron and Barb Osika. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, I would love 

to introduce in the east gallery a group of 24 grade 5’s from 

Sacred Heart Community School in my constituency of Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. The students are accompanied this morning, 

their teacher Rita Giroux and also the principal of Sacred Heart, 

Mr. Derek Hassen. Also accompanying the students are Mrs. 

Behm and Mr. Owens. But, Mr. Speaker, it looks like a fairly 

well-behaved group and I’m sure the chaperones won’t be put 

to the test too much today. Very pleased to have them here. 

 

I also have to point out a couple of students in this class that 

have a little bit of a connection to this building. First and 

foremost, Jackson who is the son of Angie Currie, who works 

for the government in this building. Very good to see Jackson 

here. And also Levi who is the grandson of the former premier 

and leader of the New Democratic Party, Lorne Calvert. So it’s 

a pretty ostentatious group, Mr. Speaker, and I would ask that 

all members would join with me in welcoming them here today. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I too would like to 

pass along a welcome to Mr. Ron Osika and his wife, Barb. It’s 

absolutely wonderful to see them here today. I know, as the 

minister has stated, he’s doing a wonderful job in Fort 

Qu’Appelle. He’s active in his community and in the province. 

And I know his lovely wife, Barb, has supported him for many, 

many years, but I truly think she runs the house, Mr. Speaker. 

He may have been in charge in this House, but I think at home 

it’s Barb who lays down the rules. But I would ask all my 

colleagues to welcome them here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the member opposite in welcoming Sacred Heart 

Community School. It’s always great to have a group from 

Moose Jaw come, and she noted that Jackson Currie, and the 

Curries are good friends of ours. So I’d like to extend a 

welcome to them on behalf of this side of the House and ask all 

members to welcome Sacred Heart Community School. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask leave 

for an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 

asked for leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 



5650 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 2010 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you this morning to the House 

some very special guests sitting in your gallery. I ask the folks 

as I call their names to stand and wave. First I’d like to 

introduce Brent King, founder of GotGinch, vice-president of 

operations, TENET Medical Engineering, and Robb Price, 

founder of delivergood.org of Calgary. 

 

These men find themselves here in Regina this morning as part 

of a very unique mission entitled GotGinch Cross-Canada 

Underwear Drive. They’re travelling across Canada — 

Vancouver to Halifax — delivering over 30,000 pairs of 

underwear to men who are homeless or near homeless, and 

they’re doing this through the informal networks of shelters and 

missions across Canada. As well during this trip 

delivergood.org will be launching their national initiative in the 

city. 

 

Yesterday they stopped in Saskatoon at The Bridge mission on 

20th Street in my constituency, dropping off several boxes of 

underwear for distribution. And I want to thank Brent and Robb 

for this generous act, something I know that folks at The Bridge 

very much appreciate. And I also should note that Brent is a 

grandson of Florence King, a constituent of mine, formerly of 

Harris, Saskatchewan. 

 

But you may want to know, where did they get this idea of 

underwear? Well Brent asked Mustard Seed of Calgary last 

year, what do men need? And something that’s often 

overlooked is good, clean underwear. And so they decided to 

deliver on this, and we really appreciate it. And these men think 

of themselves as a bit of social entrepreneurs, bringing their 

business skills to help meet the needs of those in our 

communities who find themselves in difficult circumstances. So 

I want to say we should congratulate them on delivering what 

these folks need and then delivering it with dignity. 

 

And I also want to just note a couple of other people that are 

with them, but they’ll probably get introduced. I know many of 

the MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] in this House 

know Michelle Porter and Joe Miller of Souls Harbour here in 

Regina. There you go. I didn’t say anything about the props. I 

didn’t say anything. Not a word. But I know that many of the 

MLAs here in this House know Michelle and Joe quite well and 

may want to say . . . I know the member from 

Elphinstone-Centre will want to do an introduction as well. 

 

So I ask all members to join in with me in giving our friends 

Robb and Brent and their hosts a special welcome. Best wishes 

on their travels, and a thank you from the Saskatchewan 

legislature. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to join with my colleague from Saskatoon Centre in welcoming 

Brent and Robb to the Saskatchewan Assembly, and wish you 

well on your very unique mission, but a very, very essential one 

and a very welcomed one, quite frankly, because the emergency 

shelters are extremely important. 

 

And Michelle and Joe, it’s great to see you again, and welcome 

to your Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

add to the introduction in terms of, particularly to welcome Joe 

and Michelle, but to say to Michelle and to her husband Ken . . . 

They’re heading on to Halifax, Mr. Speaker. And Mr. Speaker, 

of course, has been a good partner with the mission over the 

years, so I’m not telling you anything you don’t know, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But Ken and Michelle Porter are heading on to Halifax. Joe’s 

stepping up as the executive director for the Souls Harbour 

Rescue Mission and is going to do a fine job there. He has some 

big, big shoes to fill, of course, maybe some big bloomers. I’m 

not sure if that was what was being communicated. 

 

But I want to say on behalf of the people of Elphinstone-Centre, 

and I think by extension the people of Saskatchewan, a huge 

thank you to Michelle and to Ken for the tremendous decade 

that they’ve spent in the inner city of Regina working, helping 

to shelter, helping to clothe, helping to feed, and doing such a 

tremendous job living out their faith for the people they served. 

 

And I know that the Souls Harbour Rescue Mission is heading 

on to . . . The banner’s being carried out to Halifax, and it’ll be 

held very high, but — and I know that’s really great for them — 

but you leave such a legacy for the work that you’ve done here. 

And for that, thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I 

would like to introduce a school group from Carrot River for 

the Pasquia Christian School, Mr. Speaker. They’re in the west 

gallery. This group drove for five hours to come in here this 

morning, proving that the people from Carrot River Valley 

constituency like to get up in the morning and get to work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, their teacher is Amy Penner. There’s 15 students 

and their teacher is Amy Penner, and they’re in grades 7 to 9. 

Accompanying them as the chaperones are Bart and Margaret 

Bearg, Bruce and Becky Bartel, Doug Reimer, Carmen Reimer. 

And I want everyone in this Assembly to acknowledge them 

and welcome them to our Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, it’s once again 

my pleasure to introduce members of SCN [Saskatchewan 

Communications Network] Matters, a group of thousands — 

and I might add growing daily — of citizens concerned about 

this government’s decision to privatize the Saskatchewan 

Communications Network. 

 

And just on a quick note here, this group — despite the speed at 

which this privatization is happening — they haven’t given up 

hope that the minister might reverse the decision, and they’re 



May 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5651 

launching a great campaign next week called Smile — You’re 

on SCN!. And it actually features communities throughout the 

province where SCN has touched, whether by filming a 

production in that community or about that community. So 

SCN Matters will be launching that next week. So with that, I 

ask us all to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 

great privilege to stand on my feet today and introduce to the 

Assembly no one that is a stranger to the Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, the intern with the Saskatchewan legislative internship 

program that is working with me in the second half of session. 

And his name is Michael Selnes who is seated in your gallery in 

the top row. And perhaps he could stand because he’s a fairly 

looming height and everyone will be able to see him from here 

as well. 

 

Now Michael Selnes was born in Melfort where he attended 

Melfort and Unit Comprehensive Collegiate. Prior to beginning 

his post-secondary education, Michael spent a year in 

Dusseldorf, Germany as a Rotary exchange student. Despite no 

previous background in the German language, he attended 

classes at the Goerres Gymnasium and finished this year 

relatively — he says relatively — fluent in German. My opinion 

is, Mr. Speaker, he is fluent in German. 

 

In 2004, Michael enrolled at the University of Calgary and 

pursued a double major in history and the German language. 

Michael was recognized twice on the dean’s honours list. He 

finished his university coursework in Germany during the 

summer of 2009 by participating in the Canadian summer 

school at the University of Kassel. He convocated with 

distinction in November of 2009. 

 

During his second year at the University of Calgary, Michael 

served as the floor leader for the Residence Students’ 

Association. He was also elected to the students’ union as an 

external commissioner. The following year he was re-elected to 

the students’ union and served as a vice-president external and 

was responsible for policy development, government advocacy, 

media relations, and liaising with external organizations, 

including the Canadian Alliance of Student Associations. His 

major focus of attention was advocating on behalf of students 

on housing issues. 

 

[10:15] 

 

Michael served as the Chair of the Council of Alberta 

University Students, an umbrella organization which represents 

over 70,000 undergraduate students at all of Alberta’s 

universities, and which liaises on their behalf with the 

Government of Alberta. 

 

He was also a founder of the Calgary Student Caucus, an 

organization which advocates on municipal issues affecting 

students attending all post-secondary institutions in Calgary. He 

served for two years as a member of the University of Calgary’s 

Senate and served on several of its committees, including the 

executive committee. 

 

Michael is also an avid snowboarder and he also participated on 

various intramural teams, so he’s definitely a well-rounded 

character. He also sang in the university chorus and was a 

member of the university’s chamber choir which in 2005 sang 

at Carnegie Hall in New York city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the great pleasure of having Michael 

work with me as an intern this session. And I can tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, no matter what Michael goes on to do in his future, I 

know that it is going to be amazingly bright and prosperous for 

all those who will encounter Michael in his lifetime. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all colleagues in the Chamber to please 

welcome and thank Michael for participating in the 

Saskatchewan legislative internship program this year and wish 

him all the best for the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to join with the member in acknowledging Michael in this 

Chamber today. And he has a very impressive resumé, but one 

thing that was left out is he got grounded and founded in this 

impressive resumé when he went to high school in Melfort by 

working at KFC [Kentucky Fried Chicken] chicken in Melfort, 

Saskatchewan. I knew then that he was an outstanding kind of 

employee, but I never thought he would go on to the kind of 

resumé that he’s demonstrated today. But I’m certainly very 

proud to have been part of the grounding of Michael Selnes. 

Welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join my colleague from Moose Jaw in recognizing a great 

Saskatchewan couple in your gallery. Of course that’s Barb and 

Ron Osika. His Worship, Mayor Ron Osika is with us today. 

And I can tell you folks that I am very, very lonesome for him 

here, and I wish he’d come back soon. 

 

But I’d point out, Mr. Speaker, he is a great friend and he was 

an even greater Speaker. And the reason why I knew that is we 

became very close as MLAs and when he became Speaker, I 

thought I had the ability to heckle and do what I wanted in the 

Assembly because my friend, after all, was the Speaker. Well 

when I say he was a great friend and an even better Speaker, 

he’s called me out of order on a few occasions, and I don’t 

know why, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I want to point out that Ron and Barb have done a 

tremendous amount for our province, for our region, and as a 

mayor now he’s done a tremendous job for Fort Qu’Appelle. 

And I just want to take the opportunity to welcome Ron and 

Barb here today and to say, we miss you, pal, and we wish 

you’d come back. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

introduce someone to the members of this Assembly that is 

seated in your gallery. That is Sheena Gordon. She’s a member 

of the legislative intern program and she’s currently working 



5652 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 2010 

with me. I don’t have her resumé before me, Mr. Speaker, but I 

will just say that she also has an extensive resumé. We are 

working on a couple of projects. 

 

And I would like to mention, Mr. Speaker, that I believe it was 

earlier this week, the interns took a little bit of a road trip out to 

a First Nations community in Last Mountain-Touchwood, that 

being Little Black Bear, where they met with newly elected 

Chief Perry Bellegarde and his council. They tell me that they 

only got lost twice, but they did manage to get back in to 

Regina, and I understand they had a very interesting and 

informative day and Chief Bellegarde certainly was very 

gracious in making them feel welcome. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I also would like to 

welcome a former member, Ron Osika and his wife Barb seated 

in your gallery. Mr. Speaker, it’s good to see them here today 

and we will one day have coffee, I promise that. So I ask all 

members to join with me in welcoming these two guests. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s introduce your 

intern today, and I too have the pleasure to work with an intern 

in the internship program. And in your gallery in the very top is 

Elise Lonie. She was born in Edmonton but moved back to 

Saskatchewan at a very early age and was awarded several 

awards of excellence during her early career, including the 

Governor General’s award and several scholarships. 

 

She is currently enrolled in the University of Regina in the 

Faculty of Arts, pursuing an honours major in political science 

and a major in history. She received several scholarships and 

awards in her university career as well, including the Academic 

Silver Scholarship, Beta Sigma Phi Regina Council Award, and 

Orange Benevolent Society of Saskatchewan Educational 

Scholarship. She has been recognized on the Faculty of Arts 

dean’s honours list. 

 

She’s been involved in much volunteer work through her career 

and she likes to read, paint, and spend time outdoors. She’s also 

taking classes in Spanish. She plans to complete her academic 

requirements and convocate with a Bachelor of Arts Degree 

from the U of R [University of Regina ] in 2011. She continues 

to be interested in courses involving international issues and 

politics, and in the fall of 2009, she participated in a 10-day 

interdisciplinary studies course on food sovereignty which took 

place in Mexico City. 

 

I would like to say that Elise has been working on several really 

interesting projects with me and I look forward to continuing to 

work with her as she completes her term. And I do think she has 

a very bright future ahead of her. I’d like everyone to welcome 

her to the legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d also 

like to introduce to the Assembly, it is my great privilege and 

honour to introduce to the Assembly my daughter, Morgan 

Morin, and her friend, Nolan Anderson, who have come yet 

again to join us in observing what is happening in their 

Saskatchewan legislature. They’re seated in the front row of 

your gallery, and they have just completed some courses in their 

school on treaties and also on how government functions. So 

they’re going to be much more well versed in understanding 

what’s happening in the legislature today. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, I’d also like to thank the people 

from the House of Prayer who are with us each and every day in 

this legislature, praying for us and sitting with us and have 

dedicated a great amount of time to their service for the people 

of Saskatchewan as well, Mr. Speaker. And so I just want to 

thank Richard and Joanne Lepp and the many others who are 

with us on a daily basis, and thank you for the guidance that 

you provide for the legislature as well. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I call for presenting of petitions, I’d 

like to extend, from one Speaker to a former Speaker, a special 

welcome joining with the members. And would like to also 

make note of, as Mr. Osika found when he sat in this chair, it 

was always nice to go back to former Speakers’ rulings. And I 

want to thank Mr. Osika for his rulings. They have certainly 

come in handy this past session. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned 

over the conditions and the safety of our highways. This 

petition calls for improvements to Highway 10 between Fort 

Qu’Appelle and the junction of No. 1. The petition goes on to 

state that this portion of the highway is a main traffic route to 

year-round tourist destinations as well as this portion of the 

highway serves three inland grain terminals. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and 

the junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety 

of Saskatchewan’s motoring public. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this petition is signed by the good folks from Balcarres and 

Fort Qu’Appelle, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of the protection of wildlife habitat 

lands. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re aware that The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act protects 3.4 . . . or currently protects 3.4 million acres of 

uplands and wetlands or one-third of all wildlife habitat lands in 

Saskatchewan in their natural state, and that repealing of the 

scheduled listing of these designated lands by the proposed 



May 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5653 

amendments to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act will 

endanger the protection and designation of these lands. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follow, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately and 

without delay recognize the importance of the protection 

of wildlife habitat lands and immediately withdraw 

proposed amendments that will negatively affect the 

protection of wildlife habitat lands; 

 

And in so doing cause the provincial government to 

commit to meaningful and adequate consultations with all 

stakeholders that will be affected by future legislative 

changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by residents of Paradise 

Hill, Lashburn, North Battleford, Battleford, and Waseca. Mr. 

Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions on 

behalf of citizens who are concerned that the Saskatchewan 

Seniors Association that operates 180 senior centres throughout 

the province, the vast majority of them located in rural 

Saskatchewan — and these centres that provide much-needed 

recreation and social activities as well as important health 

clinics and workshops and contribute to an enhanced quality of 

life for the many seniors who use them — are in danger of 

closing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Many of them are facing skyrocketing cost of utilities, 

insurance, taxes, and other maintenance costs, and they’re 

thinking that one-quarter of these centres will close within the 

next 18 months. The closure of these centres will lead to the 

deteriorating mental and physical health of seniors which will 

lead to additional stress on long-term care facilities and 

hospitals. 

 

The prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

cause the Government of Saskatchewan to provide the 

much-needed funding to assist seniors’ recreation centres 

to remain open and active within their communities. 

 

And the signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

many communities throughout Saskatchewan: Allan, Alsask, 

Arborfield, Assiniboia, Aylesbury, Battleford, Bellevue, Biggar, 

Birch Hills, Brock, Carlyle, Central Butte, Chitek Lake, 

Christopher Lake, Colonsay, Coronach, Craik, Davidson, 

Domremy, Eatonia, Elfros, Eyebrow, Fillmore, Foam Lake, 

Glenbain, Glenbush, Goodsoil, Gravelbourg, Harris, Hoey, 

Humboldt, Invermay, Kindersley, Kamsack, Kenaston, 

Kerrobert, Lashburn, Leoville, Lucky Lake, Maidstone, 

Marshall, Martensville, Mayfair, Meacham, Mervin, Midale, 

Mildred, Mistatim, Mozart, Muenster, Lestock, Lloydminster, 

Nipawin, North Battleford, Paddockwood, Paynton, Pelly, Pilot 

Butte, Preeceville, Prince Albert, Regina, Rosetown, Saskatoon, 

Shaunavon, Shell Lake, Shellbrook, Spalding, Spiritwood, 

Spruce Home, St. Louis, Stockholm, Strasbourg, Stoughton, 

Swift Current, Theodore, Tramping Lake, Turtle Lake, 

Vanguard, Viscount, Wadena, Wakaw, Warman, Weyburn, 

Wishart, Wynyard, Zealandia, and Unity. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know the 

workers for community-based organizations in Saskatchewan 

have traditionally been underpaid and many continue to earn 

poverty-level wages. And in fact they can be paid on average 8 

to $10 per hour less than employees performing work of equal 

value in government departments. I’d like to read the prayer. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity with 

employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the folks signing this petition come from the city of 

Regina. I do so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of Highway 915. This petition addresses concerns of 

Saskatchewan people about the quality of Stanley Mission road. 

The prayer reads as follows. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to upgrade and repair Highway 915 as 

soon as possible. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Prince Albert and Regina. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan 

students, a call on the Sask Party government to expand the 

graduate retention program. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



5654 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition today are 

from the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

[10:30] 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition for financial assistance for the town of Duck 

Lake water project. Mr. Speaker, the petition is being circulated 

and signed by residents because of the exorbitant water rates 

being forced on them by the Saskatchewan Party government. 

And it’s an exorbitant amount that they’re forced to pay for 

clean, safe drinking water, and it’s resulting in people actually 

moving from the town of Duck Lake into other communities. 

And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by good folks from 

Duck Lake, Saskatoon, and Cudworth. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise yet 

again to present a petition on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan who are dealing with yet another water issue, Mr. 

Speaker. A government ministry has directed that customers 

may no longer treat non-potable water using methods approved 

by Sask Health. These Furdale residents, in dealing in good 

faith with SaskWater for over 30 years, have paid large amounts 

for the domestic systems and in-home treatment equipment. 

And the alternative water supply being referred to them by a 

government ministry is a private operator offering treated, 

non-pressurized water at great cost with no guarantee of quality, 

quantity or availability of water. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately despite the fact that these 

petitions have been read this session almost every day, there is 

still no contact from the government to these residents to talk 

about the situation at hand. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Saskatoon and Furdale. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a 

petition in support of maintaining quality health care services. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan must 

recognize the integral role of all health care providers and 

valued members of a health care team. And they also must 

recognize the value of health care providers by having a 

commitment to adequate funding and the installation of good 

faith in provincial bargaining. Instead, Mr. Speaker, what we’re 

hearing now is bed closures and cutbacks and layoffs in the 

health care sector, Mr. Speaker, also that the Government of 

Saskatchewan’s heavy-handed essential services legislation is 

making a mockery of the collective bargaining process in this 

province. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to negotiating a fair and just 

collective bargaining agreement with health care workers 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and the petitions are signed by people from 

Abernethy, Alameda, Antler, Arcola, Assiniboia, Balcarres, 

Baldwinton, Balgonie, Bangor, Barthner, Battleford, Benson, 

Bethune, Bienfait, Big River, Big Beaver, Biggar, Birch Hills, 

Bjorkdale, Bredenbury, Broadview, Bromhead, Buchanan, 

Buena Vista, Bulyea, Canora, Canwood, Carievale, Carlyle, 

Caronport, Ceylon, Christopher Lake, Churchbridge, Coronach, 

Craven, Crooked Lake, Cupar, Cut Knife, Dalmeny, Davidson, 

Debden, Dilke, Disley, Dorintosh, Dysart, Earl Grey, Edam, 

Edenwold, Edgeley, Elbow, Emerald Park, Endeavour, 

Esterhazy, Estevan, Fairlight, Fillmore, Foam Lake, Forget, 

Fort Qu’Appelle, Francis, Gainsborough, Gerald, Glenavon, 

Forget, Grenfell Hafford, Holdfast, Imperial, Indian Head, 

Ituna, Kamsack, Kelliher, Kendal, Kennedy, Kenosee, Kipling, 

Kisbey, Kronau, Lake Alma, Lampman, Lang, Langbank, 

Langenburg, Leask, Lebret, Lemberg, Lestock, Lintlaw, Lipton, 

Livelong, Lloydminster, Loon Lake, Lumsden, MacNutt, 

Maidstone, Major, Manor, Margo, Martensville, Maryfield, 

Mayview, McLean, McTaggart, Meadow Lake, Medstead, 

Melville, Mervin, Midale, Minton, Montmartre, Moose Jaw, 

Moosomin, Morris, Norquay, North Battleford . . . [inaudible] 

. . . Okla, Oxbow . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Ogema. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Ogema. Ogema, Okla, Oxbow, Pangman, 

Paradise Hill, Paynton, Peebles, Pelly, Pense, Pilot Butte, 

Preeceville, Prince Albert, Punnichy, Qu’Appelle, Quinton, 

Radville, Rama, Rapid View, Raymore, Redvers, Regina, 

Regina Beach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do, I do appreciate the help, Mr. Speaker. 

Rocanville, Rockglen, Saltcoats, Saskatoon, Semans, Shell 

Lake, Shellbrook, Silton, Sintaluta, Southey, Spiritwood, 



May 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5655 

Springside, Spruce Lake, St. Walburg, Stenen, Stockholm, 

Stoughton, Strasbourg, Sturgis, Tantallon, Theodore, 

Turtleford, Unity, Vanscoy, Vawn, Vibank, Wadena, Wapella, 

Warman, Wawota, Weirdale, Weldon, Weyburn, White City, 

Whitewood, Willowbrook, Willow Bunch, Windthorst, 

Wishart, Wolseley, Wood Mountain, Yarbo, Yorkton, and 

Young. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again here today to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented financial 

mismanagement displayed by the Sask Party. They allude to the 

two consecutive billion dollar deficits tabled by the Sask Party, 

and they reference the billions of dollars of debt growth 

projected under the Sask Party’s plan. 

 

These huge budget deficits, quite simply, Mr. Speaker, and 

rising public debt put our future at risk, Mr. Speaker. And 

people across this province are being heard on this issue, and 

they’re doing so by presenting petitions and signing petitions 

daily in this legislature. From every corner of the province, 

people are speaking out against this government and their 

reckless ways with our finances that are compromising the 

future for Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed here today by concerned residents of 

Meath Park, La Ronge, Esterhazy, Vanscoy, Regina, Saskatoon, 

Estevan, and Pilot Butte. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of midwifery in Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, this petition is signed by residents who are concerned 

that, despite this government’s proclamation of The Midwifery 

Act more than two years ago, that there are only seven 

registered midwives in all of Saskatchewan, five of them 

concentrated in Saskatoon, and they can’t even provide service 

to all of the Saskatoon Health Region. If you live in Humboldt 

and you want a midwife, you’re out of luck. So I’d like to read 

the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to keep its promise to broaden the options 

for women and their families and recognize that presently 

this promise remains unfulfilled as many communities in 

Saskatchewan still do not have midwives employed by 

their respective health regions; 

And in doing so, your petitioners pray the honourable 

Legislative Assembly cause the government to support 

midwifery in Saskatchewan by making funding available 

for additional midwife positions in Saskatchewan’s health 

regions as well as independent positions; 

 

And furthermore, the honourable Legislative Assembly 

cause the government to encourage an increase in the 

number of licensed midwives in Saskatchewan by 

extending liability insurance, thereby making it possible 

for prospective midwives to achieve the number of births 

required to successfully apply for a licence with the newly 

formed College of Midwives. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Regina. I so 

submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Plumbing and Other Matters 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s the 

last day of session, and members on the government side are 

looking a little drained. And that’s no surprise given how 

quickly the province’s finances sprang a leak after they came on 

the job. What began as the steady drip, drip, drip of 

incompetence over there, Mr. Speaker, has now turned into a 

flood of red ink. 

 

There was 2.3 billion in the tank when they came into office, 

but they opened the spending faucet so wide that a torrent, like 

Niagara Falls, washed away years of fiscal prudence. So what 

did they do, Mr. Speaker? They tapped the rainy day fund, and 

they drained that too. And even a $1 billion deficit doesn’t 

begin to plumb the depths to which that government will sink, 

Mr. Speaker. They even drained the Crowns who now are all 

tapped out, living on borrowed cash. 

 

The Minister for Corrections took his wrench to the wrong pipe, 

Mr. Speaker, when word leaked out about a sex offender 

unlawfully at large. Mr. Speaker, funding for a children’s 

hospital has been backed up for two years, but Enterprise 

Saskatchewan is gushing taxpayers’ dollars 24-7. And let’s not 

forget, Mr. Speaker, that there’s a free flow of contract cash to 

government friends with a direct pipeline to the Premier’s 

office. 

 

They’re drained of cash, and they’re drained of credibility. It’s 

no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that people are saying this government 

is going down the drain in November 2011. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Aboriginal Affairs Working Group 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one 

of the many highlights of last year’s Council of the Federation 



5656 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 2010 

was the creation of Aboriginal Affairs Working Group 

composed of First Nations, Inuit, and Métis national leadership 

and Aboriginal Affairs ministers from all over Canada to 

Toronto. The agenda was very ambitious, focusing on three 

goals: closing the grade 12 generation gap between Aboriginals 

and non-Aboriginal students, closing the income gap, and 

ending violence against Aboriginal women and girls. 

 

Saskatchewan has taken a lead role in gathering research and 

creating an effective strategy for achieving this essential goals. 

This groundbreaking work has been enthusiastically endorsed 

by other jurisdictions and welcomed by First Nations, Inuit, and 

Métis leadership. 

 

An unexpected and very welcome outcome of this conference 

was a conversation with the representatives of Sisters in Spirit, 

an organization that supports the cause of missing and murdered 

Aboriginals which brings closure to grieving families through 

solution of these tragic cases by the police. Sisters in Spirit 

know that Saskatchewan leads the nation in case closure rates 

and wants to find out why we are so successful. 

 

This latest Aboriginal Affairs Working Group marks significant 

progress on issues of great importance to our province’s 

Aboriginal population. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Comments on Amendments to 

The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 
 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier might be interested to 

hear some of the comments that have been made regarding the 

Sask Party’s gutting of The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act: 

 

As a First Nations person, I feel the government of the day 

should be taking all steps to preserve the natural wildlife 

habitat that makes Saskatchewan a beautiful place to live 

and play. However, their decision not to involve the public 

in proper consultation puts these ecologically sensitive 

lands at risk. 

 

Quote: 

 

The protection of critical wildlife habitat under The 

Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, now WA, was 

considered landmark legislation, far outside the boundaries 

of Saskatchewan when introduced by the Grant Devine 

government over 25 years ago. 

 

Quote: 

 

We do not want land sold, then finding out after the fact. 

We want to be notified and have the government 

accountable to Sask. Residents for this valuable resource. 

 

Quote: 

 

I am disappointed that I was mislead and ask that future 

responses be truthful and accurate in respect to what the 

government intends to do regarding this issue. 

 

Quote: 

 

My vote will always go towards those that will protect and 

preserve nature. 

 

Quote: 

 

This minister and current government appears to be on a 

mission to sell or dismantle everything that isn’t tied 

down. 

 

Quote: 

 

[10:45] 

 

I do not appreciate when governments try to ‘pull one 

over’ the public, especially on such major issues. 

Transparency is key to me and those I know. 

 

Quote: 

 

As a member of the public and as a Sask Party voter in the 

last election, I feel betrayed and lied to . . . I will not vote 

for any member of the Sask Party again. Too many things 

are happening behind closed doors and I’m left with 

sadness and fear rather than confidence in the current 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Roughrider Licence Plate Sales 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great 

pleasure to provide you with an update on the first day of Rider 

plate sales. Last week the Premier and the minister of CIC 

[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] and SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] announced that SGI is 

now offering a specialty Rider licence plate that customers can 

purchase through any SGI motor licence issuer. 

 

Football is in the air, Mr. Speaker, and Rider pride is alive and 

well in our province. With training camp just 16 days away, 

fans have once again shown their passion for the Saskatchewan 

Roughriders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday was green and white day for SGI. The 

new Rider plate sales . . . It was fun to be in line yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker. There was some 1,900 members of the Rider nation 

who placed orders for the Rider plate. Mr. Speaker, this is a big 

touchdown especially for the Saskatchewan Roughriders after 

SGI covers its administrative costs of $27 from the sale of each 

plate to the Roughriders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage all football fans to visit their local 

motor licence issuer to purchase their Rider plate. With the 

outstanding response to the new plate, the Rider nation has once 

again shown the rest of the CFL [Canadian Football League] 

why they are the world’s greatest fans. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s with this incredible support that Saskatchewan 

Roughriders will have a very exciting year, with much good 

news on the horizon including, hopefully, a trip back to the 



May 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5657 

Grey Cup with a victory. Mr. Speaker, pride lives here. Go 

Riders. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Foreign Investment and Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, just yesterday we learned that the 

Premier has signed a deal with a state-owned oil company of 

the People’s Republic of China. The hypocritical actions of this 

Premier and his government know no bounds. While they are 

stripping 100 per cent of the profits from Crown corporations in 

our province, they’re investing in the state-owned enterprises of 

China. 

 

The Premier is strengthening publicly owned crown 

corporations in China and weakening publicly owned Crown 

corporations in Saskatchewan. The Premier has stripped equity 

out of our Crowns, is privatizing them piece by piece, and is 

paralyzing their future growth because of his government’s 

financial mismanagement. 

 

Meanwhile he’s setting up an office in communist China and 

making plans to support their economy. It’s clear that this 

Premier will not invest in the people of Saskatchewan. He is 

content to force backdoor tax increases on Saskatchewan 

families, businesses, and communities to pay for his 

incompetence through skyrocketing utility rates. Clearly it’s a 

hypocritical action to invest in the people of China to strengthen 

their crown corporations while at home he does all he can to 

weaken our Crown corporations. 

 

I guess he was telling the truth when he said that the new 

TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement] 

would protect Crown corporations. But he forgot to mention 

that it would protect the crown corporations in the People’s 

Republic of China and not in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

time for this Premier to end the culture of deceit and stop the 

endless hypocrisy coming from his government. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Sask Party Government Just Getting Started 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Everyone knows that 

talk is cheap, especially the people of Saskatchewan who sent 

the NDP [New Democratic Party] packing after 16 years of 

useless chatter. 

 

In just a fraction of that time, our government has embarked 

upon a path of economic renewal and prosperity. Surgical 

wait-lists have dramatically declined. Our provincial debt has 

been reduced by 40 per cent and our government has given 

record funding to municipalities. These are but a few of the 

accomplishments of our government. 

 

Saskatchewan’s private sector has also done great things to 

ensure this province’s economy continues to move forward. 

Saskatchewan’s remarkably low unemployment numbers speak 

to the private sector’s enthusiasm for investing in this province 

under our government. 

No matter how the NDP spin it, maintaining positive 

relationships with the private sector is essential to 

Saskatchewan’s continued economic growth. We have shown 

this nation that our government understands the value of 

responsible fiscal management. Over a two-year period from 

2008 to 2010, while Ontario increased its spending by 21.8 per 

cent and the federal government by 17.5 per cent, Saskatchewan 

is the only province to reduce spending. 

 

While the NDP cooks their own phony budget documents, 

independent third party reports show that we are a very 

responsible government. We know there is more to do but, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re just getting started. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Who Knew? 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, when they ran for office, 

this government’s members made great promises to the voters 

of Saskatchewan. Three years later, Mr. Speaker, people 

looking at this government’s record can hardly believe what 

they see. 

 

Who knew, Mr. Speaker, that the government would fail to 

keep trust with Saskatchewan’s people? Who knew that the 

government inheriting huge surpluses when coming into office 

would call the province’s finances stark? Who knew, Mr. 

Speaker, that the so-called fiscal conservatives would boost 

budgetary spending by 32 per cent? Who knew, Mr. Speaker, 

that a government could take a province with a booming 

economy, record revenues from $2.3 billion in the bank, to a 

billion-dollar deficit? 

 

Who knew that to cover up its unprecedented fiscal 

mismanagement, the government would drain the rainy day 

fund and raid the Crowns? Who knew, Mr. Speaker, that this 

mismanagement would cost the people of Saskatchewan a 

children’s hospital, 13 long-term care homes, SCN, chiropractic 

care, higher utility costs, higher property taxes, and much, much 

more? 

 

Who knew that while the Premier of Saskatchewan is in the 

pages of The Globe and Mail saying he has a plan to pay down 

debt, the reality is he’s leaving 55 per cent more public debts 

for future generations to pay? Mr. Speaker, given how this 

government has broken trust, it’s no wonder people are saying, 

who knew they’d cost us so much, so fast? 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Personal Health Information 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve just been 

notified of some very disturbing news. On the corner of Fleury 

and 6th Avenue here in Regina, there is a whole bunch of blue 

and green health information cards blowing around. These cards 

contain personal information of patients from the General 

Hospital and the Yorkton hospital. Can the minister please tell 



5658 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 2010 

us what’s happening? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this is the first I’ve 

heard of it. No doubt the officials will be looking into this and 

making sure that those are secured. This is the very first I’ve 

heard of it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, this is the minister who’s been 

talking about how important privacy is. This is a significant 

breach of everybody’s privacy who’s been in the Regina 

General Hospital and the Yorkton hospital. This is something 

that is really, really disturbing to anybody who’s been in . . .  

 

This isn’t just giving your information out to a foundation. This 

is somehow letting it blow around the city so anybody can look 

at it. And it contains a lot more than just your name and 

address. 

 

So the minister needs to reassure this House that something is 

going to be done about this and follow this up and do 

something. The police have also been notified and are involved 

in this already. So the minister should get up to speed very 

quickly and reassure the people of Saskatchewan what he’s 

going to be doing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said, this is the 

first that I’ve heard of it. No doubt the officials will be working 

on that. Securing people’s privacy regarding health information 

is paramount to this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the public is really very uneasy 

about this whole privacy issue. Their trust in the fact that their 

personal information is being kept private has been shattered. 

And now this is devastating to people who have been in these 

hospitals and who have now seen that their information is 

blowing around on the street for anybody to pick up and look at. 

 

This is a complete breach of the public’s trust. And the minister 

needs to very carefully reassure us and the public of 

Saskatchewan that this is something that he will take seriously 

and not make some kind of flippant, laughing comment about 

and deal with it very quickly to make sure the public is 

reassured that this is not something that’s something that’s 

going to happen again. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, our officials will be 

looking into this immediately. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Investigation of Member’s Conduct 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the Minister of Justice. Will the government 

clarify the scope of the conduct it expects the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner to examine with regard to the Premier’s 

legislative secretary, the member from Saskatoon Northwest? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the motion that was put 

forward was one that was debated yesterday in the House. It 

deals with the specific matter about the tapes and the transcripts 

that were provided to CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation]. It also deals with matters arising therefrom. And I 

think it’s appropriate for the Conflict of Interest Commissioner 

to make whatever inquiries he deems appropriate and to expand 

or limit the scope of his inquiry as is appropriate. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I understand the members opposite have 

already made representations to the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner regarding other matters, and I understand that 

the Conflict of Interest Commissioner has chosen to deal with 

those matters as well. If he chooses to consolidate them into one 

review and inquiry process, that’s certainly within his purview 

to do that. And we look forward to giving our full and complete 

co-operation to the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, it’s all well and good that the 

government should call now for a review by the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner. We called for one weeks ago, and the 

government hid behind a police review that everyone knew 

would go nowhere. 

 

In the meantime, the Premier’s legislative secretary, in the 

meantime the Premier’s legislative secretary has deleted 

materials from his website that could be of use to the 

Commissioner in conducting his investigation. Why did the 

government give the Premier’s legislative secretary this 

opportunity to cover his tracks? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we handled this exactly 

the way the matter was handled under the previous 

administration. We refer matters to the Privacy Commissioner 

when it’s appropriate to do that. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

well-settled that when there is a police investigation under way, 

it’s not appropriate for the legislature to become involved or to 

make any comment on it. We chose to do that and, Mr. Speaker, 

that is the correct, appropriate thing and if the matter were to 

rise again it is exactly the course of conduct that this 

government would follow in another set of circumstances that 

were the same. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is our intention to try and ensure that the 

Privacy Commissioner has all of the information that is 

necessary to co-operate fully. If the members opposite want to 

make representations or have other information, it’s very 

appropriate for them to provide to that the Conflict of Interest 



May 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5659 

Commissioner as well. Mr. Speaker, it is our intention to always 

be open, transparent, and accountable. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

deserve to know when the government knew and when it knew 

in regards to the conduct of the Premier’s legislative secretary. 

Mr. Speaker, will the government table in the Assembly any 

and all materials they provided to the Regina Police Service to 

conduct their investigation into the conduct of the Premier’s 

legislative secretary, or will they continue to conspire with the 

Premier’s legislative secretary to hide the facts from the people 

of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Northwest has provided whatever information, I understand, 

that’s been requested of him. We have, Mr. Speaker, provided 

all of the information that was in the possession of our caucus 

and our government has been provided to the Regina Police 

Service, Mr. Speaker. And it will, anything that is requested of 

or that we have in our possession will of course be provided to 

the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite have anything else that 

they have in their possession, I would encourage them to do 

exactly the same. Mr. Speaker, it is imperative for members of 

the public that they have full confidence in the legislature, and 

if they have information in their possession, they ought to 

follow the same course of action and make sure that those 

things are turned over to the Conflict of Interest Commissioner 

immediately, Mr. Speaker. It’s not appropriate to stand and 

debate this matter in the House. All of the matters should be 

turned over to the Conflict of Interest as they will on this side of 

the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, our amendment yesterday called 

for the commissioner to review the Premier’s secretary’s 

possible use of his constituency office to line his pockets, the 

possible use of his travel expense account for the same purpose, 

the question of who was paying for his empty condo in Regina 

while he vows not to attend this legislature until his term ends, 

and the possible violation of the Colin Thatcher law, Mr. 

Speaker, under the terms of that law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these questions need answers, just as we need 

answers to why the Premier’s secretary, supposedly away on 

sick leave, claims to be working hard every day in his 

Saskatoon office, while posting happy family vacation photos 

on Facebook. Mr. Speaker, will the government make sure the 

people get answers to these questions? 

 

[11:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve said it before and I 

will say it again: the Conflict of Interest Commissioner has 

carriage of this matter. We will co-operate with that 

investigation, Mr. Speaker. If the members opposite wish to 

raise a myriad of other allegations they can do what they will. 

They can forward them on to the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner as well. Mr. Speaker, it is the intention of the 

members on this side of the House to do everything that we can 

to ensure that that process goes on as it’s supposed to, 

unimpeded, and we will co-operate fully. And I expect the 

members opposite will do exactly the same thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 

know, Mr. Speaker, you know public trust has been broken 

when the government acts in the interests of their private 

interest friends and not in the public interest. The government 

claims that the cost per resident at the new Amicus facility will 

be no more than $185 a day, and they say that the average cost 

per resident at affiliated facilities is $156 a day. We know that 

Amicus has to service a $27 million mortgage over a 25-year 

term. It just doesn’t add up. Then in their answers to written 

questions yesterday, they admitted that the actual per diem to 

service this long-term debt has yet to be finalized. It’s still up 

for negotiations. 

 

So to the minister: how can Saskatchewan people trust a Sask 

Party government and a Premier who signed an agreement with 

their friends without knowing how much it’s going to cost the 

public? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, an agreement between the Saskatoon Health Region 

and Amicus, which is a subsidiary of the Catholic Health 

Ministry, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is accusing the 

Catholic Health Ministry of being . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

saying that an agreement between the Saskatoon Health Region 

and Amicus, a subsidiary of the Catholic Health Ministry . . . 

she’s accusing the Catholic Health Ministry of being personal 

friends, Mr. Speaker. The Catholic Health Ministry has offered 

health care in this province for hundreds of years, Mr. Speaker, 

and has a reputation that far exceeds anybody on that side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a good deal for Saskatchewan. It’s even a 

better deal for seniors, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know whether they 

. . . obviously they’d rather have seniors live in acute care 

centres than appropriate care centres that Amicus will be 

providing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



5660 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 2010 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this is not about the Catholic 

Health Ministry. This is about an inside deal between that 

government and their friends. Mr. Speaker, it’s not about the 

Catholic Health Ministry. It’s about an inside deal with that 

government, that Premier, and their friends. 

 

You know public trust has been broken when a government 

won’t even answer some basic questions. The opposition and 

the media have been asking this government since Monday for 

information on the potential costs to taxpayers of the 

government’s decision to provide, in essence, a loan guarantee. 

We’ve asked the government how much interest will Amicus 

pay on its mortgage, and therefore the extent of the liability of 

the Sask Party’s decision on the people of the province. But the 

Sask Party apparently hasn’t figured this out; yet they enter into 

an insider deal. 

 

To the minister: how can Saskatchewan people trust a 

government and a Premier who guaranteed a loan without 

knowing the cost to the public? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, if the member wants to 

phrase the agreement between Amicus, a subsidiary of the 

Catholic Health Ministry, and the government, Mr. Speaker, as 

an insider deal, Mr. Speaker, then we’ve got hundreds of . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The member 

from Regina Rosemont and the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres will allow the minister to respond to the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Amicus is a 

not-for-profit run by a volunteer board, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

who we entered into an agreement with, Mr. Speaker. They can 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, governments previous 

and this government have entered into agreements with the 

Catholic Health Ministry, whether it was at St. Joseph’s 

Hospital in Estevan, whether it’s at St. Paul’s Hospital in 

Saskatoon, whether it’s in the Marian Centre in Radville, Mr. 

Speaker. Governments have entered into agreements with the 

Catholic Health Ministry for many, many decades, Mr. Speaker, 

for 100 years because they supply very good health care, 

excellent health care to the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This deal is no different, Mr. Speaker. There’ll be 100 care beds 

in Saskatoon that will be providing care for some of our most 

needed citizens, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the editorial of the 

Saskatoon StarPhoenix this morning isn’t buying it one bit. And 

they call this care home deal, they call this care home deal a 

scary reminder of the bad old days. And that’s what we’re 

trying to get at. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, you know public trust has been broken 

when a government forces future generations to pay the price of 

an insider sweetheart deal and their incompetence. The sad truth 

is that this government’s not going to be around to foot the bill 

for their decision to guarantee this loan. Taxpayers who will be 

paying off this mortgage long after this government is gone . . . 

And you know what it reminds me of, Mr. Speaker? The 

Devine days, Mr. Speaker. It’s future generations, future 

generations who have to pay the price for this government’s 

eagerness to fill its friends’ pockets. 

 

So to the minister: how do you explain this? How do you 

explain a deal for their friends when it should have been 

publicly tendered because it’s public money? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said it 

over and over again. This deal is, this agreement is between 

Amicus, which is a subsidiary of the Catholic Health Ministry, 

Mr. Speaker. It is not a sweetheart deal for any friends, Mr. 

Speaker. It goes to the Catholic Health . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would expect that the opposition 

members would expect an answer to the question and would 

allow the minister to respond so they can hear the answer. I 

recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Catholic Health 

Ministry, as I’ve said, has supplied health care in this province 

for hundreds of years, Mr. Speaker. It’s a reputable 

organization. And I think by accusation they’re saying we’re 

filling the pockets of the Catholic Health Ministry. Is that like 

right up to Pope Benedict XVI? Is that what they’re saying, Mr. 

Speaker? Mr. Speaker, it is a good agreement. It is a good 

agreement for Saskatchewan. It’s an even better agreement for 

the people, seniors in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the government can try and 

hide all it wants behind the Catholic Health Ministry, but it 

doesn’t change these facts: the lawyer is the Premier’s chief of 

staff’s brother, number one. The CEO [chief executive officer] 

is on contract with the Ministry of Health to look at affiliated 

agreements, but Amicus won’t be an affiliate. And most of all, 

it doesn’t change the fact that a Sask Party donor — $18,000 in 

the past four years — receives an untendered contract to build a 

facility that is being paid for by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

So again, how does this minister explain to the public why 

public money is being used to reward their Sask Party insider 

friends? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we provide long-term 



May 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5661 

care homes and facilities around this province, Mr. Speaker, 

and in many locations, they are certainly outdated after 16 years 

of NDP government, Mr. Speaker. We’re replacing 13 of them, 

whether it’s in the number of communities I mentioned 

yesterday. We also know that in Saskatoon right now we have a 

number of seniors living, living in acute care centres. 

Absolutely inappropriate. 

 

We need these beds, Mr. Speaker, and the member opposite is 

right: we are using taxpayers’ money to provide care for seniors 

in this province, something that government failed to do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So here we have a government that sent 

money out to the health regions to fund 13 long-term care 

facilities. They couldn’t manage their budget, and they told 

those health regions to use that money to pay off their debt, Mr. 

Speaker. And then we have a government that says, we’re not 

going to fund those 13 long-term care facilities, that are 

affiliates that have to raise the 35 per cent, until they raise the 

35 per cent. 

 

And then we have a number of nursing homes in Saskatoon that 

would like to add additional beds. So what happens? This 

government enters into a sweetheart deal with a few of their 

buds in Saskatoon to build a long-term care facility, and guess 

what, Mr. Speaker? One hundred per cent of the $27 million is 

going to be funded by the taxpayers of this province. And then 

what happens? We have an untendered contract to a member of 

their operation that gave an $18,000 contribution to their party. 

 

I want to ask the member again, how do you explain public 

money and no public tender and money to their inside friends, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m amazed that that 

member would stand in her place and talk about long-term care 

delivery and the facilities that they left behind after 16 years of 

government, Mr. Speaker. Whether it’s the water buckets in 

Watrous, whether it’s having people live in basements in 

Rosetown . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I realize the time is slipping by. Members 

want to get their last few questions in. They should allow the 

minister to respond, so I’d ask the opposition members to allow 

the minister to respond to the question. I recognize the Minister 

of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, whether it’s an aged 

facility in Radville, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s in Kelvington, 

these facilities have to be repaired, Mr. Speaker. They have to 

be replaced. After 16 years of NDP government, Mr. Speaker, 

they were deteriorating. It was not, it was not the type of 

facilities that seniors should be living in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon we have a shortage of beds. This 

facility that Amicus is going to be building that we’ll simply be 

leasing space from, Mr. Speaker, is a good deal for 

Saskatchewan people, but it’s an even better deal for seniors, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Amicus is building the building. The 

contractor that they so choose to contract is totally up to the 

Catholic Health Ministry, Mr. Speaker. We are simply leasing 

beds at no more than $185 per bed per day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s only the NDP that would say, no we should 

keep them in acute care centres. That’s what they would do, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re providing appropriate care for our seniors. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Management of Provincial Finances 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, again we see here today 

from that minister no transparency, no accountability, no 

answers, no consultation. It’s a shameful trend of the Sask 

Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier inherited $2.3 billion in surplus and 

has turned that into a $1.3 billion deficit. His own budget 

documents show that debt will grow by 55 per cent by 2014. 

 

To the minister: why on earth should Saskatchewan people trust 

this Premier when he has mismanaged our finances so badly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, for the 

record I want to make sure that members in this Assembly 

understand the facts of the matter. When the Saskatchewan 

Party formed government, we inherited 1.2 billion in the 

Growth and Financial Security Fund and $6.8 billion in debt. 

Today there’s now more than $500 million in the Growth and 

Financial Security Fund and the debt is down to $4.2 billion. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a $2 billion improvement over the term of 

this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the record of this government. We have to 

make choices, and we are making choices that are in the best 

interest for the province. We choose to invest in people, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve invested more than $300 million in the largest 

income tax relief in the history of this province. We have 

increased the seniors’ income plan, Mr. Speaker, an important 

function of looking after the most vulnerable in our society. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this minister and this 

government invests in one thing — one thing — and that’s 

friends of the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan can’t trust a government that 

forces them to pay more and to get less. Under the Sask Party, 

the cost of paying your property tax have skyrocketed, the cost 

of post-secondary education have skyrocketed, the cost of our 

power bills have skyrocketed, the cost of renting a home up 

over 26 per cent in the past two years. 



5662 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 2010 

 

Meanwhile, they shortchange municipalities, they shortchange 

education, they shortchange health care, and they shortchange 

universities, while they strip 100 per cent of the profits from our 

Crowns and do nothing for affordable housing. 

 

How can the people of Saskatchewan trust a government who 

forces them to pay back door tax increases directly as a result of 

their incompetence? Why is this government compromising our 

quality of life, jeopardizing our future, and putting at risk our 

shared prosperity? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the friends of this 

government, the friends of this government are the 80,000 

people that have come off the tax rolls. The friends of this 

government are the people that have had . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The Minister of 

Finance has the right to be able to answer this final question 

without interference so the people of Saskatchewan can hear 

what his response is. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the friends of this 

government are the people who drive . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member from Regina 

Rosemont just placed a question. I would expect he’s looking 

for, yes, he’s looking for an answer. We’ll allow the Minister of 

Finance to respond. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the friends of this 

government are the people of Saskatchewan because the people 

of Saskatchewan understand that we’re about a growth agenda 

and we’re going to move this agenda forward for the benefit of 

all our friends, the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d ask the members to come to order. I just 

ask the members to be patient for a moment while we await the 

arrival of His Honour, the Lieutenant Governor for Royal 

Assent. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

[At 11:20 His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills.] 

 

His Honour: — Pray be seated. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly in its present session has passed several Bills which 

in the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 

which Bills I would respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

Clerk: — Your Honour, the Bills are as follows: 

 

Bill No. 133 - The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2009 

Bill No. 97 - The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 

Bill No. 118 - The Milk Control Repeal Act 

Bill No. 108 - The Cities Amendment Act, 2009 

Bill No. 109 - The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 

Bill No. 110 - The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 

Bill No. 111 - The Northern Municipalities Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 

Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 

Bill No. 112 - The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 

2009/Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur 

les juges de paix 

Bill No. 113 - The Justices of the Peace Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2009 

Bill No. 115 - The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 

2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur 

la Cour du Banc de la Reine 

Bill No. 103 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional 

Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009 

Bill No. 101 - The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

Bill No. 127 - The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 2009 

Bill No. 104 - The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment 

Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

Bill No. 114 - The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2009/Loi de 

2009 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur les petites 

créances 

Bill No. 102 - The Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 

2009 

Bill No. 124 - The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2009 

Bill No. 128 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Labour Mobility) 

Amendment Act, 2009 

Bill No. 125 - The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2009 

Bill No. 107 - The Weed Control Act 

Bill No. 117 - The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage 

Act 

Bill No. 106 - The Labour Market Commission Repeal Act 

Bill No. 129 - The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act 

Bill No. 130 - The Enforcement of Money Judgments 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2009/Loi de 

2009 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 

intitulée The Enforcement of Money Judgments 

Act 

Bill No. 135 - The Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2009 

Bill No. 98 - The Municipal Financing Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2009 

Bill No. 137 - The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods 

Amendment Act, 2010 

Bill No. 119 - The Ticket Sales Act 

Bill No. 143 - The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

Bill No. 121 - The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2009 

Bill No. 123 - The Forest Resources Management Amendment 

Act, 2009 

Bill No. 131 - The Conservation Easements Amendment 

Act, 2009 

Bill No. 122 - The Environmental Assessment Amendment 

Act, 2009 

Bill No. 126 - The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Act 

Bill No. 120 - The Financial Administration Amendment 

Act, 2009 

Bill No. 141 - The Business Statutes Administration Transfer 



May 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5663 

Act 

Bill No. 142 - The Business Statutes Administration Transfer 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2010/Loi de 

2010 portant modifications corrélatives à la 

loi intitulée The Business Statutes 

Administration Transfer Act 

Bill No. 139 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining 

Government) Amendment Act, 2010 

Bill No. 140 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining 

Government) Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 

2)/Loi corrective (rationalisation 

administrative) n
o
 2 de 2010 

Bill No. 138 - The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 

2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2010 modifiant la Loi de 1998 

sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 

Bill No. 904 - The Orange Benevolent Society Amendment 

Act, 2010 

Bill No. 136 - The Technical Safety Authority of 

Saskatchewan Act 

Bill No. 105 - The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2009 

Bill No. 132 - The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land 

Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

Bill No. 80 - The Construction Industry Labour Relations 

Amendment Act, 2009 

Bill No. 134 - The Opticians Act 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 

 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 

Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 

government to defray the expenses of the public service. 

 

In the name of the Assembly, I present to Your Honour: 

 

Bill No. 145 - The Appropriation Act, 2010 (No. 1) 

 

to which Bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

 

His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

 

[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 11:27.] 

 

The Speaker: — Please be seated. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

of the Assembly to move a motion regarding adjournment of 

the session and to make some closing remarks. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 

leave to move a motion of adjournment as well as extend some 

remarks of thanks. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

House Adjournment 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you are 

aware, today marks the conclusion of the third legislative 

session of the Saskatchewan Party government. I would like to 

take this opportunity to thank both you and the Clerks at the 

Table for your professionalism and wisdom while guiding us 

through the various procedures of this Assembly. 

 

To the Legislative Assembly staff — who have endured the 

extended hours of this session — along with the elected 

members, the Chairs and Vice-Chairs of various committees, 

my sincere thank yous for your continued commitment and hard 

work. 

 

To those who contribute to the daily operations of this 

Assembly such as the staff of Hansard, journals, broadcasting 

services, Sergeant-at-Arms, commissionaires, the building 

maintenance staff, library services, cafeteria staff, the Pages, 

and the interns, our deepest appreciation is extended to you for 

ensuring efficient operations every day — and particularly 

during the session — and for the very friendly attitude that you 

always display. I would also like to extend my thanks to the 

staff of the respective caucus offices, the staffs of Executive 

Council, and the staff of the ministers’ offices. 

 

To my colleagues on both sides of the House, my thanks for 

your commitment to this Assembly and constituents whom we 

all serve. Some might say that the Opposition House Leader and 

I need to work on our interpersonal relationship skills, and they 

could be right, Mr. Speaker. We will endeavour to do so over 

the many remaining years in our respective positions. 

 

I would like to acknowledge the media for reporting on the 

day-to-day activities of this session and for keeping the public 

apprised of the business and the antics of their legislature. 

 

[11:30] 

 

But most importantly, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank our 

families for their continued support and the many sacrifices 

they make throughout the year that allow us the privilege to do 

our jobs. Many of our members are away from home for 

extended periods of time, which can be difficult for our spouses 

and children. To them I offer our gratitude for their 

understanding and patience while we serve the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish all the members and staff a good, safe 

summer as we carry out our duties outside of this Assembly. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 

day in accordance with the parliamentary calendar, it shall 

stand adjourned until 10 a.m. on October 27th, 2010, 

unless earlier recalled by Mr. Speaker upon the request of 

the government; and if recalled, Mr. Speaker shall give 

each member seven days clear notice, if possible, of such 

time and date. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

question placed by the Government House Leader. Will the 

Assembly take the question as read? 

 



5664 Saskatchewan Hansard May 20, 2010 

I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am very 

pleased today to join with the Government House Leader in 

offering thanks to many people today who make this Assembly 

run. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, I’d like to 

start by thanking you for your duty in overseeing the debates of 

this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank all the staff and 

officers of the Assembly here who work in the Chamber itself 

— the Pages, the Clerks, the Sergeant-at-Arms and his staff — 

who work to make this Legislative Assembly function each and 

every day. 

 

I’d also like to thank those who make sure the word of what 

happens in this Assembly reaches the people of Saskatchewan, 

our Hansard employees and the employees in broadcasting 

services, who have worked long and difficult hours at times as 

the Assembly was extended. I’d like to thank all those staff who 

went the extra mile to ensure that this Assembly functioned and 

worked well during those difficult times. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, no Legislative Assembly is 

complete without the presence of the fourth estate, in this case 

the media, Mr. Speaker, who work each and every day 

diligently to ensure that the people of Saskatchewan know and 

hear about the important things that go on in this Assembly and 

around our province, Mr. Speaker. To them we offer a very 

special thanks. 

 

I’d also like to thank the rest of the staff in this building, Mr. 

Speaker, this magnificent building that needs many, many 

others to make it function each and every day on behalf of us 

and the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Whether they work in the offices of the government or the 

official opposition, the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, the 

library, the cafeteria, visitor services, as they maintain our 

building or for that matter, Mr. Speaker, the interns who work 

on behalf and help members in this building each and every 

day, as I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, the Pages and others 

who have gone above and beyond to help us, whether they’re 

cleaning the building, maintaining the grounds, carrying out the 

repairs in this building, escorting visitors within this building, 

taking tours, helping school students come and learn about their 

Legislative Assembly, provide security, or a hundred other 

tasks that get done in this building each and every day — we’re 

truly grateful for the effort you put in on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I think each and every one of 

us appreciates the work that they do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t mention the families, the 

families of all 58 members and the staff who work in this 

building who give a great deal during the session. There are 

members who are away from their families a week at a time. 

They in many cases have children and family that they miss, 

and so each and every one of us understands the importance of 

family and the role that our families, our spouses, and others 

play in making it possible for us to be here and do the job that 

we were elected to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also thank the members of the 

government who each and every day have been here doing their 

duty as the people of Saskatchewan would expect them to do, 

Mr. Speaker. And I think the people of Saskatchewan 

appreciate the work that we do do, and on behalf of the official 

opposition, I’d like to also thank the members of the 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank our hard-working opposition 

caucus staff who have — I think the majority — have now 

joined us in the gallery. It’s a relatively new team, Mr. Speaker. 

Many of them haven’t been here longer than a year, but they’ve 

come a long way in a very short few months, and we’re very, 

very proud of the work they do. 

 

We have with us today, Nicolette Yeung who’s the researcher, 

pardon me the communications individual in our office, Mr. 

Speaker. We have Brian Sklar and Scott Calimente. Scott may 

actually be out in the rotunda now working. We have in 

research Linsay Martens, Hillary Aitken, Rick Pollard, and 

Dwane Yasinowski who do a fabulous job on behalf of the 

members of our caucus. We have in our office Jannet Shanks 

and Val Stevenson who every day make sure that we are 

organized and know what we are doing, and we very much 

value their work. And we have a terrific management team in 

the office: Cheryl Stecyk who makes sure that each and every 

day we’re organized, Sandra Jackle who’s in charge of 

communications, and Stephen Moore who’s the chief of staff in 

the caucus office that works tireless hours to make our office 

work and function properly. On behalf of the caucus, we’d like 

to thank each and every one of you for the hard work that you 

do. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to say on a personal note that a 

team is only as strong as any one of its members, and a single 

member can make all the difference, and we’ve seen that over 

the last year. A single player can be a game changer, Mr. 

Speaker, if he’s on the team to mentor, to rally, and to inspire 

the rest of the team and to find their inner drive to both learn 

and to succeed. Mr. Speaker, on our team that player is our 

leader, Dwain Lingenfelter. I’d like to close by offering him 

thanks on behalf of the rest of our team for all his hard work in 

leading our caucus. No one in our caucus works harder, Mr. 

Speaker. No one cares more about our province or about its 

people. He truly inspires our team to work harder each and 

every day and, Mr. Speaker, from our caucus and our team, 

thank you very much, Dwain. 

 

The Speaker: — Before placing the question, I would like to 

extend some thank yous as well. 

 

First of all, I would like to extend a special thank you to the 

citizens of Saskatchewan and the voters who have sent MLAs 

to this Legislative Chamber; the Premier and the Leader of the 

Opposition; our House leaders; but as Speaker, most 

importantly the individuals at the Table, the Clerks at the Table 

and the Sergeant-at-Arms whose expertise the Speaker looks to 

on many occasions with the numerous requests that fall across 

the desk of the Speaker in regards to rules and security of the 

building; to legislative security and sessional security staff; to 

our committee staff and officials who appeared before the 

committees. 

 

And I would like to also list and name our Pages who have 



May 20, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5665 

worked with us this past session: Shaheen Lotun, Kristin Bend, 

Katie Colhoun, Chelsea Laskowski, Crystal Gall, Megan Fraser, 

and Delee McDougall. We truly appreciate your time and 

efforts and the interest you took in the Legislative Chamber. 

 

I also extend a special thank you to our Dome Cafeteria staff; 

Government Services; the Clerk’s office; Office of the Law 

Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel; our communication and 

technology services, and they’ve had a few challenges this past 

session as well; financial and administrative services; human 

resources and payroll services to whom we all look to and 

depend on; the folks who work in Hansard, journals, the 

Legislative Library, visitor services who have a number who 

have joined us today. 

 

And certainly to MLAs and Chairs and Co-Chairs and members 

of committees, a special thank you to broadcast services, our 

commissionaires, building maintenance staff, interns and 

summer students, our caucus office staff, Executive Council 

office staff, ministerial office staff, the media, and our 

constituency assistants. And a special thank you to the staff of 

the Speaker, who have worked so diligently to manage the 

different responsibilities of the Speaker’s office. 

 

And finally as has been mentioned, to the families of MLAs, we 

want to extend our thanks. And as we noted earlier, I think it 

would be also remiss if we did not acknowledge the number of 

people who have come from the Saskatchewan House of Prayer 

who have spent the time not only lifting up members but lifting 

up our province and praying God’s blessing on this province 

and praying for all members. We say thank you to Rick and 

Joanne and all the people who have joined you over this past 

session for the time and efforts and the time you spend in this 

Legislative Building. 

 

At this time, I present the motion presented by the Government 

House Leader: 

 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 

day in accordance with the parliamentary calendar, it shall 

stand adjourned until 10 a.m. on October 27th, 2010, 

unless earlier recalled by Mr. Speaker upon the request of 

government; and if recalled, Mr. Speaker shall give each 

member seven clear days of notice, if possible, of such 

date and time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This House stands adjourned 

until . . . oh sorry, pardon me. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Almost close but not quite. Mr. Speaker, 

I move this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 10 a.m., 

October 27th, 2010. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 11:42.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ................................................................................................................................................................... 5649, 5652 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5649, 5650 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5649 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5649 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5649 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5650 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5650 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5650 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5650 

  Morin ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5651, 5652 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5651 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5651 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5651 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5652 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5652 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5652 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5653 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5653 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5653 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5653 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5654 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5654 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5654 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5655 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5655 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Plumbing and Other Matters 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5655 

 Aboriginal Affairs Working Group 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5655 

 Comments on Amendments to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5656 

 Roughrider Licence Plate Sales 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5656 

 Foreign Investment and Crown Corporations 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5657 

 Sask Party Government Just Getting Started 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5657 

 Who Knew? 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5657 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Personal Health Information 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5657 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5658 

 Investigation of Member’s Conduct 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5658 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5658 

 Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facility 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5659 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5659 

 Management of Provincial Finances 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5661 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5661 

ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5662 

MOTIONS 

 House Adjournment 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5663 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5664 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5664 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


