




















































Hansard: April 22, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 49A  THURSDAY, APRIL 22, 2010, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4959 

 April 22, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before routine proceedings, members, I lay 

on the table in accordance with section 30 of The Ombudsman 

and Children’s Advocate Act the 34th annual report of the 

Provincial Ombudsman for the year 2008. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, through you to members, I 

would request leave to make an extended introduction this 

morning. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for the opportunity for 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thanks to 

you, hon. members, for the leave. 

 

In two days, on the 24th of April, we will mark the beginning of 

National Immunization Awareness Week. That day almost 

exactly will mark the one-year anniversary of the earliest 

beginnings of what we now know as the H1N1 pandemic and 

the largest provincial immunization campaign ever undertaken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the time, nobody knew or health officials did 

not know here or elsewhere around the world the magnitude of 

what we might be facing at the time. The news coming out of 

Mexico was alarming, to say the least. A new strain of influenza 

was putting previously healthy and young people in hospitals in 

surprisingly high numbers and people were dying. 

 

It started with a conference call on a Sunday morning with a 

small team from the Ministry of Health in terms of the response 

from the province of Saskatchewan. Two hours later, we had 

notices posted in our airports warning people returning from 

Mexico to be alert for signs of influenza. It was among the 

swiftest action in the country at the very beginnings of the 

pandemic. 

 

It gives me a great pleasure today to offer formal recognition, 

Mr. Speaker, and to thank some of those key players who were 

responsible for the immunization campaign and the public 

awareness, Mr. Speaker, and to introduce them to you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly. 

 

I would like to start with our population health branch, 

represented here today by several people. First of all, Rick 

Trimp, along with all of his staff. He was responsible for the 

ministry pandemic preparation and response and ran the Health 

Emergency Operation Centre. This was the nerve centre. 

 

I had a chance to tour it along with the Minister of Health. And 

in that nerve centre, staff undertook close surveillance of course 

of the virus, figured out the logistics of ensuring Tamiflu and 

then vaccine that they were ordered and distributed throughout 

the province, worked with the regional health authorities’ 

clinical and management staff to establish vaccination clinics. 

The people behind some of those tasks include Valerie Mann 

and Leslie Grob, Tim Macauley, Tami Denomie. 

 

I want to offer a special thank you to one of the main architects 

of the immunization rollout in our province, the person who 

Saskatchewan residents came to know as a credible and calm 

voice with respect to the H1N1 situation, the chief medical 

officer for the province of Saskatchewan, Dr. Moira McKinnon, 

as well as deputy chief medical health officer, Saqib Shahab. 

 

The Saskatchewan Disease Control Laboratory, represented by 

Dr. Paul Levett and Dr. Nick Antonishyn, was key in the initial 

identification and ongoing surveillance and testing of the virus. 

The health emergency management team represented here today 

by Jim McIlmoyl and Garnet Matchett was instrumental in 

setting up the HEOC [Health Emergency Operation Centre] and 

acquiring key supplies for the region. 

 

Acute and emergency services branch, represented today by 

Patrick O’Byrne, was responsible for monitoring activity in our 

hospitals. Communications branch, represented by Joan Petrie 

and Karen Hill, worked to distribute infection control 

information and advice throughout the province, coordinated 

the communication with the ministry, with the health regions 

and the federal government and other provinces and territories. 

 

I want to acknowledge the communication staff who answered 

hundreds of calls from Saskatchewan residents who were 

obviously worried, who had real concerns for themselves and 

for their family members. 

 

Thanks also to individuals in workforce planning, primary care, 

and to staff from our medical services branch who worked 

closely with the Saskatchewan Medical Association. 

Overseeing it, Mr. Speaker, the deputy minister, Dan Florizone, 

and the assistant deputy minister, Lauren Donnelly, were 

instrumental in terms of the leadership needed. Thanks to all. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we want to thank the nurses. We want to 

thank the front-line staff right across this province who made 

sure the delivery of the vaccination was very successful, Mr. 

Speaker, by any reasonable measure. 

 

On behalf of all of the residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, I want to thank everyone who was helpful in the 

delivery of the program. There are hundreds of them across 

Saskatchewan today represented by those who have joined us in 

your gallery. 

 

Saskatchewan was referred to, frequently referred to on the 

national level as having one of the best approaches to the 

challenge of H1N1 and among the best immunization rates at 

about 50 per cent of the entire population. Mr. Speaker, that is 

due not to the people in this Chamber, that is, on the floor. That 



4960 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2010 

is due to the folks that joined us in the Speaker’s gallery and to 

nurses and medical professionals right across this province. And 

we welcome them to their Legislative Assembly and in so doing 

we thank them for the great job they did on behalf of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to add my 

congratulations and welcome to Dr. Moira McKinnon and the 

whole team of professionals who handled the H1N1 outbreak 

and the response to it so efficiently and professionally. And I 

want to welcome them to the legislature and add our thank you 

to them as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

this morning, to you and through you to the entire Assembly, to 

welcome in the west gallery a fine group of young people, the 

grade 11 and 12 students from Glaslyn Central School. They are 

joined this morning by their teacher, Brian Goota, chaperones 

Carol Lee Allen and Merv Pritchett. And I would like all 

members to help me welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — With leave to make an extended 

introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

asked for leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with great honour that I 

stand and rise today in my place to introduce the members of 

the Potash Council, Saskatchewan Potash Council who are here 

with us today. 

 

The Potash Council was formed in September of 2008. Miners 

in the potash industry concerned about a number of issues for 

workers, but who have gotten together to deal with occupational 

health and safety issues in the mines. Mr. Speaker, they have 

produced a wonderful looking poster here and with the . . . in 

memory of 52 workers who have died from workplace injury in 

the potash industry with all the names, as a reminder to all those 

that have died. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask the members of the Potash Council to rise 

as I introduce them. From the United Steelworkers Local 7552, 

Agrium, we have Kevin Climenhaga and Gord Bedient. From 

United Steelworkers Local 7458 at Cory, we have Randy 

Rounce. From the United Steelworkers Local 7689, Allan, we 

have Ron St. Pierre and Roy Howell. From United Steelworkers 

Local 7656, Colonsay, we have Scott Rushton and Allan 

Martin. 

From Communication, Energy and Paperworkers Local 922, 

Lanigan, we have Rick Suchy and Derrick Fisher. From 

Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Local 892, 

Esterhazy, we have Perry Bubnick and Brian Kitch. From the 

Rocanville Potash Employees Association, Rocanville, we have 

Dale McAuley and Ernest Berezowski. And from United 

Steelworkers Local 189, Patience Lake, we have Neil Wolff. 

 

We also have with us a very special guest who is presently in 

Winnipeg, and that’s Sylvia Tkach. Sylvia is presently taking 

occupational health and safety in Winnipeg. Sylvia is the wife 

of Robert Tkach who was killed in the mines in September of 

2008 in a workplace accident. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a special connection here to the legislature. 

The husband, Robert Tkach’s father was a painter, and he was 

the painter commissioned by Woodrow Lloyd to do his 

painting. So I would ask all members to welcome these people 

to our legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. To you and 

through to all members of this Assembly, I would like to join 

the member opposite in welcoming members of the Potash 

Council and Mrs. Tkach to their Assembly. And obviously all 

of us put great emphasis on occupational health and safety. If I 

could ask all members to join in this welcome, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned 

over the condition of Highway 310. This petition states that 

Highway 310 has deteriorated to the point where it’s a potential 

safety hazard for those folks that travel on that highway each 

and every day. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway 310 that the people of Saskatchewan 

need. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the good folks from 

Lestock, Ituna, Hubbard, and Kelliher, Saskatchewan. I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of the protection of wildlife habitat 

lands. And this speaks to the concern of many residents that the 

government currently has tabled in this House amendments to 

The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. And that Act protects 3.4 

million acres of uplands and wetlands or one-third of the 



April 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4961 

wildlife habitat lands in Saskatchewan in its natural state. And 

the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately and 

without delay recognize the importance of the protection 

of wildlife habitat lands and immediately withdraw 

proposed amendments that will negatively affect the 

protection of wildlife habitat lands; 

 

And in so doing, cause the provincial government to 

commit to meaningful and adequate consultation with all 

stakeholders that will be affected by future legislative 

changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens in Asquith, 

Biggar, Blackstrap, and Davidson. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Members, if members would allow the 

Speaker to move back to introduction of guests, there’s a very 

important gentleman in the Chamber that I neglected to 

introduce earlier. That’s greatly appreciated. My apologies. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — We do have our Provincial Ombudsman with 

us, Mr. Kevin Fenwick. And my apologies; I had every 

intention of introducing Mr. Fenwick earlier. And I believe he’s 

joined by one of his staff members as well. So welcome to the 

legislative chambers. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for protection for renters from 

unreasonable rent increases, and we know that many 

Saskatchewan renters are facing a dangerous combination of 

rising rents and low vacancy rates right across our province. 

And we know as well that the majority of Canadians, some 80 

per cent, now live in provinces with some form of rent controls, 

including Manitoba, BC [British Columbia]; Ontario, Quebec, 

and Prince Edward Island. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

consider enacting some form of rent control with a view to 

protect Saskatchewan renters from unreasonable increases 

in rent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the good city of Regina. I do so present. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on the issue of high tuition fees for 

post-secondary students. And I call on the Sask Party 

government to have its actions match its rhetoric. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to addressing the burden placed 

by high post-secondary tuition fees on Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of expanding the graduate retention 

program. The petition is being circulated because the 

Saskatchewan Party government chose specifically to exclude 

the retention program to exclude master’s and Ph.D. graduates 

as well as graduates from outside the province of 

Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Prince Albert. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, on this very special day, on Earth 

Day, I’d like to read a petition regarding the Sask Party’s lack 

of action with respect to climate change: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately, 

without delay, acknowledge and recognize that climate 

change is occurring and the impacts of climate change are 

escalating and worsening; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

undertake immediate actions to mitigate climate change by 

reducing greenhouse gas emissions, actions which will 

serve to protect Saskatchewan people from the significant 

costs to our economy, global security, and the quality of 

life which climate change threatens to bring about, and to 

also protect Saskatchewan people from longer and more 

frequent droughts, reduced river flows as the glaciers 

which feed our rivers shrink, erratic rainfall with more 



4962 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2010 

frequent and more serious flooding, and loss of at least the 

southern part of Saskatchewan’s valuable boreal forest 

which is treasured by so many in our province; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, begin the process of creating 

a meaningful, significant, comprehensive, and broad-based 

strategy including enacting substantial and meaningful 

legislation and substantial and meaningful regulations, to 

meet the commitment solemnly pledged repeatedly in 

October and November of 2007 during the last provincial 

election by the Premier, the current member from Swift 

Current, who at the time of the last provincial election 

when he made this serious and significant commitment 

was serving as the leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition, to reduce our province’s greenhouse gas 

emissions by 32 per cent from the levels of greenhouse gas 

emissions which our province produced in the year 2007 

and to meet said 32 per cent reduction of greenhouse gas 

emissions by the year of Our Lord 2020, 10 years from 

now or one short decade away; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the Premier to instruct his 

Minister of Environment, the current member from 

Martensville, to recognize the importance of honouring the 

Premier’s solemnly pledged commitment and to set about 

the important task of developing a substantial and 

meaningful plan to seek a reduction of our province’s 

levels of greenhouse gas emissions, rather than continuing 

to evade all responsibility in her duties to actually address 

this critically important issue which will directly affect our 

province’s economy and the quality of life for all of our 

residents; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, reject the intensity-based 

reduction targets which the Saskatchewan Party 

government has shamefully followed the federal 

Conservative government in adopting, in favour of 

absolute reduction targets, and to immediately enact said 

absolute reduction targets in the new management and 

reduction of greenhouse gases Act; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, reverse its ill-advised decision 

to cut all funding to the Prairie Adaptation Research 

Collaborative and to recognize that the Prairie Adaptation 

Research Collaborative is a valuable and much-needed 

organization in that it generates practical options to help 

Saskatchewan to adapt to current and future impacts of 

climate change and fosters the development of new 

professionals in the emerging science of climate change 

impacts and adaptations; 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, restore the full amount of 

funding which it recently cut to the Prairie Adaptation 

Research Collaborative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Regina and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a 

petition in support of protecting Saskatchewan workers. Mr. 

Speaker, according to the Workers’ Compensation Board, 34 

people were killed in the workplace in Saskatchewan in 2010. 

Fifty-two workers in the potash industry have been killed, and 

the current government has created a culture of complacency 

with regards to upholding safety regulations and the acceptance 

of risk, injury, and death in the workplace, and that the working 

people of Saskatchewan should never be expected to put their 

lives at risk when doing their job. And we in the prayer . . . The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

Cause the government to immediately recognize the 

importance of creating a safe and healthy working 

environment for all people of Saskatchewan; 

 

And in so doing cause the government to support the hard 

work and integrity of occupational health and safety 

officers and respect their authority by supporting them in 

the performance of their duties; 

 

And in so doing create a culture and atmosphere of respect 

for the working people, of upholding the high standards of 

occupational health and safety, and by honouring those 

workers who have been killed in the workplace in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I so present. These petitions are signed by people from 

Saskatoon and Delisle. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to present a petition to the Assembly. The petition 

notes many Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed incomes and are 

victims of physical, emotional, and financial abuse. Mr. 

Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Calls on the Legislative Assembly to enact a 

Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which would provide 

Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic security 

and protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of The 

Battlefords constituency. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive $1 billion deficit budgets of the Sask 

Party and two years of debt growth under the Sask Party. They 

characterize the current budget as irresponsible, short-sighted, 

and taking us backwards, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as 



April 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4963 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned citizens of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

again today to present a petition in support of the Saskatchewan 

film and television industry. This petition is signed by residents 

concerned that the Sask Party government has put ideology 

ahead of good public policy with the closure of SCN 

[Saskatchewan Communications Network] and that it has 

allowed the film and television industry to languish in the last 

two years. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to make changes to the film employment tax 

credit that will allow the Saskatchewan film industry to be 

more competitive with other provinces; to reverse its 

decision to shut down the Saskatchewan Communications 

Network; and to work with the industry to reverse the 

decline in film production. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed by residents of Regina. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Earth Day 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to proudly proclaim that 

today, across Canada and around the globe people, young and 

old, will be celebrating the 40th anniversary of Earth Day. Over 

6 million Canadians will join 1 billion people in 170 countries 

raising awareness about the critical environmental issues that 

face humanity. 

 

Across Saskatchewan, citizens are staging events and playing 

their part in this noble cause. In Estevan, community members 

are meeting at the library to learn how eating locally is better 

for the environment, their health, and the local economy. 

 

Here in Regina the Seeds For Sustainability concert will be held 

at the Royal Saskatchewan Museum with all proceeds going to 

the north central community gardens. And local Girl Guides 

will be connecting with their communities, spending the 

morning participating in a city-wide cleanup campaign. 

 

Beginning tomorrow, a three-day film festival, complete with 

youth programs, workshops, and guest speakers will be held in 

Craik. 

 

Mr. Speaker, despite these wonderful events, we must 

remember that Earth Day is a time not only for reflection, but 

for reminder for action. As members of this Assembly, we are 

the chief stewards of our province’s abundant ecosystems and 

natural resources. It is both our duty and responsibility to not 

only pay lip service to the environment, but to pass strong, 

effective environmental legislation that will ensure healthy and 

vibrant ecosystems for generations to come. 

 

To quote a Native American proverb, “We do not inherit the 

earth from our ancestors, we borrow it from our children.” Mr. 

Speaker, if we’re going to entrust our children with the earth 

they deserve, we need real action and we need to start today. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

rise in the House today in recognition of Earth Day. This day is 

a special time set aside to honour the earth, our only home. 

Earth Day began in 1970 and is recognized as the birth of the 

environmental movement. It’s a day to raise awareness about 

the need to increase our efforts to keep our environment clean 

and safe for our future generations. Mr. Speaker, we look at 

Earth Day as an opportunity to stimulate positive actions aimed 

at local, regional, and global issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today also marks the two-year anniversary of the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] Environment critic’s request that 

we adopt the federal government’s greenhouse gas emission 

reduction targets. I ask all members to join with us today in 

celebrating Earth Day and the fact that on the important issue of 

climate change, our government and the opposition, especially 

the Environment critic, have placed partisanship aside and 

found common ground on the greenhouse gas emission 

reduction targets we should be setting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if only the member from Walsh Acres could once 

again show those same strong leadership qualities and convince 

her colleagues that they should stop delaying our government’s 

current climate change Bills, if this would happen we could get 

more done on the Environment file. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Saskatchewan Potash Council 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since the formation 

of the Saskatchewan Potash Council in September of 2008, the 

council has been working hard to become an effective voice 

between Saskatchewan labour representatives and the 

Saskatchewan potash industry. 

 

Participating Saskatchewan potash organizations are: CEP 

[Communications, Energy and Paperworkers Union of Canada] 



4964 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2010 

Local 922, CEP Local 892, United Steelworkers Area Council, 

United Steelworkers Local 189, United Steelworkers Local 

7458, United Steelworkers Local 7552, United Steelworkers 

Local 7656, United Steelworkers Local 7689, and the 

Rocanville Potash Employees Association. 

 

The council fulfills an essential role in educating their members 

on health and safety regulations, collective bargaining, political 

action campaigns, and WC [workers’ compensation] 

compensation and appeals. They also promote workers’ issues 

within the potash industry and lobby two levels of government 

to support workers’ rights. 

 

By bringing together many different voices and by representing 

many different unions, the Saskatchewan Potash Council has 

formed a strong and united voice for people working in the 

potash industry. The spirit of solidarity, combined with hard 

work and dedication, is a driving force for the Potash Council’s 

mission to achieve justice and equality for all workers in the 

potash industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in recognizing 

the Saskatchewan Potash Council for its hard work and 

dedication. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Opposition Allegations 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, for some time now the 

NDP’s been spreading the mistruth that the Premier had two 

companies that went bankrupt. Now they’re using taxpayers’ 

money to spread this falsehood. 

 

The NDP MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] are 

using their taxpayer-funded allowances to run radio attack ads 

that spread a number of falsehoods, including the one about the 

bankruptcies. 

 

This morning I wrote a letter asking the Speaker to review this 

matter pursuant to section 56 of The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act. We believe these NDP attack ads are a 

violation of the Act and the Board of Internal Economy 

directives. 

 

Directive 4.1 states that members are allowed to use their 

constituency allowance to “convey ideas and information.” I 

believe it is intended that the information conveyed should not 

be false information and that using the constituency allowance 

to convey false information is a violation of the directive. 

 

I refer also to the members’ code of ethical conduct which 

states, “To our constituents we owe honesty . . .” and “To our 

colleagues in this Assembly, we owe . . . fairness in political 

dealings.” 

 

The statement that the Premier launched two companies that 

went bankrupt is neither honest nor fair. It simply isn’t true and 

taxpayers’ money should not be used by the NDP to spread this 

falsehood. Mr. Speaker, I would challenge the NDP MLAs to 

provide you with documentation to prove that the statement is 

accurate. I know that they will be unable to do so and as such, 

the NDP MLAs should not be allowed to use their 

taxpayer-funded allowances to spread this mistruth. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier made it clear 

from his first days in government that he was going to war with 

the working people in Saskatchewan. This government rammed 

through Bill 5, the essential services legislation, Bill 6, The 

Trade Union Act, crippling the power of working people to 

negotiate and organize. And soon the government will force 

Bill 80 down the throats of Saskatchewan people despite the 

fact that it is a self-interested attempt to fix the construction 

industry, an industry that is not broken. 

 

The Sask Party has mismanaged the labour legislation file so 

badly that even the United Nations is now recognizing the Sask 

Party government’s incompetence. The International Labour 

Organization, a prestigious United Nations body, has publicly 

condemned this labour legislation. But did the Sask Party 

reverse their decision and repeal the legislation? No, they 

actually pledged to take the fight against the working people all 

the way to the Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

While the Premier walked away from a court battle with the 

federal Conservatives that could have resulted in 800 million a 

year for Saskatchewan families, he is willing to carry on his war 

with working families of this province in spite of international 

condemnation. The Premier claims that there is too much red 

tape in occupational health and safety. Meanwhile the number 

of fatal deaths continues to rise. Mr. Speaker, the Premier 

should be honouring those workers who have gone to work and 

been killed, not going to war with their families. Thank you. 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Comments on Kidney Transplant Program 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I rise today to address misleading comments made yesterday by 

the member opposite from Saskatoon Eastview about the 

province’s kidney transplant program. The people of this 

province who have kidney disease and require kidney 

transplants are . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I would ask 

members to allow the member to make her statement. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The people 

of this province who have kidney disease and require kidney 

transplants are presented with unimaginable challenges. These 

people are not benefiting from the confusion, the 

misinformation, and quite frankly the politicization of this 

issue. 

 

The member opposite said, and I quote: 



April 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4965 

I spoke to Dr. Shoker this morning . . . According to Dr. 

Shoker, “If there is no firm start date, the surgeons will 

leave.” 

 

Minister McMorris had the pleasure of speaking directly to Dr. 

Shoker this morning at 9 a.m. It is . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I 

would ask the member, if that isn’t a quote, the member’s not to 

use a member’s name, but to refer to their constituency. 

 

Ms. Ross: — I apologize. The Minister of Health had the 

pleasure of speaking directly to Dr. Shoker this morning at 9 

a.m. It is irresponsible for the member opposite to take this 

comment out of context yesterday in the House, completely 

misleading the public and this Assembly by using comments 

from Dr. Shoker inappropriately and following the usual pattern 

of fearmongering by the NDP. 

 

Dr. Shoker said he is encouraged by their conversation and 

stated that he believes no surgeon would be leaving as work 

continues on this program, noting that he does not speak on 

behalf of the surgeons, as he is actually . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would just remind the 

member that over time we have been very careful on how we 

use certain terms and the term misleading, while it was hard to 

determine whether in the context, it certainly doesn’t add to the 

debate. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Health Care Results 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier must truly 

expect that Saskatchewan people have unlimited patience. Since 

he was appointed by the Premier, the Health minister has done 

nothing but make promises and conduct one study after another. 

But he’s forgot one thing. He’s forgot about providing any 

results, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To begin with, the minister spent hundreds of thousands of 

dollars on his flagship Patient First Review. And what have we 

seen as a result? Patients on their deathbed, waiting for kidney 

transplants and unable to get them because this Health minister 

and this Premier shut down the program. 

 

But the Premier told them, just keep waiting; just have patience. 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier spent millions more taxpayer dollars 

on a doctor recruitment agency, and the only results we’ve seen 

are a rise in the physician vacancies around the province. Just 

last week we saw three more physicians leave in Moose Jaw, 

leaving the two remaining doctors to shoulder the burden by 

working overtime. And the patients, Mr. Speaker? They will 

certainly have to test their patience since the clinic is now only 

open for limited hours, and patients are being forced to line up 

outside just to receive health care. 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen women with ovarian cancer left with 

nowhere to turn since this Health minister forced Regina’s 

gyne-oncologist to close her doors due to substandard working 

conditions and overwork. The Sask Party government has asked 

for two years to address the situation, but finally Dr. Brydon too 

ran out of patience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the Premier and his Health minister to 

deliver some results to the real patients of Saskatchewan. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Workplace Safety 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier. As he will know, there are 14 representatives of potash 

workers in the gallery today, and they are here to observe 

question period and visit with members of the opposition. They 

represent thousands of miners from across the province who 

work in the potash industries. 

 

These are hard-working people who pay their taxes. They’re 

involved in the community. They do an honest day’s work for 

not so much pay, but they work hard and they’re well trained 

and they work in dangerous jobs. And the problem is they don’t 

feel that their work is valued by this government. And in fact, 

52 miners in the potash industry have died here, in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And my question to the Premier is this: these family members 

want to know when this government will stop treating them, 

with the high number of fatalities that are taking place, and will 

stop treating these fatalities as simply a matter of reality that 

nothing can be done about. When will they stop treating these 

incidents of death with the . . . take them seriously for the first 

time and do something about it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for the 

opportunity to talk about this very, very serious subject and that 

is occupational health and safety, and in this instance as it 

pertains to Saskatchewan’s mines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we’ve endeavoured to do and that we can 

demonstrate is that we are working diligently to ensure that 

we’re actually putting greater emphasis with greater results on 

occupational health and safety. For example, in conducting 

workplace inspections, in 2006-07, the last year of the members 

opposite, there were 3,621. In 2009-10, there were 4,785. That’s 

a 32 per cent increase on workplace inspections — an increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker I can also offer that there were stop work orders 

issued. In 2006-07, there were 210. In fact last year in ’09-10, 

we saw 794. That’s a 278 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s more to do. We know that, but we take occupational 

health and safety very seriously. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 



4966 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2010 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the sad part is that the fact 

that these people who work in risky occupations, and that when 

fatalities occur, these are a true tragedy for the family, for the 

community, and for the industry. 

 

And by contrast, when a miner died in Esterhazy last fall, this 

government simply brushed it aside. And I say that with 

seriousness because that is not the way to handle this kind of an 

issue. And the minister can brag about the number of times that 

there have been inspections and when there had been 

contraventions, but the fact of the matter is this: that the number 

of deaths of working people in ’07 was 21 and in ’09 was 26. 

Those are the numbers that matter; not the number of 

inspections, but the number of deaths. And they’ve increased 

significantly under this Premier’s watch. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: if you’re doing such a great 

job, why are more workers dying in this province now than 

before? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for the 

opportunity again to speak to this very significant and serious 

subject. Mr. Speaker, for a number of years, Saskatchewan’s 

record on occupational health and safety is one that warrants 

improvement. It’s one of the reasons that we’ve put forward 

Mission: Zero, and that we’ve put in place a memorandum of 

understanding between the Workers’ Compensations Board and 

the Ministry of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

to actually advance Mission: Zero. And that is to ensure that 

we’re working towards the only acceptable number; that is zero 

occupational injuries or deaths. 

 

What we can say is we’re increasing also not only our 

inspections, not only our stop work orders, we’re also working 

to ensure that there’s greater transparency and information 

being shared. So that as of last summer, we’ve updated our 

website with more occupational health and safety and labour 

standard enforcement information. And we’ve just recently 

come forward with a new initiative where young people in 

Saskatchewan are being given the opportunity to take online 

tests. Those include very specific elements of occupational 

health and safety. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier and the minister. I’m not arguing whether he’s getting 

things up on the website or not. The fact of the matter is many 

people can’t find where it’s at on the website and there’s a 

difficult time getting information. But that’s not the main 

problem. 

 

The main problem is the Premier set the tone from day one with 

working people in this province when he said the following: 

that he intended to go to war with labour and working people. 

And that sets a tone for managers across the province. That’s 

the problem. 

 

He also passed labour legislation that gets condemned by the 

ILO [International Labour Organization]. We have workers, 

health care workers without a contract going into their third 

year. My question to the Premier is this: how can a government 

that boasts of going to war with the working people of this 

province then say they can be trusted? The safety of the 

workplace, how can that be that you go to war and then have 

people believe that you’re going to have a safe workplace? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well 

to echo the words of the minister responsible, obviously 

workplace safety is a very serious issue in this province. It 

transcends partisan politics; at least it ought to, Mr. Speaker. 

And as evidenced by the ministers who report to this legislature, 

two good questions with respect to worker safety, detailing the 

government’s priorities with respect to Mission Zero, detailing 

an increase in the number of work site inspections, detailing an 

increase in the number of stop work orders. Mr. Speaker, this 

issue’s taken very seriously. 

 

The reference the hon. member makes is his usual, is taken out 

of context, and not based on the truth, Mr. Speaker. The best 

thing we can do in this province, the best thing we can do in this 

province for working families is to ensure that there is safe 

work places, but it is to also ensure that there are more 

opportunities in this province for families, unionized and 

non-unionized. That’s why we see in record numbers, in record 

numbers — despite what members opposite have to say — 

people moving to this province to find workplace opportunities 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it is an important issue. And if 

it’s an important issue, one of the questions I guess could be 

was the number of cuts in the Department of Labour that were 

made to work safety and occupational health and safety and the 

workers’ advocate. 

 

But Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Sylvia Tkach lost her husband 

Robert in 2008 after the Jeep he was driving went over an 

unmarked ledge at the potash mine in Lanigan, and he was 

thrown from the vehicle and then pinned beneath it. Inspectors 

had warned the company to ensure that hazards like this ledge 

be well marked after a similar tragedy at another mine. But 

there was no requirement placed on the company to report back 

on the steps it was taking to comply. 

 

To the Premier: why were the mining companies not required to 

report back? And is that an indication of how seriously this 

government takes worker safety? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, again, obviously this is a 

very serious and sensitive issue. It’s one that we put tremendous 

emphasis on. In the case that the member has brought up, I 

would just like to report and it’s on the public record. The 

company was charged with contravening the following sections 

of occupational health and safety, and that was 4(1) and 61, 

3(a), 17(1)(a), 17(1)(c), and 25(2). What we see, Mr. Speaker, is 



April 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4967 

that that company was fined the maximum penalty allowed 

under occupational health and safety. As well there was an 

order for the company to pay $120,000 victim fine surcharge, 

the maximum amount. Obviously there’s always more to do, 

Mr. Speaker. And in these moments our hearts go out to the 

family members and we roll up our sleeves. We know there’s 

more to do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, at the Seabee mine when a 

miner was killed in a similar incident that the department wrote 

a letter to all the mines saying that they should pay attention to 

this. That was what the response was. Mr. Speaker, Robert 

Tkach was driving in a jeep that did not have a seatbelt. Many 

of the vehicles at the Lanigan mine didn’t have seatbelts, 

despite this being a requirement by provincial legislation, but 

this rule was never enforced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Sylvia Tkach is here today and she wants to ask 

the government what gives them the right to decide which 

regulations get enforced and which do not? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

[10:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, again on this specific issue, 

the company in question was fined the maximum amount. 

There is certainly more to do. I think importantly, Mr. Speaker, 

what we can do is look at some records regarding prosecutions, 

and that is in 2006-07 the final member’s year in office there 

were six prosecutions initiated. In this past year, in ’09-10, 15 

— 15 prosecutions were initiated. 

 

Certainly we know there’s more to do, but empirically we can 

demonstrate that there is more effort with greater emphasis, Mr. 

Speaker, on occupational health and safety than there has been 

for several years. Is there more to do? Yes, there is. And we do 

it with the aim of Mission: Zero, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the signal that they’re sending 

here, the record speaks for itself. They have a fired occupational 

health and safety worker. When we raised an issue around a 

crane, they were asking where did we get the information 

before they acted. That’s the record over there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they brag about increased number of inspections 

and contraventions, but it’s not backed up by proper 

enforcement and meaningful follow-up, and they don’t mean a 

thing, Mr. Speaker. Inspectors had warned PCS [Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.] to ensure that hazards like 

the ledge were well marked, but clearly those warnings were 

not enough. The miners are here today to say that all too often 

there is no meaningful follow-up on inspections or notices of 

contravention. 

 

And to the Premier: he can boast all he likes about increased 

numbers of inspections, but if it doesn’t result in safer 

workplaces, what has he really accomplished? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I will just simply say that 

we have a lot of faith within our officials. We have a culture of 

continuous improvement, and certainly there’s always more to 

do. I would like to also offer that, I would also like to reinforce 

that this is a shared responsibility. Government has a leadership 

role. 

 

And what I can highlight, Mr. Speaker, is that the number of 

training participants taking place and participating in 

occupational health committee and supervisor training 

initiatives, Mr. Speaker, in 2006-07, there were 3,866 

participating. This past year we’ve had 4,713 participating. That 

is an increase of 22 per cent, Mr. Speaker, reflecting and 

reinforcing obviously a leadership role to be played by the 

government. But also we know it’s a shared responsibility. And 

there are actually more people participating in these kind of 

training initiatives that certainly help to reflect and reinforce 

this shared responsibility, one that we certainly put a priority 

on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen what happens 

when workers speak out to try and make a change over there. 

They get fired. Mr. Speaker, it’s too late to save Robert Tkach, 

but hopefully it’s not too late to save others. 

 

Workers at the Rocanville mine are concerned about a change 

in policy regarding the operation of an emergency hoist 

intended to be used to safely bring miners to the surface in the 

event of an underground emergency. Previously a trained hoist 

operator was required to be on site at all times. Now one only 

has to be on call. This means that in an event of an emergency, 

an uncertified operator may be the only person available to 

operate the hoist and bring workers from the underground. 

 

To the Premier: what are these workers supposed to do in the 

event of an emergency? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re certainly interested in looking into this. This is 

part of our ongoing dialogue with the council. The subjects that 

have been included in the deliberations include enforcement 

activities, Mr. Speaker, physical barriers as they relate to the 

activities within the mining sector, codes of practice, Mr. 

Speaker, as well as reporting dangerous occurrences. Mr. 

Speaker, obviously there’s more to do. This is part of an 

ongoing dialogue with ministry officials, and certainly we’ll be 

happy to follow up quite quickly on the issue that’s just been 

raised. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 



4968 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2010 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if I should thank 

the minister for that answer. Mr. Speaker, he met with this 

individual, these individuals just about a year ago already. He 

met with them. And not only that, Mr. Speaker, the fact is this: 

the site in question was visited by the director of occupational 

health and safety, Glennis Bihun. Workers were promised 

action, but months later nothing has changed. 

 

This is more than a simple question of certification, Mr. 

Speaker. If someone without proper training is forced to operate 

this hoist in the event of an emergency, the results could be 

disastrous. To the Premier: why are the lives of these miners 

being put at risk by this government’s incompetence? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Again, Mr. Speaker, certainly that culture 

of continuing and constant improvement is one that informs our 

work. Our aim is focused on Mission: Zero. 

 

What we’re pleased to report is that, as tabled in the recent 

WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] report, we have a time 

loss rate that is actually decreasing, that is getting better within 

the province, Mr. Speaker. We have fewer time loss claims, and 

that is nearly a 10 per cent decrease since 2007, Mr. Speaker. 

The total injury rate is also improving, Mr. Speaker, that is, 

since 2007 what we’ve seen is an improvement of 8.4 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously this is not about these kind of statistics. 

This is about making sure that occupational health and safety 

plays a key role in workplaces across the province. This is a key 

priority for us. It’s why we’ve focused on Mission: Zero. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to have that emphasis. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Police Investigation and Member’s Conduct 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier was asked on Monday 

morning what the government turned over to the police and he 

said this, and I quote, “Just what we have, what the CBC 

provided to us . . .” 

 

Well we know that the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation] turned over absolutely nothing to the government 

over the weekend, so the government couldn’t turn over the 

audio tape or the chat transcript because they didn’t have them. 

To the Premier: is it not the truth that the government turned 

nothing over to the police? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear that 

we are co-operating fully and completely with the Regina 

Police Service. We are providing to them everything that is in 

our possession, Mr. Speaker. Regardless of what it is, regardless 

of what they ask for, it will be provided to the Regina Police 

Service. This government will co-operate fully and completely 

with that investigation. We don’t know how long that 

investigation will take place but, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure 

you and the members of the public that the Regina Police 

Service will have the full and complete co-operation of this 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, this morning we learned that the 

Sask Party caucus has a habit of misusing taxpayers’ dollars, 

with one Blaise Boehmer, a Sask Party caucus office staffer 

whose salary is paid by the taxpayers who was also operating 

the NDP Watch blog. Of course this is a pattern. The people of 

Saskatchewan learned yesterday that the Premier’s legislative 

secretary may have been using his taxpayer-funded 

constituency assistant and his constituency office for personal 

gain. 

 

To the Premier: has the government turned over the issue of the 

legislative secretary’s potential misuse of his constituency 

assistant and his constituency office to the police? Yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we don’t instruct the 

police how to conduct an investigation. We received 

information last week that indicated a potential criminal 

offence. Mr. Speaker, the government did the correct and 

appropriate thing. We contacted the police. We made our 

officials available to them so that they could provide whatever 

information they had received. Everything has taken place. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to provide that 

co-operation. We will let the Regina Police Service determine 

what, how, and when they will investigate. And if the 

investigation goes a different direction, so be it. But regardless 

of what happens with that investigation, Mr. Speaker, this 

government and the members on this side of the House will 

co-operate fully, completely, and totally. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious matter. The 

unanswered questions continue to mount. When the CBC called 

the constituency assistant on the business cellphone number 

yesterday to verify this concern, the constituency assistant hung 

up. We need answers, Mr. Speaker. If the Premier has not 

turned over the issue of the legislative secretary’s potential 

misuse of his constituency assistant and his constituency office 

to the police, then there’s absolutely no reason why he cannot 

be turned over immediately to the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also learned yesterday that the Premier has 

chosen not to release any details about the expenses of the 

legislative secretary for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

because of the government’s refusal to provide these answers in 

written questions. We do not know whether or not the 

legislative secretary used taxpayers’ resources inappropriately. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: will he agree today to a unanimous 

motion of this Assembly to turn this issue over to the Conflict 

of Interest Commissioner? 

 



April 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4969 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, on that side of the House 

they have two members of the Law Society. Those members of 

the Law Society will give them the advice, I am sure, that 

before anything happens . . . [inaudible] . . . by way of a civil 

nature, we should let the criminal procedure take place. Mr. 

Speaker, I am sure that that would be the advice that those 

members would give, and I’m sure that the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin would have given that advice when he 

was the minister of Justice before I was. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will give our co-operation, it will be 

continuing co-operation, and we will not cloud a criminal 

investigation by taking steps or doing anything that will 

interfere, distract, or disrupt that process as it takes place. Mr. 

Speaker, the members on this side of the House will co-operate 

fully, completely, and totally with the investigation of the 

Regina Police Service. The Regina Police Service have in fact 

confirmed that they have received the information and are 

conducting an investigation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party promised in the 

2007 election campaign to stabilize greenhouse gas emissions 

by 2010 and to reduce greenhouse gases by 32 per cent from 

2007 levels. Then in May and December of last year, they 

promised to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 20 per cent 

from 2006 levels by the year 2020. Every few months it seems 

they have a new set of targets, but they won’t make any of these 

targets legally binding. Their so-called management and 

reduction of greenhouse gases Act still doesn’t contain targets 

of any kind. 

 

To the minister: why won’t she put her reduction targets into 

legislation, or is she just ragging the puck until after the next 

election? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for her question, and I would like to offer her my 

congratulations. As was mentioned earlier, today is her 

second-year anniversary. Two years ago today on Earth Day, 

the Environment critic for the NDP said, and I quote, “I would 

say the federal targets are something that they should clearly be 

adopting.” So, Mr. Speaker, the NDP have gone from . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote to allow the minister to respond. I recognize 

the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP have gone from 

a target of 32 per cent, and two years ago they asked, their NDP 

Environment critic asked us to adopt the federal targets. And, 

Mr. Speaker, just last fall their leader said, and I quote: 

My view is that we will watch as this develops and 

through our policy forums come forward with our 

proposal. But at this point, I think to do something other 

than the Americans is going to be very difficult. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they have gone from 32 per cent to 20 per cent 

to 17 per cent target that they are now endorsing that the 

Americans are doing. They want to talk about targets, that’s 

fine, Mr. Speaker, but they need to come up with their own plan 

first. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party and the 

Minister of Environment love nothing better than spin and 

rhetoric. Well here is a quote, here is a quote that I think that 

they should be listening to. Here’s a beautiful quote. And this 

comes from Robert Ingersoll, and it’s, “In nature there are 

neither rewards nor punishments. There are consequences,” Mr. 

Speaker. And the Sask Party will see the consequences to the 

environment under their leadership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people can only judge this 

government on what they do and on what legally binding 

commitments they’re prepared to make. 

 

This government won’t put their so-called greenhouse gas 

reduction targets into legislation, but they’re negotiating a new 

West partnership agreement behind closed doors, an agreement 

that no one has seen, an agreement that could weaken the ability 

of our provincial government to defend Saskatchewan people’s 

interests. To the minister: is there anything in this new West 

partnership agreement that will weaken the ability of the 

provincial government to address climate change and protect 

our environment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for her question. I find it interesting, her accusations of 

ragging the puck. And we have legislation before this very 

House that the NDP is absolutely refusing to get through to 

committee so that we get this legislation passed so that we can 

make sure that large emitters in this province are regulated to 

actually reduce their emissions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If she were sincere about her position about addressing this 

issue, they would get their House Leader to work with our 

House Leader to get that legislation through. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, their very own House Leader said, and I quote, about 

our legislation on climate change: “. . . what we’re urging the 

government to do is reintroduce their . . . Bill . . . because we 

support that Bill.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, their House Leader went on to say, and I quote, 

“. . . this is a Bill that has substance and structure in which to 

accomplish the goals of which the government has brought . . .” 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. There’s a private debate 



4970 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2010 

between members across the floor, and I’d ask the members to 

cease that debate and allow the Minister of Environment to 

complete her response. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, and as to ragging the 

puck, the Leader of the NDP said, and I quote, “I think it’s 

incumbent on large producers of fossil fuels to be clear on what 

their environment policy is going to be, according to the NDP.” 

And he said, of the NDP, and I quote, “I think we’ve got quite a 

bit of work to do there,” Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the NDP 

don’t believe they have a position. I don’t think the people of 

this province believe that the NDP have a position. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 137 — The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 

137, The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment 

Act, 2010 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Corrections, Public Safety 

and Policing has moved that Bill No. 137, The Safer 

Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2010 be 

now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 138 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2010 

(No. 2)/Loi n
o 
2 de 2010 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour 

du Banc de la Reine 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 138, 

The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2010 be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 138, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 

2010 (No. 2) be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 612 — The Earth Day Recognition Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 612, The 

Earth Day Recognition Act be now introduced and read a first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh Acres has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 612, The Earth Day Recognition 

Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second time? 

 

Ms. Morin: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 127, The Assessment Management Agency Amendment 

Act, 2009 with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

committee? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I request leave to waive consideration 

in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill and its 

amendments be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 127, The 

Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2009 with 

amendment and that the Bill and its amendments be now read 



April 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4971 

the second time, third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Leave is granted. When shall the 

amendments be read the first time? 

 

I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 127 — The Assessment Management 

Agency Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I move that the amendments be now 

read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 

amendments be now read the first and second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — I invite the minister to move to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 127 — The Assessment Management 

Agency Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that Bill No. 127, The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 2009 with amendment be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 104, The Summary Offences 

Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

committee? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and the 

Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in the Committee of the Whole on the Bill and 

that it now be read a third time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? Or, pardon me, is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 104 — The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 

No. 104, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 

2009 (No. 2) without amendment be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee of 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee of Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 114, The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2009 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 



4972 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2010 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and the Bill be now read 

the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

114, The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2009 and that the Bill 

be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 124 — The Small Claims Amendment Act, 

2009/Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1997 

sur les petites créances 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 114, The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2009 be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice to report Bill No. 102, The Personal Property Security 

Amendment Act, 2009 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

committee? I recognize the Minister of Justice? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and the 

Bill now be read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

102, The Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 2009 

without amendment and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 102 — The Personal Property Security 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 102, The Personal Property Security Amendment 

Act, 2009 without amendment be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 124, The Legal Profession 

Amendment Act, 2009 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill considered in Committee 

of the Whole? I recognize the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration of Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

this Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

124, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2009 without 

amendment and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave 



April 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4973 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 124 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2009 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 124, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2009 

without amendment be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 

128, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Labour Mobility) Amendment 

Act, 2009 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill 

and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour has requested leave to 

waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

128, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Labour Mobility) Amendment 

Act, 2009 without amendment and that the Bill be now read the 

third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 128 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Labour Mobility) 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It is has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

that Bill No. 128, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Labour Mobility) 

Amendment Act, 2009 without amendment be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with a request for leave for 

members to briefly introduce a guest in your gallery. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave for 

introduction of guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to introduce to 

members of this Assembly, through you, a former constituent of 

mine who is here for a temporary visit, but a very important 

one, Mr. Speaker. Rory Grooters is seated in your gallery, or 

more appropriately, Pastor Rory Grooters is seated in your 

gallery. And he and wife Karen and their kids have been not 

only very good friends of our family but as I say, Mr. Speaker, 

also constituents up until about a year and a half, almost two 

years ago when Pastor Grooters went down to Missouri to take 

his master’s in theology. 

 

He has recently returned, in part, Mr. Speaker, to go through the 

official ceremony of becoming a Canadian citizen. He’s 

originally from Michigan where he was a police officer before 

he chose another line of work or maybe one was chosen for 

him. And, Mr. Speaker, he is going to be joining his . . . the rest 

of his family, of course his wife he met in . . . from Manitoba. 

He will be becoming a Canadian citizen here, I believe, later 

this week. And it’s a pleasure to have him here back visiting, 

and I’d ask all members to welcome him to this Legislative 

Assembly. 

 



4974 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Government House 

Leader. 

 

NOTICE OF CLOSURE 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Oral notice for closure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice pursuant to rule 66(1) that of the next 

sitting of the Assembly when the order of the day is called for 

resuming consideration of the government motion for the 

sessional revision of sitting times, I will move that 

consideration of the said motion be not further postponed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, to request leave to move a motion 

under rule 59. 

 

The Speaker: — The member should state his rule . . . the 

reason for the motion under rule 59 for the purpose of the 

Assembly. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 

Investigation by Conflict of Interest Commissioner 

 

Mr. Yates: — For days we have seen a growing cloud of 

questions about the member for Saskatoon Northwest, including 

questions about his use of taxpayers’ resources and whether he 

used his position for personal gain. 

 

While one small part of this has been turned over to the police 

for them to determine if there is any issue to pursue under the 

Criminal Code, the reality is that standards for MLAs go well 

beyond the Criminal Code. The police are not looking into the 

misuse of taxpayers’ dollars; that is the job of the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner. 

 

Yesterday the Minister of Justice said that the situation “puts a 

cloud over all members of the Legislative Assembly.” For that 

reason, Mr. Speaker, the opposition is hopeful that the 

government will agree to the motion. Mr. Speaker, the motion 

is: 

 

That this Assembly calls upon the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner to immediately investigate the actions of 

the member from Saskatoon Northwest with respect to his 

compliance with The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act 

and The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 

concerning the potential misuse of public funds. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has asked 

for leave to move a motion under rule 59. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the 

suggestion and the commitment of the Leader of the Official 

Opposition that we move to the management and reduction of 

greenhouse gases, I would ask that I be allowed to make a 

motion to move to government business to Bill No. 121 and 

pass all remaining stages today. 

 

[11:15] 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked, I believe, is asking 

for leave to move the government business to Bill 126. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. Leave is not granted. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I rise on a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — Can the member state his point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During member 

statements today, the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 

repeatedly used the statement, Mr. Speaker, that the official 

opposition, members of the official opposition had deliberately 

misled the public. 

 

And on page 145 of Beauchesne’s, Mr. Speaker in Debates of 

May 20th, 1959, on page on 3837; Debates, June 29th, 1966, 

page 7019; Debates, February 6th, 1967, on pages 12685; 

Debates, June 19th, 1969, page 10403; Debates, May 7th, 1970, 

page 6712; Debates, May 19th, 1970, pages 7086; Debates, 

November 24th, 1971, page 9847; Debates, December 22nd, 

1971, page 10711; Debates, March 15th, 1972, pages 848 to 

849; Debates, June 28th, 1972, page 3598; Debates, February 

7th, 1973, page 1033; Debates, May 10th, 1973, page 3608; 

Debates, November 19th, 1973, page 7913; Debates, March 

5th, 1974, page 168; and Debates, April 18th, 1974, page 1537, 

Mr. Speaker, this has been ruled out of order. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, in another section, Mr. Speaker, the 

member went on to say, “misleading the public.” Mr. Speaker, 

on page 146 of Beauchesne’s, that was also ruled out of order 

on February the 1st, 1960, on page 591.  

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it should be very clear that the member 

from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley did what was not permitted, 

used language that was not permitted in the House, Mr. 

Speaker. And I would ask that you review the Hansard and rule 

on this order. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

indeed all of those quotes are in Beauchesne’s, and I have used 

them a number of times in bringing forward arguments, Mr. 

Speaker, about the terms, the loose use of phrasing, that the 

members of the opposition do on a consistent basis, Mr. 

Speaker. 



April 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4975 

I believe in this particular case, Mr. Speaker, you have actually 

already ruled on this question . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Earlier in the day, as the 

member from Regina Dewdney stated, there were a couple of 

quotes that the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley had 

quoted. At the time, just to ensure that I had heard correctly, I 

was thinking in my mind that I will review it, but asked 

members to be mindful of their quotes. 

 

But having had the time to sit here and also pick up 

Beauchesne’s, as the member already has, I find that certainly 

the “misleading the public,” based on the rules before us, is out 

of order and ask the member to apologize and withdraw. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will withdraw and 

apologize. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

2010 Budget 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — It’s a pleasure once again to be on my feet to 

address an issue that is of very much significance in the minds 

and the lives of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

I’m referring, Mr. Speaker, to this year’s budget presented by 

the government, the Saskatchewan Party government, on March 

24th of this spring. And toward the end of my comments, I’m 

going to be asking that this motion be accepted by the Speaker: 

 

That this Assembly recognize their government’s 

commitment to ensuring Saskatchewan’s continued 

economic growth and success by way of our balanced, 

responsible, and forward-looking budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion speaks to a much, much larger matter, 

frankly, because the budget this year addresses issues that arose 

from previous circumstances. It addresses the reality of today 

and it builds on the economic future and purports, rather, to 

help us build a stronger economic future for the province of 

Saskatchewan and our many people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget was not created in a vacuum. It was 

created in an environment of serious intent. It was deliberated 

over by a number of people through a period of many months. It 

was weighed in on by members of the Executive Council, 

various ministers who brought their ideas and their proposals to 

Treasury Board as the budget was being developed, and 

eventually it was placed before our entire caucus for 

consideration. And budgets like this which are very significant 

as milestones in the life of a government aren’t arrived at 

without that kind of intense participation and careful scrutiny. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the budget that was presented this year not 

only stated clearly what the intentions of our government are 

for this upcoming 12-month period of fiscal endurance, but it 

speaks to where we’re going to be going as we move forward in 

this province, meeting the needs of the people of the province 

but stating clearly what we believe the role of government 

ought to be in the lives of the people of this province. 

 

And it’s our view, Mr. Speaker — I’d like to say that for the 

record — that this government believes in smaller, more 

efficient and effective government. We hope to hold the line on 

spending as much as possible. We want to evaluate programs 

for not just their mere existence, not just for their historical 

participation, but for their benefit to the people of the province, 

for their ongoing contribution to the effective delivery of 

government. And if programs can’t meet that kind of criteria, 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be weighing them, measuring 

them, and either asking for a redesign or asking for a 

contemplation of a new program or possibly eliminating the 

program. 

 

Governments cannot be all things to all people at all times. 

There are limitations to what governments ought to do and what 

our funding will allow, and so those are the kinds of questions 

we’re going to be asking as we evaluate programs in the future. 

Is this a necessary role for government or is there a better way 

to deliver the service? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that just forms some of the foundation for the 

budget that was presented by the Saskatchewan Party 

government for this upcoming fiscal year. But it wasn’t created 

in a vacuum, as I said, and let me just for the sake of citizens of 

Saskatchewan, for the members in the House today, let me set 

some of the additional context within which this budget came 

into being. 

 

Last year at this time, Mr. Speaker, the economy of the nation 

of Canada was in difficult straits. The economies of virtually 

every province in this nation, and the territories as well, those 

economies were in difficult straits. But the difficulty being 

experienced in this nation was nothing compared to the 

economies of the United States, western Europe, a little later 

eastern Europe. Some Third World countries were badly 

affected by the economic downturn of the last 12 to 18 months. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at where Saskatchewan is 

vis-à-vis the economies of other provinces, the Government of 

Canada, and international economies around the world, I would 

have to say, Mr. Speaker, that we are very well positioned. We 

were well positioned. We weathered that storm, not without 

some impact, but we weathered that storm relatively well versus 

everybody else. And now we’re moving forward, building on 

that stability, and building on that strength. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can’t overemphasize the importance of the 

kind of actions taken by this government in its first two years of 

mandate that helped us achieve that level of stability. 

 

Last year we saw banks going broke. We saw the world’s 

largest insurance company go into receivership. We saw 

governments taking on record levels of debt. We saw industries 

evaporate and we saw savings disappear. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the economic meltdown that was affecting 

so much of the economy elsewhere, we saw General Motors 

require an unprecedented government bailout. And it’s in the 

news again today, Mr. Speaker, because GM [General Motors] 



4976 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2010 

has actually started to pay some of that money back. 

 

But employment insurance had to be restructured to 

accommodate the rapid rise in unemployment. Canada even 

faced a potential constitutional crisis because of the federal 

government’s response to the economic meltdown. And yet, 

Mr. Speaker, in spite of all that fallout, one economy emerged 

better than ever before. Mr. Speaker, let me say that again. One 

economy emerged better than ever before, and that’s the 

economy in the province of Saskatchewan. I’m proud to say 

that this has been and continues to be the best place to weather 

the economic storm and to see the progression as we move 

forward in our economic growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m just going to touch briefly on some of the 

highlights from the budget because I have some additional 

comments I want to make. But this budget produced a reduction 

in the size of government, in the amount of spending. We saw 

an investment in key capital and programming areas. We saw 

sustaining and enhancing of core government services. 

 

We are predicting a $20 million surplus in the General Revenue 

Fund. We saw overall government spending reduced by 1.2 per 

cent. There’s no rise in government debt. It remains at $4.5 

billion as of March 21st, 2011. Our Growth and Financial 

Security Fund is projected to have a year-end balance of over 

$500 million. 

 

A 2010-11 infrastructure budget of $632 million, Mr. Speaker: 

177 million in municipal infrastructure funding — that’s up 30 

per cent over the previous year; we’ve got $161 million set 

aside for 470 kilometres of new highway construction in the 

province; we’ve got $16 million for agricultural research and 

development; we’ve got $7.9 million for additional new health 

care training seats. 

 

And there are many, many more highlights from this budget, 

Mr. Speaker, that I could enunciate today. 

 

But let’s compare that to what other jurisdictions have done in 

this most recent fiscal period. Let’s look at Ontario. Once the 

country’s largest and wealthiest province, Mr. Speaker, the 

province of Ontario in their budget this year have posted a 

record deficit of $21.3 billion. And in Nova Scotia, they posted 

a $221.1 million deficit for this fiscal year, and that’s in 

addition, Mr. Speaker, to the $488 million deficit that they 

posted in 2009-10. 

 

What about our neighbours to the west, the very prosperous, 

successful province of Alberta? Mr. Speaker, they felt the 

impact of the economic downturn in some ways greater than 

other jurisdictions. They have posted a record $4.7 billion 

deficit for the 2010-11 fiscal year, and that’s in addition, Mr. 

Speaker, to a $4.7 billion deficit for the previous fiscal year. So 

the province of Alberta has been hit very hard. They’ve had to 

go into deficit financing as contrasted to what’s happened here 

in the province of Saskatchewan. No deficit financing here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that this balance, this budget 

wasn’t only a non-deficit budget but it was so clearly balanced 

by the very criteria used by every other government over the 

last 14 or 15 years, that there can be no question about the 

nature and the success of this particular budget this year. 

Mr. Speaker, budgets aren’t created in a vacuum. But not only 

are they created on the basis of economic realities, they form 

the foundation for what the citizens of the province think about 

the economy. And by any measure, Mr. Speaker, the citizens of 

Saskatchewan are convinced that this budget is the right budget, 

this government is the right government, and the times are right 

and ripe for improvement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how do I know that? Well people keep moving 

here. Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the largest population growth at 

any time in our history outside of when the province was first 

opened up. Mr. Speaker, it’s been years and years since we’ve 

seen this kind of growth, and that growth is a vote of confidence 

by the people of the nation and of other nations who are coming 

to the province of Saskatchewan to enjoy the stability and the 

success of a growing and prospering economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, employment is at an all-time high — 520,000 

people employed in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s a 1.8 

per cent growth over last year, whereas the Canadian average is 

only point 9 per cent, nine-tenths of 1 per cent. Saskatchewan is 

now ranked number 3 in employment. 

 

Saskatchewan’s GDP [gross domestic product] pegged at 41.6 

billion in 2008. That’s a 4.2 per cent growth in that year, while 

the Canadian average is four-tenths of one per cent. Mr. 

Speaker, these are just some of the indicators of continuing 

strength in our economy. 

 

[11:30] 

 

I couldn’t help but notice, Mr. Speaker, last night as I was 

watching the late night news, there was additional good news 

again. Every day we’re finding a little bit more to celebrate in 

this province. I noticed that car dealers in this province are 

exceptionally happy with the results of consumer sales over the 

last little while. That shows a confidence by the people in the 

province that things are moving in the right direction, that they 

are going to have employment stability. 

 

They’ll have income stability which, by the way, Mr. Speaker, 

wages in this province are going up on a weekly basis like 

they’ve never gone up before. But consumers are finding that 

security, that financial security, and using it to buy consumer 

goods and in this instance we’re talking about vehicle sales that 

are hitting their stride very, very significantly in this province. 

 

What was the other thing we saw last night? We saw an 

indication from manufacturers that wholesale goods, the 

production of manufactured and other goods, wholesale sales 

are growing dramatically in this province. 

 

Now they had an interview by the general manager of one of the 

seeding equipment manufacturers in this province who said his 

growth has been at least 20 per cent this year. And I’ve heard 

that story from manufacturers in my constituency. We’ve heard 

it from manufacturers all around the province. 

 

They believe that their business is going to prosper significantly 

because of increased consumer confidence around the world 

and because this is the right environment in which they as 

businesses can prosper. They like our tax laws. They like our 

provision for infrastructure. They like what we’re doing in a 



April 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4977 

whole variety of places, Mr. Speaker, that strengthen the 

economy, that give them the confidence to move forward and 

make investments in their own business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for just the last minute or so about 

how this might apply in my own constituency. I think 

everybody in this House has heard about the Cypress Hills 

Vineyard and Winery. Now it is Saskatchewan’s only locally 

produced wine and it is based on a dream by a young couple 

who turned their ranch into a vineyard. And, Mr. Speaker, that 

speaks very clearly to the confidence of this young couple in 

opportunity that this province presents. 

 

Opportunity doesn’t happen. Opportunity is created, Mr. 

Speaker. And this young couple, Marty and Marie Bohnet, took 

this opportunity, stepped out in an area that had never been 

really tried — at least not successfully — in this province, and 

they have turned, over the last two or three years, an idea into 

such a success that nobody could have imagined it. And they’ve 

been identified as the rookie of the year as a business, and this 

last spring were awarded the award of excellence for business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in their first few years they sold 16,000 bottles of 

wine. Last year they sold 36,000 bottles of wine. They are 

employing a staff of 24 people, Mr. Speaker, and they expect 

visits of 44,000 people over the next little while. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the confidence of business people in this province 

is unbelievable. And this particular enterprise in the 

constituency of Cypress Hills is just one of those success stories 

that has become reality because of the success of this 

government and the kinds of budgets we have presented — 

investing in infrastructure, investing in education, investing in 

roads of all kinds. Mr. Speaker, this is a great place to be, based 

on the financial and economic success. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion reads: 

 

That this Assembly recognizes our government’s 

commitment to ensuring Saskatchewan’s continued 

economic growth and success by way of our balanced, 

responsible, and forward-looking budget. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the member from Cypress Hills: 

 

That this Assembly recognizes our government’s 

commitment to ensuring Saskatchewan’s continued 

economic growth and success by way of our balanced, 

responsible, and forward-looking budget. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 

pleased to rise here today and bring, hopefully bring some sense 

to the discussion that’s before us here today. And I recognize 

that that was probably a very difficult job for the member 

opposite, because that member, the member from Cypress Hills, 

is a good man. Mr. Speaker, I have no doubt of that. 

 

He’s a good man, but he had a tough job to do to read what he 

had to read there today. To read the speech prepared by the 

Premier’s office must have been tough for that member because 

I know he’s a good man and I guess he’s all there for the team, 

but that has to be awfully difficult, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Never in this Assembly before might we have seen a more 

ludicrous and irresponsible motion put forward for this 

Assembly. I think accurately we can describe that motion, Mr. 

Speaker, that unfortunately that member had to put on the table, 

as dishonest. Mr. Speaker, a dishonest . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 

Order. I would ask members, I would ask members to be 

mindful of . . . Order. I would ask members to be mindful of the 

words and how they term the words and how they reflect on . . . 

even saying the motion is . . . may be termed as reflecting on a 

member. So just be mindful of the connotation of the words 

used. I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the good member from 

Cypress Hills unfortunately had to speak to the dishonest 

motion that was put forward here today. And it’s representative 

of the budget that was put forward, a budget that can’t be 

trusted by the people of Saskatchewan, from a government that 

can’t be trusted by the people of Saskatchewan with the 

management of our finances, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it would be far more fair to characterize this budget, Mr. 

Speaker, as a deficit, which certainly it is, as irresponsible, as 

short-sighted, and one that drives us backwards, Mr. Speaker. 

And for the members to pretend otherwise is disingenuous. And 

it’s seen for what it is by Saskatchewan people, and it only 

speaks to the broken trust that’s occurring across Saskatchewan 

with the government opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we’ve seen in this budget that’s put forward was a budget 

that was prepared without vision, without plan, without any sort 

of coordination and organization, Mr. Speaker. We saw ad hoc, 

uncoordinated cuts and, Mr. Speaker, those cuts themselves, 

many of them are set up for failure, Mr. Speaker. So certainly 

what we see before us today is certainly not a balanced budget. 

It’s the exact opposite. It’s a second consecutive billion-dollar 

deficit from this government, Mr. Speaker, and it’s the furthest 

thing from forward-looking. It drives us backwards, Mr. 

Speaker. And this budget, all from a government that certainly 

can’t be trusted with managing the finances of our province. 

 

Just to look back of course, we have a government that 

inherited $2.3 billion in surplus, Mr. Speaker — all-time highs 

in revenues flowing into government coffers. And with those 

two strengths, Mr. Speaker, this government has launched itself 

into two consecutive billion-dollar deficits and debt growth that 

is a huge problem at this point in time. Billions of dollars, Mr. 

Speaker. And as we look at the trend moving forward, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s not going to slow down. 

 

We see debt growth in each of the consecutive years planned by 

the Sask Party, and in fact the Sask Party isn’t satisfied to just 

put two deficit budgets on the table, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

planning to put a third one on the table here next year too. 



4978 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2010 

That’s completely inappropriate, Mr. Speaker. This at a time 

where the Sask Party has more revenues flowing into coffers 

than ever before from an economy built by the hard work of 

Saskatchewan people. By strong policies, economic policies of 

New Democrats, and by the hard-working entrepreneurs of our 

province, this activity is furnishing unprecedented revenues to 

government. And we see a government that cannot manage, Mr. 

Speaker. Unprecedented highs in revenues, and we see a 

government that can’t balance their books, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You and I know full well, Mr. Speaker, that if anyone operated 

their household like this or their farm operation or their own 

business, they’d be bankrupt, Mr. Speaker, and they’d have the 

kind of unsustainable spending program that this government 

has. It simply can’t go on and it’s irresponsible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Specifically we have a major, major problem as it relates to our 

rainy day fund, Mr. Speaker, a fund that had well over $2 

billion in it just over a year ago, Mr. Speaker, that is now a 

shadow of its former self. It’s dwindling by the day. It’s at $700 

million and basically $2 billion have been drained in two years, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

At times where this economy has had strength and at a time 

where revenues are at all-time highs, this is complete financial 

irresponsibility, Mr. Speaker. As we look at our Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker, we see all of the equity, every last 

dollar has been stripped out of our Crown corporations. Over a 

billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, from our Crown corporations. And 

this at a time of unprecedented revenues flowing to 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when you add those two numbers up, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

dealing with $3 billion of drain, of fiscal drain. A burn rate 

that’s unsustainable and irresponsible, Mr. Speaker, and 

something that can’t continue, Mr. Speaker. When you look at 

$3 billion that’s been burnt off at this period of time that is of 

prosperity, it’s completely irresponsible. And we see debt and 

deficit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. There’s a dialogue I 

think across the floor, further removed from The Speaker. But I 

think if the members would like to continue this dialogue I’d 

ask them to either meet outside the Chamber or behind the bar 

so we can hear the member’s comments from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can 

understand why the members opposite are trying to interrupt 

this speech, Mr. Speaker, because the points that need to be 

made are what we’re hearing from across the province. What 

people are saying is that we can’t handle this kind 

irresponsibility, this kind of recklessness, this kind of 

short-sighted approach, Mr. Speaker. We can’t handle having a 

government that’s without a plan, Mr. Speaker, and we can’t 

handle having a government that’s asking Saskatchewan people 

to pay for its own financial incompetence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see a government that, at unprecedented revenues, has 

shelved important projects to Saskatchewan people as it relates 

to a children’s hospital, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 13 

long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker. And we see deferral after 

deferral across this province, many of which haven’t even yet 

been identified by this government, Mr. Speaker. At the same 

time, Mr. Speaker, this government, this Premier, this Sask 

Party is asking Saskatchewan people to pay for their 

mismanagement, Mr. Speaker, through backdoor increases, Mr. 

Speaker, that we’re starting to see on many, many different 

fronts. 

 

Saskatchewan people are needing to pay, Mr. Speaker, much 

more for their heat and for their power, Mr. Speaker. And when 

I stand up for the constituents of Regina Rosemont, I know that 

this is offside, Mr. Speaker . And what they say to me, Mr. 

Speaker, is how when a government has more money than ever 

before, that launches itself into a irresponsible deficit and they 

strip all of the money out of the Crown corporations, and now 

they ask me and my family and my business to pay for it, they 

say that’s not on, Mr. Minister, and it’s irresponsible. 

 

The other area that we’re seeing that Saskatchewan people are 

having to pay for this government’s financial mismanagement 

is as it relates to property tax, Mr. Speaker — an issue that’s 

incredibly important to Saskatchewan people. And we see this 

government and their irresponsibility and their lack of ability to 

be contractually bound. They sign an agreement with 

municipalities with great fanfare, put their signature on it. We 

know you can’t take them at their word or trust their word, Mr. 

Speaker, but you can’t even trust this government when they 

put pen to paper and sign a contract, Mr. Speaker, because they 

rip it up. They rip it up. 

 

And we see the consequences of it, Mr. Speaker. And 

constituents across this province in Kelvington, in Regina, in 

Melville, in Estevan are paying more, Mr. Speaker, in their 

property taxes this year from a government that off-loads onto 

municipalities and rips an agreement, Mr. Speaker. And then 

the government opposite is wondering, how have they broken 

the trust of Saskatchewan people? Yet they don’t, they can’t 

identify these very, very important aspects that have been 

broken by this government. 

 

Huge tax increases directly on the backs and at the feet of this 

Premier, Mr. Speaker, a government that has more revenues 

than ever before that’s put forward two consecutive $1 billion 

deficits, Mr. Speaker, and is asking Saskatchewan people to pay 

for it, Mr. Speaker. This is not acceptable. We see a government 

that mismanages our finances and asks students to pay for it, 

Mr. Speaker. We see a government that mismanaged their 

finances and asks families to pay for it, Mr. Speaker, through 

increases to their cost of living and destroying the kind of 

positive gains that we need to make as it relates to health care, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see a government that’s making life incredibly difficult for 

seniors, directly as a result of their financial mismanagement, 

Mr. Speaker. We see a government that has short-sighted and 

ill-fated economic policy, as they don’t understand the 

economy, Mr. Speaker. And they make cuts as it relates to our 

film industry that have a devastating consequence for the people 

of Regina, for the business people of Regina, Mr. Speaker, and 

for our economy. And all at a time, Mr. Speaker, when they ask 

civil servants to take cuts, where they put Dutch elms at risk, 

where they put West Nile virus as a great concern as they cut 



April 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4979 

the mosquito program. 

 

And I know there’s going to be lots of talk this summer, Mr. 

Speaker, on the golf courses and at barbeques across this 

province as they swat themselves with mosquitoes that are 

biting them, Mr. Speaker, and possibly giving them West Nile 

virus. That’s a direct consequence of the irresponsibility of this 

government, Mr. Speaker, a government that has more revenues 

than ever before and one that’s not prepared to lead by example. 

 

We look to our brother jurisdictions or sister jurisdictions in 

Manitoba and Alberta. What do they do? They lead by example. 

They cut the pay of the Premier. They cut the pay of the 

cabinet. Not this, not this government, Mr. Speaker. They ask 

everyone else to pay for their mistakes, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 

not acceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t support the foolish motion, Mr. Speaker. 

And I think Saskatchewan people call it what it is, an 

unbalanced . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the member from 

Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 

to speak to this motion. I am very proud of the budget that our 

government brought forward. I’d like to start off my speech 

congratulating our Finance minister and the Treasury Board and 

the process that was gone through. I know it’s an elaborate 

process. And I think that it’s come to a point that we delivered a 

budget that I am very proud to stand behind, as are all the 

members in this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:45] 

 

I would also like to start off by congratulating the critic of 

Finance, Mr. Speaker. I know that as a critic of Finance — a 

large job — you have a lot of numbers to crunch and you have 

to really analyze the budget. And you’re out front on this issue. 

I think that he’s just given a very impassioned speech, maybe 

not that accurate. 

 

What I find troubling is that he’s giving it today and not on the 

day the budget was introduced. And in my time here in the 

legislature, in most of the people’s memories who serve in the 

legislature, they found it extremely shocking that the critic of 

Finance on budget day was sidelined into the penalty box while 

the spotlight shone on the important Leader of the Opposition, 

Mr. Speaker. And having heard the speech from the Leader of 

the Opposition, I think they might have done well to go with the 

young member from Rosemont that . . . In all rights, Mr. 

Speaker, that member has carried the pail for the opposition. 

 

He was the guy that they put out there to take the flak when 

their government made some assertions which the media 

certainly asked some fairly difficult questions for him to 

answer. And he was out there well in advance, you know, 

maybe cheapening his own position for the good of their party. 

And then on budget day, when the galleries are full, Mr. 

Speaker, when people have come here to hear his response, he 

gets left . . . kicked to the curb, Mr. Speaker. If I could say 

kicked to the curb, I think that would probably reflect what 

most people thought that day, Mr. Speaker. 

But I would like to speak about this budget, Mr. Speaker, and 

how good it is for the people of Saskatchewan. This budget is 

smaller, Mr. Speaker. It’s a year-over-year decrease in spending 

which is something you haven’t seen, Mr. Speaker, in 

Saskatchewan in a long, long time. You haven’t seen it across 

Canada or even in the national budget. We see year-over-year 

increases in spending. In Saskatchewan we took a different 

path, Mr. Speaker — an actual decrease. 

 

We see a more effective government forming, Mr. Speaker. We 

see that we’re looking at individual full-time equivalents. 

Across the civil service we’re going to find ways to do things 

better, to serve the people of Saskatchewan more efficiently, 

Mr. Speaker, and that’s important. It’s important to the people 

of Saskatchewan to know that their government who takes their 

tax dollars, who is entrusted with them, is analyzing how 

they’re spent on a yearly basis, Mr. Speaker. And I stand behind 

that and I’m very proud to do so. 

 

I’d like to look at . . . I’d like to read a quote here from The 

Globe and Mail from March 25th. I know that people across 

Canada looked at our budget and looked at Saskatchewan and 

were really . . . I don’t want to say shocked, but a lot of people 

said, now there’s a province that’s doing things differently. 

They saw deficit budgets, and I believe every . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member from Regina 

Rosemont has already had the opportunity to speak. I would ask 

the member to now allow the member from Lloydminster the 

same opportunity. I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

read what The Globe and Mail had to say about this budget the 

day after the budget was released. And I think it’s indicative of 

what we’ve heard from many commentators, from many leaders 

from across Canada. And I quote: “Amid the ruin [of] . . . most 

governments’ balance sheets, Saskatchewan stands as a beacon 

of light, tabling another balanced budget yesterday.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, a beacon of light is how it was characterized by 

The Globe and Mail, as by many people, Mr. Speaker, across 

Canada. Now I think that is truly what it is. I think that there’s a 

lot of people across Canada that are hoping their governments 

see this beacon of light and recognize it for what it is — as a 

new way, Mr. Speaker. It may not be always as politically 

expedient, but I think they recognize it as the right thing. 

 

And the beacon of light, Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . Indulge me 

on this. A lot of ships back 100 years ago, 200 years ago used 

beacons of light for navigation. They used the stars. They used 

a compass. But in countries they would put up lighthouses, Mr. 

Speaker, and the lighthouse would guide ships into harbours, 

around coastlines. And they were an integral, an integral 

navigational tool. And that’s what this budget is going to be, 

Mr. Speaker, as other governments look to this beacon of light 

to guide their budgeting process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this lighthouse that we have built here in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, where have we built it? And I’m going to go back 

to maybe where the foundations of this budget were laid. In 

October 21st, 2008, this is a quote from the Premier, Mr. 

Speaker. Many things happened in 2008. The budget, the debt 

of the province was paid off by 40 per cent. There was tax cuts. 



4980 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2010 

There was a fundamental change in the way Saskatchewan’s 

future was looking. And there was a $2 billion reserve put in the 

Growth and Financial Security Fund, Mr. Speaker. And this is 

what I would like to mention now: 

 

“We expect our economy to weather the current economic 

storm, and Saskatchewan's revenues to remain strong,” 

Wall said. “But at the same time, we are planning with 

caution by maintaining a $2 billion cash reserve — our 

province’s fiscal insurance policy. This $2 billion cash 

reserve is the rock upon which Saskatchewan will weather 

that storm.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rock, this was the rock that our economy was 

going to be based on. Now, Mr. Speaker, it is being recognized 

across Canada that the lighthouse, the beacon of light, was built 

upon this rock. And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, 

there’s a lighthouse here in Saskatchewan of fiscal 

responsibility. 

 

The members opposite are the small children standing on the 

shore tossing rocks trying to break out the light, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s what those members are. They’re little children with 

pebbles, and they’re tossing them. But, Mr. Speaker, I can tell 

you, this lighthouse will stand strong and will guide 

Saskatchewan for many years. It will guide the decisions of 

hopefully many provinces across the country because I know 

I’ve seen the pitching arm of these children across the way, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’m pretty sure they cannot throw a rock hard 

enough to break down the lighthouse that has been built here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to, I’d like to talk about other lights 

that are going to be seen in Saskatchewan, orange flashing 

lights. This budget has a fundamental commitment to 

infrastructure. We’re going to see that there’s work crews on 

our highways. There’ll be orange flashing lights. The members 

opposite were instrumental in passing a Bill that said we must 

slow down when we pass these flashing lights. And there will 

be many of them, Mr. Speaker, on our highways this summer. 

 

There will be green lights, Mr. Speaker, with people coming 

into our province. There will be more in-migration again this 

year, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen our populations rise 

dramatically in the last few years and that’s going to continue. 

People see this province as opportunity and this budget goes a 

long way to ensuring that that continues, that the strength in our 

economy continues and the people of Canada and around the 

world recognize this as a good place to come to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think that the confidence in housing, we see housing starts that 

have gone up, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen wholesale sales. We’ve 

seen auto sales, as the member from Cypress Hills has 

mentioned, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen the highest incomes in 

Saskatchewan’s history, Mr. Speaker, recently. We’ve seen the 

lowest unemployment rate in the country here in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. I think that the members opposite have trouble 

with the economy, with Saskatchewan that has moved forward, 

that has left behind our darker days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a time where the premier, the deputy 

premier of the province had to leave the province to find 

opportunity. That’s no longer the case, Mr. Speaker. In fact we 

brought that very deputy premier back. He now sits in 

opposition but, Mr. Speaker, that was only eight short years 

ago, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that he had to leave the province. 

And the only lights he saw at that point were red and blue 

flashing lights because he was speeding . . . the speeding tickets 

to get out of this province, Mr. Speaker. That is no longer the 

case. 

 

We now have a responsible government that recognizes that the 

people of this province work hard for their money, and we will 

manage our responsibility to be prudent with the spending and 

to ensure that it goes to the right places. 

 

I’d also like to mention that educational infrastructure, Mr. 

Speaker, is something that our government has made its very 

large commitment to in the last two years. And this budget 

continues on with that, Mr. Speaker. On the entire infrastructure 

spending, it’s the third largest infrastructure spending budget in 

the history of our province. I think that’s remarkable that we 

can have a 1 per cent reduction in overall spending, but yet see 

the third largest infrastructure spending in the province’s 

history, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Something that we all hear about, Mr. Speaker, is health care. 

We see $7.9 million to post-secondary institutions for 

continuation of health care training seats. That’s something, Mr. 

Speaker, that from rural Saskatchewan is very important. 

 

I’m getting near the end of my time here, Mr. Speaker, but I 

hope that the members opposite will support this motion 

because I know that it’s the right budget for Saskatchewan, and 

it is a guiding light that Canada may follow to a fiscally 

responsible future. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, thank you. It’s a 

pleasure to join into the discussion today on this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, not because of the nature of this motion because as the 

member from Rosemont stated before me, it clearly is a motion 

that can’t be trusted, from a government, on finances that 

certainly can’t be trusted. Mr. Speaker, budgets are 

fundamentally about trust. They fundamentally are about 

government saying one thing and having the people of 

Saskatchewan putting their faith in that government and 

expecting that government to deliver what they say. But sadly, 

Mr. Speaker, time and time again we’ve seen the exact opposite 

from the Sask Party government. 

 

Just, Mr. Speaker, as budgets are so often about trust, so too are 

relationships — relationships we have with our colleagues, with 

our significant others, with our family members, Mr. Speaker. 

And this issue of trust and relationships, it reminds me of a 

story I heard about a young man named Walter and Walter’s 

quest for love. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the earlier relationships that Walter had as he 

pursued love weren’t all that successful, Mr. Speaker. For a 

while Walter chased a woman out in Ottawa. They went for 

long walks along the Rideau Canal. And it had its highlights, 

Mr. Speaker, but sadly that relationship came to an end. And it 

didn’t take long, Mr. Speaker, for Walter to realize that at that 

time love could not be found in Ottawa, and it was more 

appropriate . . . He thought he would turn his sights to 

Saskatchewan and see what kind of love he could find in 



April 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4981 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, he ended up in his home community and 

started dating a country music singer. And it was a good 

relationship for some time. They went for walks along the Swift 

Current Creek. They watched sunsets. They sang country music 

songs, Mr. Speaker, but that relationship too came to an end. It 

did not end successfully. 

 

Throughout the whole process as Walter searched for love, Mr. 

Speaker, he had his eye set on one woman, one woman that he 

knew was very special and a woman that he wanted to end up 

with. And that woman was Suzanne. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Suzanne was currently in a relationship 

when Walter was having his eyes set on Suzanne and seeing 

what kind of relationship could perhaps be sparked up. But 

Walter started positioning himself and pretending that he was 

something that he wasn’t. Walter started talking about being a 

big-time roller in business. Walter started talking about 

relationships he had. All an attempt, Mr. Speaker, to impress 

Suzanne. 

 

Well going on at the same time as Walter was seeking to 

impress Suzanne, Suzanne’s own relationship with her current 

partner had hit a rough patch, admittedly, Mr. Speaker, and the 

relationship was having some problems. Suzanne was 

wondering well, what is this relationship with my current 

partner going to hold? And you know, this Walter guy, he says 

he’s successful in business and he says he has a lot of contacts. 

And you know, he said a few nice things to me. Maybe I do 

want to give Walter a chance. Maybe there is something good 

there, something positive. Perhaps I can trust Walter. Perhaps 

the things that Walter says, I can believe in them, and I can 

follow the advice and the words that he gives me. 

 

Well the problem, Mr. Speaker, Suzanne in her history, she had 

been, in her own family growing up, they had some serious 

financial problems. So she came out of a family, came out of a 

culture where managing the finances was among the most 

important things. Mr. Speaker, she wanted responsible 

management of the finances. So, Mr. Speaker, for the most part 

with her previous relationship, the finances, they had built up 

things to a pretty good state. Through working together, through 

co-operation, the state of their finances as a couple in a 

relationship were quite sound. 

 

But as I said, relationships from time to time can hit rough 

spells. So when Walter turned on the charm, eventually 

Suzanne said, yes I will indeed try out this relationship and see 

what might happen. Well Mr. Speaker, the honeymoon phase in 

their relationship was indeed a great one. They went to every 

Rider game, Mr. Speaker. They loved going to football games. 

They ate a lot of cake. They loved cake. 

 

[12:00] 

 

An Hon. Member: — Balloons. Balloons. Did they have 

balloons? 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well they gave balloons to other people, Mr. 

Speaker. But the honeymoon phase was a very bright one. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, Walter had made promises about being a good 

financial planner and a good financial manager so he went out, 

Mr. Speaker, and got a job on a used car lot. And, Mr. Speaker, 

he had some high hopes in terms of the number of cars that he 

could sell in any given month. Egged on by his good friend 

from Kindersley, Mr. Speaker, Walter set sales projections in 

the sale of cars that were completely . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — To introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 

thank my hon. colleagues for allowing me the opportunity to 

introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to the members 

of the Assembly, seated in your gallery is my sister, Meagan 

who is in Regina from . . . She lives in Marshall. She’s a mental 

health therapist. And she’s in Regina for the last couple of days 

for work and for our mother’s birthday party too. She works in 

Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker, as I said, a mental health therapist. 

And I just would like all of my colleagues to welcome her to 

her Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

2010 Budget 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So Walter is working 

on the car lot. He’s been egged on by his good friend from 

Kindersley suggesting that he can achieve these fantasyland 

levels of car sales, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this is the story, Mr. Speaker, that Walter is telling to 

Suzanne. Suzanne, every night when Walter comes home, says 

how many . . . how are the car sales going? Are we going to be 

doing all right? Will we have enough in our savings? Are we 

paying down some debt? Are we having programs for our 

family members? How are the finances doing? 

 

Well every day, Mr. Speaker, Walter just kept saying, sales are 

going great. Don’t you worry. I have this target of selling 300 

cars in one month. Please just trust me. I’m sure it’s going to 

work out just fine. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, lo and behold, in the month when Walter set 

a target of 300 cars, he didn’t sell a single car, Mr. Speaker. 

And the car that he had sold the month before, Mr. Speaker, 

turned out to be a lemon, Mr. Speaker, and the person who 

bought the car came back and asked for a refund. For that 

month, Mr. Speaker, Walter actually had to dip into his own 

finances and pay back that customer. 



4982 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2010 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you can understand when Walter has these 

pie-in-the-sky projections of how many cars he’s going to sell, 

you can imagine how that will have consequences for the 

relationship that he shares with Suzanne and the finances in 

their household. It did not add up, Mr. Speaker, and it didn’t 

take long after that honeymoon phase and after all that talk 

about selling so many cars, Mr. Speaker, that the issues of 

finances in the family started to pile up. Bills weren’t being 

paid in the same way. Debt was not being addressed, Mr. 

Speaker. Debt was increasing. Many of the essential things 

needed in the household like milk, Mr. Speaker, weren’t being 

provided any more. 

 

And Suzanne was asking herself, I thought I could trust Walter. 

I thought Walter had a plan. He told me that he was good with 

finances. He told me that he was good at his job, Mr. Speaker. 

But what Suzanne realizes is that what Walter had put forward 

was in fact not correct. What Walter had put forward, Mr. 

Speaker, she could not put her trust and faith in those words. 

 

So last I heard, Mr. Speaker, Suzanne was calling her lawyer. 

Suzanne had arrived at a point where she was evaluating this 

relationship. She said it started bright. We had a good 

honeymoon phase, Mr. Speaker. But given the trickery, Mr. 

Speaker, that Walter exhibited in hiding, in hiding his financial 

failure on the car lot, given the way that he changed the 

reporting mechanism back to Suzanne about how much he was 

actually earning in every given month and how much they were 

spending, Mr. Speaker, Suzanne said, I cannot trust Walter any 

longer. And Suzanne, as I said, was calling her lawyer and 

thinking about next steps. 

 

Suzanne was actually considering, you know, my previous 

relationship. It wasn’t perfect as no relationship is perfect, Mr. 

Speaker. But she thought to herself, when I think about my 

primary needs, when I think about my experience as a child 

growing up in a household where the management of the 

finances was so brutal and things were always tight and 

completely irresponsible, well, Suzanne said, if I look back just 

to my previous relationship, things weren’t that bad. We have 

made a lot of progress over the years of that relationship 

between Suzanne and her previous partner. 

 

Walter, I don’t know what exactly his state is right now in the 

relationship. I think he’s still liking to think that he’s in that 

honeymoon phase. I believe he bought some Rider tickets on 

his credit card in an attempt to have a good summer, but, Mr. 

Speaker, Suzanne is the one that’s been paying the payments on 

that credit card, and I’m not so certain that she’ll be pleased 

with the short-sighted actions that she’s seeing from Walter. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, just as relationships are about trust, just as 

relationships are about one individual’s putting forward a plan, 

being honest, being open, being transparent, being clear on who 

they are, not pretending that they’re something that they’re not, 

Mr. Speaker, so too must budgets be held in trust. So too must 

the budget being put forward by any government be able to be 

believed by the Saskatchewan people. And, Mr. Speaker, in the 

Sask Party record of budgets, we have seen a track record of 

budgeting that cannot be trusted. 

 

Two budgets ago, Mr. Speaker, we saw the pie in the sky, 

fantasyland budget projections of $3 billion in potash — 

numbers that anyone who was paying attention to the world 

economy, anyone who was paying attention to the issues that 

people in the world were facing, would realize that projections 

of $3 billion by the minister from Kindersley is in no way 

realistic. 

 

This most recent budget, Mr. Speaker, we’ve moved on from 

bad projections to that of financial trickery — changing the 

reporting mechanisms midstream in a term, changing the way 

debt is recorded, changing the way spending is recorded. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support this motion because I believe 

it is a motion that cannot be trusted based on a budget that 

cannot be trusted from a government that can’t be trusted. So 

with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure 

for me to enter into the debate over the Assembly recognizing 

our government’s commitment to ensuring Saskatchewan’s 

continued economic growth and success by way of our 

balanced, responsible, and forward-looking budget, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I am very proud, Mr. Speaker, to have played a small role — 

and I stress small — in relation to the huge role that our 

Minister of Finance played. I did play a small role in the 

development of this budget as a member of our government’s 

Treasury Board and I’m very proud to have been there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Our Minister of Finance was very focused through this process. 

He’s focused on balancing the budget and focused on smaller 

government, Mr. Speaker. And those are two things that the 

NDP cannot condone. They have very rarely had truly balanced 

budgets in their history, and never smaller government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our 2010-2011 budget is a truly balanced budget, 

a budget that reduces the size of government and the amount of 

government spending, finally, Mr. Speaker. Government 

spending that grew dramatically under the NDP and has 

continued to grow somewhat under our government as well. 

And those days are over, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This Minister of Finance has brought in a new era, an era of 

government restraint and responsibility and fiscal responsibility 

that has never been seen, at least in recent memory in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, and certainly not during the 14 years, or 

16 years it was, of NDP rule under those members opposite, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The problem with overspending by a government, Mr. Speaker, 

it makes an economy uncompetitive. And that may just seem 

like to a number of people, well that doesn’t really affect me; 

that’s something for economists to talk about; that’s something 

for big business. But, Mr. Speaker, an uncompetitive economy 

costs jobs, drives people out of a jurisdiction, and hurts 

everybody’s standard of living, therefore, Mr. Speaker, 

reducing the ability to spend on programs and infrastructure. 

 

This budget, Mr. Speaker, invests in key capital and 

programming areas. It sustains and enhances core government 



April 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4983 

services, especially, Mr. Speaker, I want to mention that there 

will be more money for health and education in this budget. 

 

A General Revenue Fund surplus, Mr. Speaker, in this budget, 

for the fiscal year estimated at $20 million. A reduction of 

spending, Mr. Speaker, of 1.2 per cent. The first time in 

memory, Mr. Speaker, that we have seen government spending 

actually get smaller in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most importantly I think, no increase in 

government debt, as government debt will remain at 4.5 billion 

for this fiscal year, following a 40 per cent reduction in the ’09, 

I think in our first budget, Mr. Speaker, as government — 

certainly during our term in government. 

 

The Growth and Financial Security Fund, Mr. Speaker, 

projected to have a year-end balance of 510 million. This is 

$510.8 million of actual cash, Mr. Speaker, unlike the former 

NDP government’s Fiscal Stabilization Fund that contained no 

money at all, was just a bookkeeping placeholder, Mr. Speaker, 

was never, was never a fund of money, but a bookkeeping 

placeholder that they used — or claimed to use — like a bank 

account, like as if it had real money. Numerous years, Mr. 

Speaker, during their reign they balanced the budget by using 

that so-called Fiscal Stabilization Fund, Mr. Speaker, that did 

not exist in terms of real dollars. 

 

Every time, Mr. Speaker, that they drew down that Fiscal 

Stabilization Fund, it amounted to an increase in debt for this 

province. The only way those cheques could be cashed was by 

borrowing more money, Mr. Speaker, and consequently debt 

grew under that government. 

 

A 2010-2011 infrastructure budget included, Mr. Speaker, of 

$632 million. Mr. Speaker, that amounts to the second largest 

infrastructure budget in the history of our province, second only 

to our last budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A $177 million in municipal infrastructure funding, up 30 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker. That speaks for itself, Mr. Speaker, in a time 

of restraint that we recognize as a government that 

municipalities under the previous administration have been 

shorted by hundreds of millions of dollars over the last 16 

years. 

 

$250 million, Mr. Speaker, for highway construction. Mr. 

Speaker, we inherited a huge infrastructure deficit from those 

members opposite, the former NDP government. And they 

don’t want to hear this, Mr. Speaker. They don’t like to hear it 

and I don’t blame them. I wouldn’t want to hear it either if it 

was my record. Nobody would, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Many areas that I could talk about in this budget, Mr. Speaker, 

but I want to mention agriculture in passing. I’m not going to 

cover every detail of it, but I want to mention that there’s $16 

million in additional agriculture research and development 

money in this budget, Mr. Speaker. And that this budget will 

continue our practice of full funding for AgriStability program, 

a practice that is a foreign concept to those members opposite, 

Mr. Speaker, when they would delay and postpone funding of 

that program until it was too late for many farmers across the 

province to take advantage of it, Mr. Speaker. More cropping 

and pricing options in crop insurance, Mr. Speaker, under this 

budget, and a wildlife predation program that will be operated 

through our Crop Insurance offices, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Under Education, Mr. Speaker, we find that there’s increased 

funding for Education, which we deem to be one of the most 

important programs in our province and one that we base our 

future on, Mr. Speaker. And among those programs or among 

with that increased funding for Education, Mr. Speaker, we find 

funding for 18 education . . . well school infrastructure projects 

around the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[12:15] 

 

When economic forecasters, Mr. Speaker, project or predict 

great things for the economy of a jurisdiction, that basically 

indicates, among other things, strong approval for that 

jurisdiction’s fiscal direction as indicated by their budget. The 

NDP don’t like to see this budget, Mr. Speaker. They don’t like 

to see smaller government and they don’t like to see balanced 

budgets, real balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker. Because in 

contrast of what they did during their 16 years it makes them 

look very, very bad. 

 

Economic forecasters say things like, that for 2010 the Bank of 

Montreal predicts 3.8 per cent growth for Saskatchewan while 

the Canadian average will be 3.4. BMO [Bank of Montreal] 

rates Saskatchewan as third overall. RBC [Royal Bank of 

Canada] predicts 3.6 per cent growth for Saskatchewan’s 

economy while the Canadian average they predict will be 2.8, 

second overall in the country according to RBC, Mr. Speaker. 

CIBC [Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce] predicts 3.5 per 

cent growth for Saskatchewan while the average they predict 

for Canada is 2.7 per cent growth. Scotiabank, Mr. Speaker . . . 

Oh I should mention that CIBC that puts us first in their 

estimation. Scotiabank predicts 3.4 per cent growth, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I could go on and on listing them individually, but I average the 

nine economic forecasters in the private sector, Mr. Speaker, 

that put Saskatchewan at 3.6 per cent GDP growth in 2011 and 

2010-11 and 2011-12 and Canada at 3.2 per cent. All 

forecasters put us either in first, second, or third place in leading 

economies of this country, Mr. Speaker. And accordingly I 

hope that all members will, as I will, support this motion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to apologize in advance for the story I told once already but I 

think it’s very, very important I tell it again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had a dream. And in that dream me and the 

member from Kindersley were about to be shot by a firing 

squad. And the firing squad, as we were tethered to those poles 

in the courtyard, the captain of the firing squad walked up to the 

member from Kindersley and said, before you die, sir, what is 

your last wish? And the member from Kindersley said, I want 

to hear a three-hour speech from the member from Melfort on 

how to balance the budget based on my potash predictions. 

That’s what the member from Kindersley said. And the captain 

of the firing squad turned to me and said, before you die, sir, 

what is your last wish? To which I replied, shoot me first. 

 



4984 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly the problem that we 

have from the Saskatchewan Party government. They simply do 

not know what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. They don’t know 

what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. They don’t have a clue what 

they’re doing. If you have members from a wide variety of, I 

imagine, financial background — I’m sure they’re all 

accountants over there — they’re singing from the same song 

sheets. Just keep saying what you’re saying based on the 

member from Swift Current and the member from Kindersley, 

what they tell you to say to the public, that’s what you will say. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I say to them, shame on them. 

 

Now one of the most stark contrasts that I’ve seen in the last 

couple of years is when the Saskatchewan Party government 

were given a chance, a chance to become government, they 

betrayed that opportunity, Mr. Speaker. A lot of people believed 

in them, and I want to tell the people that gave them the 

opportunity, it’s all right to make that error but let’s not make it 

again. 

 

Because one of the first things that these guys did when they 

came into power, Mr. Speaker, is they put a billboard up: the 

Premier’s face saying, look we paid down debt 40 per cent. And 

every fiscal conservative in this province and across the country 

— anybody that had any background in financial management 

— said, there’s no way a government that’s been six months 

into power can pay down 40 per cent of a debt that’s been there 

for many, many years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that lends credence to the whole argument that we make, is 

that (a) they had a huge inheritance that they got from the 

previous administration, compliments of the people of 

Saskatchewan. And yet they not once ever gave credit where 

credit was due, and that was at the hard work being done by the 

previous NDP administration and the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, with this budget and with this silly motion, 

it’s insulting to the people of Saskatchewan’s intelligence when 

they put this motion forward to try and convince themselves 

that they’re doing a wonderful job, Mr. Speaker. They’re not. 

Two consecutive billion-dollar deficits, that is not a wonderful 

job, Mr. Speaker. That is a terrible job record. That’s a terrible 

job record and you guys ought to step away, because you don’t 

know what you’re doing. You couldn’t organize a two-car 

parade, much less a $10 billion budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So my point is, Mr. Speaker, why aren’t you putting up 

billboards now? Why aren’t you putting up billboards now? 

Because now you’ve got to stand on your own two feet and on 

your own record instead of blaming the NDP or taking credit 

from the NDP. Where are your billboards now saying, oh we’re 

going back into debt? We’re going back into debt. Why aren’t 

you putting those up? You know why you’re not putting them 

up? Because you’re trying to hoodwink the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s what you’re trying to do. 

And we’re going to sing from the highest mountains and the 

deepest valleys that this is not the truth, Mr. Speaker. This is not 

the truth. 

 

And I am telling people throughout the world, in my world, that 

it’s time to stand up to these guys. You guys have been bullying 

the working people. You have been ignoring the health care 

workers. You have turned your back on the Aboriginal people. 

You don’t care about the students. 

 

After a while you begin to wonder, well who do they care 

about? Who do they care about? Of all the people that you have 

turned your backs on, who do you care about, Mr. Speaker? 

They don’t care about anything except trying to retain power 

and to try and confuse the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I’m telling the people throughout Saskatchewan, it’s time to 

stand up to these guys. And along with the opposition we’ll 

stand up with you to fight back, to fight back for two simple 

reasons. Number one is they don’t know what they’re doing. 

That’s one of the biggest reasons why. And number two is we 

can’t afford you anymore. We simply can’t afford you anymore. 

 

And I tell the people of Saskatchewan wherever we go, 

wherever we go. To the Liberals, it’s time for us to come back 

to the NDP, we will do the job that is required to bring this 

province to the point where we’re properly financing and 

properly managing the financing. 

 

We’re going to ask the people, the people that many families 

and the people that you fired in 2007, all the families that are 

affected, over 500 families, let’s stand up to these guys and let’s 

start showing them what we’re made of, Mr. Speaker, what 

we’re made of. 

 

When they put aside your involvement and when they come 

after the working people, let’s go back to the unions and say, 

come on board, unions. Let’s stand up to these guys and start 

fighting them back. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the most amazing thing that I see, the most 

amazing thing that I see is that right across the board a lot of 

people, the fiscal conservatives, the people that said well let’s 

give these guys a chance, you have betrayed that trust. They say 

you guys couldn’t organize a two-car parade when it comes to 

financial management. And many people throughout your own 

backyards are starting to say that about the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

And when you get up and put motions of this sort, these silly, 

meaningless motions of this sort, you’re insulting their 

intelligence. And they don’t like that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now people across northern Saskatchewan tell me, well, well, 

Buckley, you know, obviously the NDP are going to give the 

Sask Party a hard time. And I say, okay, fine. You could say it’s 

not balanced. They’re saying it’s not balanced. You got to find 

a neutral qualifying party to exactly say what you’re saying. So, 

Mr. Speaker, a lot of the accountants in Saskatchewan have 

spoken very loudly. 

 

But quite frankly, I go back to Murray Mandryk’s opinion, Mr. 

Speaker. And Mr. Mandryk’s opinion of course is . . . And I 

quote from the Thursday, March 25th, 2010 Leader-Post, and 

Murray’s comment — and this is a neutral person — and I 

quote: 

 

But contrary to Gantefoer’s assertion of a balanced budget, 

a claim repeated ad nauseum Wednesday, it’s not balanced 

— not by any definition. 

 



April 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4985 

End quote, Mr. Speaker. Not by any — any — definition. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, here’s a neutral party that is qualifying what 

we’re saying. And we’re telling the people of Saskatchewan, 

2011, it is time to get rid of these guys because they don’t know 

what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. They don’t know what they’re 

doing, Mr. Speaker. When they fudge the books and when they 

mess around with the elections officer and they’re still in this 

denial state, it is time to get rid of them. You’re tired, 

uninspired, and you need to be fired, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this to the people of 

Saskatchewan. You trusted them, yes. It’s time for us to look 

back and reassess where they’re at. But let the Saskatchewan 

Party . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The 55-minute debate or 

65-minute is . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, okay. Sorry 

about that. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, let the Sask Party name live in 

infamy, because they’re going to war with the working people. 

They’re turning their back on the Aboriginal people. Families 

are paying more. Health care is in shambles. They’re killing off 

the Crowns and now, Mr. Speaker, they’re putting us back into 

debt. 2011 is the time we say enough of the infamous Sask 

Party. It’s time to bring in a government and a leader that has 

the experience that makes Saskatchewan what it’s always been, 

a very strong, vibrant Saskatchewan and a great province in the 

country of Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, there’s only 57 people, 

37 people over there that are on the way. It is time to get them 

off the way and bring a party in that can do the job properly. 

 

The Speaker: — The debate on the 75 minutes has ended and 

we’ll now go into the 10-minute question. Member from Moose 

Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the facts are the facts. So let’s look at the facts and 

these are the facts. Undeniable, Mr. Speaker, undeniably more 

people than ever before are living in Saskatchewan. More 

people than ever before are working in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. And Saskatchewan has the lowest unemployment 

numbers for 10 consecutive months. With all this great 

economic news, how can the member from Regina Rosemont 

continue to go around this province and tell the people of 

Saskatchewan that the economy is in a freefall? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, what an honour to take 

that question. I tell you what, Mr. Speaker. Our economy is in 

fine health, Mr. Speaker, due to the good policies of New 

Democrats, the hard work of Saskatchewan people, and the fine 

entrepreneurs. 

 

What is in freefall, Mr. Speaker, is the financial management of 

this Premier that can’t be trusted with the finances of our 

province — billions of dollars of debt growth, and a 

billion-dollar deficit with unprecedented revenues — totally 

unacceptable. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Funding for the 

children’s hospital in Saskatoon is gone in this Saskatchewan 

Party government’s budget. There was $100 million already 

committed to the construction of the children’s hospital. My 

question is to the member from Lloydminster: where is the 

$100 million that has been promised for the children’s hospital? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank 

the member for that question. I think as she well knows our 

government has made a solid commitment to that project, and 

that that money will be there as it’s needed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think that what is important to the people of Saskatchewan to 

remember is the question is coming from a member who 

represents a party who cut 52 hospitals, closed 52 hospitals. So 

today for her to stand in this House with indignation about a 

project which is currently under way, which our government 

has made a commitment to, I think it wears pretty thin on the 

people of Saskatchewan. Specifically the people of rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, who have lived in those 

communities, who rely on health care in those communities. 

 

And under their watch with the Leader of the Opposition today, 

as a prominent member, they closed those hospitals, Mr. 

Speaker. And I haven’t heard them apologize for it. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP always likes talking 

about how great the resumé of their leader is. The members 

opposite, however, forget to tell the people of Saskatchewan his 

whole resumé. Their leader made investments in business 

ventures such as SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company] where the NDP lost 28 million 

taxpayer dollars, and Channel Lake where the NDP lost 15 

million taxpayer dollars. All these terrible investments occurred 

while the current Leader of the Opposition was sitting at the 

cabinet table helping make these decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from Athabasca: 

how can you go around telling the people of Saskatchewan your 

current leader has good judgment and business sense when he 

has made such terrible decisions in the past? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to that 

member that any day of the week I will compare the resumé of 

my leader versus his leader, Mr. Speaker, any day of the week, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Your leader, sir, put the Country Music Hall of Fame in Swift 

Current in the hole. And if you can’t sell country music to the 

people of Saskatchewan, then you’re not much of a salesman, 



4986 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2010 

Mr. Speaker. I’ll much rather have my leader predict 

international potash prices and negotiate with oil companies any 

day of the week than a guy that can’t even sell country music to 

the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, our leader comes with a very 

solid knowledge on how to build the economy of 

Saskatchewan. Your leader doesn’t have a clue, Mr. Speaker. 

He doesn’t have a clue. So once again the people of 

Saskatchewan are left in the . . . with this huge void. They 

trusted this leader and that party, and that trust was betrayed, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like 

to draw to the attention of the members opposite — and in 

particular to the member from Lloydminster in hopes he might 

finally see the light, Mr. Speaker — bottom of page 62, total 

debt, total debt. Charts made so a child can read it, so it 

shouldn’t be hard for any of us in this Assembly. We’re far 

beyond that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, debt is going from $7.7 billion to $11.9 billion, 

Mr. Speaker. How can you be putting up billboards saying debt 

isn’t going up? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As that member 

well knows, the budget line he’s looking at includes Crown 

debt. And this government inherited a situation where their 

government did not plan for the future of Saskatchewan. They 

took the dividends out of those Crowns; they didn’t reinvest it 

back in. And we have a vision for our province, which is a 

growing vision that we’re going to see people moving to this 

province . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I’d ask . . . 

Order. I’d ask the members to allow . . . I’d ask the members to 

allow the member from Lloydminster to complete his question. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Going further on 

that, Mr. Speaker, some of these members, you know, their 

vision was that if the people of Saskatchewan leave, we don’t 

need to renew the infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. That isn’t our 

vision. 

 

Our vision is that more people are moving to Saskatchewan. We 

need to have a stable supply of electricity, phone systems. We 

need our gas systems at a world standard, Mr. Speaker, because 

we’re a province that’s leading the world, Mr. Speaker. And 

that wasn’t their vision. It wasn’t their priorities to invest in 

infrastructure. Our government has different priorities, Mr. 

Speaker, and I will stand by them, as will all the members on 

this side of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The former 

NDP government was responsible for the worst job creation 

record of any province over a 10-year span. To the member 

from Athabasca: given this alarming trend, why did your 

government create such a hostile climate for business? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, one of the books I often tell 

people to read is a fictional book — it’s history according to the 

Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker. It is history. 

And that member ought not to portray herself as being 

somebody that’s going to follow that particular path because 

generally people kind of think she’s got a strong mind. And 

what she should not do is try and follow a script handed to her 

by people that are handling the Sask Party backbench. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the NDP government, this economy 

flourished, Mr. Speaker. Business flourished. Workers 

flourished, Mr. Speaker. Debt was going down. The Crowns 

were being strengthened, Mr. Speaker. And every time the 

economy of Saskatchewan was strong, guess who was in 

power? An NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I listened 

to the member from Lloydminster’s speech about the 

lighthouse. Well I think his lighthouse . . . I think the bulb’s a 

little dim, Mr. Speaker, when he doesn’t think about . . . 

 

And he somehow feels that, well he’s got some debt in this 

hand and he’s got some debt in that hand, and I can put this 

hand behind my back and I’ve only got this much. I’m doing 

really good. Well, Mr. Speaker, how on earth can he justify 

stripping all of the profits out of the Crown corporations and 

expecting the Crown corporations to borrow money when they 

have made that much money? And if it wasn’t for this 

government stripping that money out to pay for their own debt 

and overspending, the Crowns would be sitting fine, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 

member was listening so intently to my speech that she wants to 

quote it back. So I appreciate that. But, Mr. Speaker, as she well 

knows or at least she should know, the Crown corporations are 

assets of the province of Saskatchewan. They are companies 

that operate within our province and they pay dividends to our 

government. 

 

But I think it’s also important to note that the Crown, 

SaskPower, the senior Crown in our province, hasn’t paid a 

dividend and won’t pay a dividend because, Mr. Speaker, 

because similar to my last answer, they allowed . . . Mr. 

Speaker, those members under their watch allowed our system 

to get rundown, to get to a point where it was only servicing the 

needs of today, not looking into the future. Our government has 

a different vision. We’re going to rebuild our system, rebuild 

our generation, and be supplying power for a long time. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 



April 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4987 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, most of the leading financial 

forecasters in the country have predicted Saskatchewan GDP 

growth first or second in the next two years. This is an enviable 

position to be in compared to other regions in the nation and 

this is good news from leading financial professionals in 

Canada. 

 

We have more people working . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The 75-minute time for debate 

has elapsed. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 3 — Release of Intelligence File 

on Former Premier 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Today I again want to rise to move a motion, a motion that 

would say and along the following lines: 

 

That this Assembly calls upon the Government of Canada, 

the Canadian Security Intelligence Service, and the Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police to release the complete 

intelligence file of the former Saskatchewan Premier 

Tommy Douglas, and further; 

 

That in making this call, the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan asserts the following [items, Mr. Speaker] 

. . . 

 

And if I could just run through them, that then will lay out why 

we are urging unanimous support for this motion. And I know 

from the opposition, we have discussed this in caucus, and I 

know that we will be supporting it, all the members who are 

here today. And I would urge members of the government 

benches to support this motion as well because it was here in 

this building that Tommy Douglas, after the election in 1944, 

did many of the things that led Canadians in general to choose 

him as the most important Canadian. 

 

That’s a honour that is bestowed on all people of Saskatchewan 

through Tommy Douglas, and including the members opposite. 

And many of the members of the Sask Party and many 

members of the Conservative Party in the vote that was taken 

voted that Tommy Douglas was the most famous Canadian and 

I’m sure that . . . the greatest Canadian, and I’m sure that if you 

went back to your constituents and asked whether or not you 

should be voting this day for or against this motion, your own 

members would say that you should be voting for this 

information to be released about the greatest Canadian. 

 

The items that we want to discuss today and the reasons that we 

want this file released, first: 

 

That public access to information is a core tenet of the 

democracy [of our province]; 

 

That the Canadian Security Intelligence Service should be 

consistent in that it routinely releases intelligence files on 

individuals twenty years after their death; 

And as we know, unfortunately Tommy died 25 years ago so it 

should be automatic that the information is released. And if 

there is some glaring reason why it can’t or shouldn’t be 

released, then I think it’s incumbent on the agencies involved to 

outline exactly what those reasons are, and that hasn’t been 

done. 

 

(3) That twenty-four years after Tommy Douglas’s death 

and several decades after the information on him was 

gathered, there is no legitimate security reason for keeping 

the information secret; 

 

(4) That the release of this information is important to the 

legacy of Tommy Douglas and to the people of 

Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

I think that’s important. And we were in Weyburn the other 

night for an event and the mayor of Weyburn, Deb Button, Her 

Honour, was explaining that Weyburn and the community has 

created a statue of Tommy Douglas and they’re going to be 

putting it up in the city of Weyburn over the next few months. 

And I’m sure all members of the Assembly will want to find out 

when that date is, and go and celebrate with the community of 

Weyburn the erection of this statue. 

 

And what would be very important and why we’re pushing this 

motion now is we would like to, on behalf of the legislature, get 

the information so that when the unveiling occurs, that all of the 

information that would be outlined in these files would be 

compiled and be part of that historic moment in the city of 

Weyburn. 

 

The fifth point: 

 

That the Assembly recognizes that Tommy Douglas 

served our province and our country with distinction, as 

the first social democratic leader in North America. 

 

Now that is important because it started a trend of politics based 

on the social gospel in this province of helping neighbours and 

friends to build things. And it was a history that our parents and 

grandparents and even today are very proud of. If you needed to 

get together to build a community hall or a barn in the early 

days and there was no established contractors in the community 

that you could hire . . . It wasn’t that people were opposed to the 

private sector; there was nobody to do it. So people got together 

and created work bees, and they would build their community 

in that way. 

 

And later when they needed power in rural Saskatchewan, it 

wasn’t that people were opposed to the large multinational 

power companies; they just weren’t there. They weren’t 

coming. There were no profits to be made by putting power into 

rural Saskatchewan. So again in a very practical way, what is 

now called social democracy, which really was co-operation, 

people got together and built little power plants, mined the coal, 

hauled it to town, burned it, made electricity, and then the 

Power Corporation was committed. And people often say, well 

why is Saskatchewan so backward that they keep their Crown 

corporations — people who don’t understand where the Crown 

corporations came from. 

 

The fact is our Crown corporations were created by our family 



4988 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2010 

members, parents and grandparents, and they were a labour of 

love. They were built and created to serve the needs of the 

public. And that’s why when the member from Moose Jaw 

South raised it a few moments ago, why are all the profits being 

stripped out of the Crown corporations, we’re worried about 

that. We’re worried about that because when they were created, 

they weren’t meant to be a tool to be fiddled with by right wing 

governments every time they get elected. And they did that 

back in the 1980s with the Crown corporations and tried to 

privatize SaskEnergy under the Devine administration. The 

public stood up and fought that, and we saved that Crown. And 

we’re going to have to do that again. 

 

(6) That this Assembly values Tommy Douglas’s legacy to 

Saskatchewan and Canada, including medicare, old age 

pension, family allowance, social programs, and the 

central Bank of Canada, civil liberties and rights [in the] 

legislation, and our Crown corporations; 

 

(7) That this Assembly recognize the people of Canada 

voted Tommy Douglas as the greatest Canadian to mark 

his accomplishments. 

 

And it’s true. Wherever I go in Canada, whether it’s in 

Vancouver or Montreal, people know for sure one person from 

Saskatchewan and it’s Tommy Douglas. And some people say, 

well you shouldn’t talk about Tommy Douglas or you shouldn’t 

talk about Grant Devine because nobody under the age of 35 

knows them. What an insult to young people. They know 

perfectly well who Tommy Douglas is, and they know who 

Grant Devine is, and they know, young people know their 

history. 

 

And I say to members opposite that this individual who stood in 

this Assembly right over there where the now Premier stands 

. . . And think about that comparison of the father of medicare 

and the father of Crown corporations stood at the same desk as 

the now Premier, and that comparison is stark. And the Premier 

has used that expression in the past. It’s a stark comparison. 

 

And I say that the legacy of this man, Tommy Douglas, needs 

to be rounded out by releasing the information that was 

collected about him during those turbulent but exciting times of 

medicare and the Crowns and the huge debates that went on 

here in the House. 

 

And the eighth reason is: 

 

That this Assembly believes that Tommy Douglas’s 

family, friends, and all Canadians deserve to know the 

information contained in the intelligence file. 

 

And that is basically the motion that I will be moving on the 

conclusion of my remarks. I have only a few other things to talk 

about. 

 

But in a very realistic way, Mr. Speaker, in a democratic 

country, the public deserves to have access to these kind of 

files. There is no doubt about that. And again the Canadian 

Security Intelligence Service releases these files on a routine 

basis 20 years after the death of the individual involved. That 

happens hundreds of times. And what isn’t clear is why this file 

is unusual because no one knows. 

I’ve talked to Allan Blakeney, who was around at the time of 

the introduction in 1962 of the actual Bill that created the 

medicare system, and he talks often about — he was the 

minister of Health at that time — and he talks about the great 

press conferences that were held here in the rotunda of the 

legislature. He indicated that there would be 50 or 60 reporters, 

50 or 60 reporters from across Canada and the United States 

because it was a huge debate and discussion. 

 

[12:45] 

 

The American Medical Association — interestingly enough the 

same organization that fought against medicare in the United 

States, I might add unsuccessfully in the recent debate with 

President Obama — were here in this building, debating and 

discussing and trying to stop medicare from being introduced in 

our province because they knew that, if it was introduced here 

and took hold, that it would likely sweep across Canada. And 

their fear — because there was a lot of fear during that period 

worldwide about social programs being introduced — that it 

might sweep across the United States. 

 

Well it took 50 years, but it has swept across the United States. 

And had we not introduced it here, and had Tommy Douglas 

not had the courage of his conviction, you would not see the 

implementation of medicare in the United States, because 

Canada was used as a model and an instrument to sell the 

program in the United States in the most recent debate. And in 

meeting in Denver and talking to many of the people who were 

involved in the Democratic race at that time, medicare was one 

of the big interests of people like Rahm Emanuel and how it 

happened in Canada. 

 

And I met at one point with an interesting company called Blue 

State Digital who were doing the communications for the 

Obama campaign and they were very interested in how 

medicare was established in this province. And they wanted to 

know which think tank or university was responsible for the 

implementation and the design of medicare. 

 

When I told them the story about medicare and how Tommy 

Douglas had based it on a program from Health Region No. 1 in 

southwest Saskatchewan where people who had been dying 

because they couldn’t afford doctors and hospitals got together 

and levied a small tax on quarter sections of land and then hired 

a doctor — practical men and women getting together to solve a 

problem together, not based on philosophy or on a textbook or 

something they learned at university, but how to save lives by 

getting together to do what they couldn’t do alone — I could 

see in the eyes of the young guy I was talking to that there was 

a little disappointment that it was so simple. That it was 

practical, made in, I might add because I’m a bit of a homer, in 

southwest Saskatchewan by practical men and women who 

weren’t left or right wing. They weren’t philosophical about it. 

They were solving a problem. 

 

And my advice is that everything we can do in this Assembly to 

honour that individual — and part of it is by getting the release 

of these documents — we should do. 

 

There are many people in Ottawa who are asking about this 

motion because they want to know what do the people of 

Saskatchewan think, which is the home province of the 



April 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4989 

individual we’re talking about. So the importance of this motion 

goes far beyond this room. I think sometimes the bickering that 

goes on here and the personal emotions overtake what’s the 

right thing to do. And the fact of the matter is, many Canadians 

will watch to see what we do in this room today — who stands 

for the vote and who doesn’t stand for the vote — because 

many Canadians want this document released. And again on 

this issue, Saskatchewan is a leader. And the people of this 

legislature should be leaders on this issue. And there are people 

waiting to see if this motion will pass today. 

 

Now I’m encouraged because I am told that the Premier clearly 

indicated and told the media on March 24th that, and I quote, “I 

don’t think we have a problem with them being released.” That 

is the Premier of Saskatchewan, the member from Swift 

Current, on March 24th. So I’m hoping he has talked to 

members of the government benches because that’s his words. 

 

And later he said, and he also said that if the official opposition 

brought this motion forward on private members’ day — that 

would be today, the first opportunity we’ve had — he said, and 

I quote: “I don’t think we’d have a big concern either way.” 

 

So we expect that it will be passed today and that the Premier 

will stick to his word, and that on this one item at least, we can 

trust his word that he said to the media and the public on March 

24th. So I’m asking the House Leader, Government House 

Leader, that he will carry out the word of the Premier. If the 

Premier’s not here, I’ve got the documentation of his quote . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Pardon? No, I said if he wasn’t here 

at the time the vote came . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, I 

didn’t say he’s not here. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member to direct his 

comments through the Speaker. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — What I’m hoping is that the Government 

House Leader, if the Premier isn’t here at the time of the vote, 

that he will take it upon himself to deliver on the Premier’s 

commitment of March 24th here in the rotunda, I believe, of the 

legislature. And I quote again — because this is important — he 

said, and I quote, “I don’t think we’d have a big concern either 

way.” So again we expect that this vote will go ahead today. 

 

Now Tommy Douglas, as we all know — I’m not going to 

spend a lot of time on this — but he was born in Scotland in 

1904 and moved with his family to Winnipeg in 1910. He 

began his career as a young minister in Weyburn, gave great 

speeches, and people still talk about the speeches that were 

delivered there. And for Douglas, his service on both religion 

and politics were intertwined, and it’s interesting. 

 

But in Alberta at the same time, there was a young minister, 

Aberhart who was involved in politics but spoke from a 

different perspective; from the right wing, and how it was in 

Alberta that people are independent and you had to succeed on 

your own and pull yourselves up by your bootstraps. And in 

Saskatchewan, we had the preachings of Tommy Douglas as a 

politician and a minister that said, no there’s a different way, 

and that is to do it as a community at large and help each other. 

And to this day, the two provinces are fundamentally different. 

And I’m not even making a strong argument that one is right or 

wrong. 

Of course I believe in the theory of the social gospel and 

Tommy Douglas. But the fact is, when people say politicians 

don’t make any difference, this is my point, nothing could be 

further from the truth, if you stick to your beliefs, if you’re 

yourself and you’re convinced about what you believe in. 

Tommy Douglas did that for the province of Saskatchewan. He 

did it both in a religious way and he did it politically. 

 

Tommy was also an underdog. Before he was elected in 1944, 

the political pundits of the day made it very clear that there 

wasn’t a hope in heck of Tommy Douglas and social democrats 

being elected in the province of Saskatchewan. And he had all 

of the media against him. And he had all of the wealth of the 

province, the money people, against him. And I hear the 

arguments sometimes from members opposite, that you people 

can’t win the next election because you don’t have the banks or 

the oil companies, and you don’t have these people — the high 

level in our society. I wish we did, but maybe we don’t. I don’t 

know. 

 

But they laugh sometimes and the member from Big Muddy has 

said statements about Tommy Douglas. He heckles sometimes 

about it from Wood River. And we need to not go to that today, 

but those words about Tommy Douglas aren’t appropriate and 

shouldn’t be used in this place where Tommy Douglas spent his 

life and gave to the province and is the greatest Canadian. It 

should be below us to use those kind of terms. 

 

And I hear other people say, well you can’t win the next 

election because you don’t have any support. You just have 

those working people and unions, and you just have Aboriginal 

people and old people. Look, that’s probably all Tommy had 

when he got elected in 1944 with the majority vote. And so I 

say that Tommy was always a leader and always 

underestimated. 

 

But in his first term alone, he passed more than 100 Bills. And 

because of his leadership change, old-age pension, family 

allowances, and social programs came into being. He 

introduced, as premier, The Crown Corporations Act that led to 

the establishment of SaskPower, SaskTel. Labour legislation 

that was best in Canada and best in the world. He was also 

known as the father of medicare. 

 

Roy Romanow often tells the story about his early 

conversations with Tommy Douglas. I never knew Tommy well 

— I heard him speak once or twice — but I didn’t know him 

well as an individual. But Roy, as a young elected person, 

actually got to know Tommy. And he tells the story of flying in 

an airplane with Tommy in the early 1970s. And Roy was 

nervous. And because Tommy was such a hero, he didn’t know 

what you should be saying to the former premier. And Roy was 

a brand new elected MLA; it’s funny for us to think of Roy that 

way now. But he said to Tommy, expecting the answer to the 

question would be medicare, he said, Tommy — this was after 

Tommy had gone to Ottawa — what was your greatest 

accomplishment in Saskatchewan? And expecting then Tommy 

would talk for half an hour about medicare and Roy could relax 

and not have to carry the conversation. But to his surprise, 

Tommy said rural electrification. 

 

And he said, looking down at the lights twinkling all the farms 

in the rural area evening, and the darkness showed up the lights 



4990 Saskatchewan Hansard April 22, 2010 

on all the farms, and Tommy said, my biggest accomplishment 

was getting electricity to the farms in rural Saskatchewan. But it 

also told you about the kind of guy he was. But his main reason 

for being involved in politics was not about himself or his 

family. It was about looking after your neighbours and friends. 

 

And he also was inspired in his early days because when he was 

a young man, his parents didn’t have the funds for the 

specialist. He had a bad leg, and it was a real problem for him. 

And the specialist indicated that the only option was 

amputation, but a visit to a surgeon offered to perform that 

surgery for free. And his reforms and the work that he did, 

saved his leg and someone out of the goodness of their heart 

helped him with that. And then he went forward and had the 

treatment that he needed and saved his leg. And he always 

believed that medicare was a fundamental part of his regime. 

 

So with those few words, Mr. Speaker, I wish to move the 

motion that has been introduced. and I’m not sure if the Clerk at 

the Table has the actual motion. But I think at this time I will 

move that motion. I’ve read it in general and I’ll read it then 

verbatim: 

 

That this Assembly calls upon the Government of Canada, 

the Canadian Security Intelligence Service, and the Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police to release the complete 

intelligence file on the former Saskatchewan Premier 

Tommy Douglas, and further; 

 

That in making this call, the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan asserts the following: 

 

(1) That public access to information is a core tenet of 

democracy; 

 

(2) That the Canadian Security Intelligence Service 

(CSIS) should be consistent in that it routinely releases 

intelligence files on individuals after 25 years of their 

death; 

 

(3) That 24 years after Tommy Douglas’s death, and 

several decades after the information on him was 

gathered, there is no legitimate security reason for 

keeping this information secret; 

 

(4) That the release of this information is important to 

the legacy of Tommy Douglas and the people of 

Saskatchewan and Canada; 

 

(5) That this Assembly recognizes that Tommy Douglas 

served our province and our country with distinction as 

the first social democratic leader in North America; 

 

(6) That this Assembly values Tommy Douglas’s legacy 

to Canada and Saskatchewan, including medicare, old 

age pension, family allowance, social programs, the 

central Bank of Canada, civil liberties and rights 

legislation, and the Crown corporations; 

 

(7) That this Assembly recognize the people of Canada 

voted Tommy Douglas as the greatest Canadian to mark 

his accomplishments; 

 

(8) That this Assembly believes that Tommy Douglas’s 

family, friends, and all Canadians deserve to know the 

information contained in these intelligence files. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has 

moved a motion: 

 

That this Assembly calls upon the Government of Canada, 

the Canadian Security Intelligence Service, and the Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police to release the complete 

intelligence file on the former Saskatchewan Premier 

Tommy Douglas, and further; 

 

That in making this call, the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan asserts the following: 

 

(1) That public access to information is a core tenet of 

democracy; 

 

(2) That the Canadian Security Intelligence Service 

(CSIS) should be consistent in that it routinely releases 

intelligence files on individuals after 20 years of their 

death; 

 

(3) That 24 years after Tommy Douglas’s death, and 

several decades after the information on him was 

gathered, there is no legitimate security reason for 

keeping this information secret; 

 

(4) That the release of this information is important to 

the legacy of Tommy Douglas and the people of 

Saskatchewan and Canada; 

 

(5) That this Assembly recognizes that Tommy Douglas 

served our province and our country with distinction as 

the first social democratic leader in North America; 

 

(6) That this Assembly values Tommy Douglas’s legacy 

to Canada and Saskatchewan, including medicare, old 

age pension, family allowance, social programs, the 

central Bank of Canada, civil liberties and rights 

legislation, and the Crown corporations; 

 

(7) That this Assembly recognize the people of Canada 

voted Tommy Douglas as the greatest Canadian to mark 

his accomplishments; 

 

(8) That this Assembly believes that Tommy Douglas’s 

family, friends, and all Canadians deserve to know the 

information contained in these intelligence files. 

 

The time of adjournment having been reached, this House now 

stands adjourned until 1:30 Monday afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:01.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4959 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4959, 4973 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4960 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4960 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4960 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4960 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4961 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4981 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4960 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4960 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4961 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4961 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4961 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4961 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4962 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4962 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4962 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4963 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Earth Day 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4963 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4963 

 Saskatchewan Potash Council 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4963 

 Opposition Allegations 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4964 

 Labour Legislation 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4964 

 Comments on Kidney Transplant Program 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4964 

 Health Care Results 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4965 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Workplace Safety 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4965 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4965 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4966 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4966 

 Police Investigation and Member’s Conduct 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4968 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4968 

 Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4969 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4969 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 137 — The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2010 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4970 

 Bill No. 138 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2 

 Loi n
o 
2 de 2010 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4970 

 Bill No. 612 — The Earth Day Recognition Act 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4970 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4970 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4973 

 



 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 127 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4971 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 127 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4971 

 Bill No. 104 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4971 

 Bill No. 124 — The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur les petites créances 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4972 

 Bill No. 102 — The Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4972 

 Bill No. 124 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4973 

 Bill No. 128 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Labour Mobility) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4973 

NOTICE OF CLOSURE 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4974 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 Investigation by Conflict of Interest Commissioner 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4974 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4974 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4974 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4975 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 2010 Budget 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4975 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 4977, 4985 

  McMillan ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4979, 4985 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4980 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4982 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 4983, 4986 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4985 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4985 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4985 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4986 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4986 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4986 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4987 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 3 — Release of Intelligence File on Former Premier 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4987 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


