




















































Hansard: December 01, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 20A  WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 1, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6309 

 December 1, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before routine proceedings, under section 

14(1) of The Provincial Auditor Act, I table the Provincial 

Auditor’s report. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — And before introduction of guests, if the 

members will allow, I’d like to acknowledge the presence of a 

former speaker of the Assembly, Mr. John Brockelbank, who 

has joined us this afternoon. If Mr. Brockelbank will give us a 

wave. 

 

I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On the 

13th of December, it’s a Monday, the Saskatchewan Party will 

nominate its candidate in Regina Dewdney. But the deadline for 

nomination papers has passed with only one submission. And 

so I’d like to introduce to you and through you the next 

candidate for the Saskatchewan Party in Regina Dewdney, 

Gene Makowsky of the city of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by way of a very brief introduction, I can tell you 

that Gene and I have a lot in common. We’re both married to 

wonderful women named Tami and spell it in a very unique 

way. Mr. Speaker, we both coach minor football. I think he’s 

probably a little better at it than I am. We both have Rider 

jerseys with the number 60. I wear mine quite a bit, Mr. 

Speaker. I can tell you that I’m often mistaken for Gene 

Makowsky as I go around the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know Gene well in this Assembly. He was 

born in Saskatoon, played for the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] Huskies. He’s a two-time CFL [Canadian 

Football League] outstanding offensive lineman, several times 

on the all-star team. But more important than that, he’s the 

father of three. He’s a husband. He’s someone involved in his 

community and countless charities that the Riders are involved 

in. He’s also a coach in minor basketball. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

don’t know about the status of his current career, a very 

successful career as a football player, but we know that he will 

work very hard as a candidate. 

 

A lot of coaches in the CFL would love to have Gene 

Makowsky on their team and, Mr. Speaker, we’re looking 

forward to that too. And so I’d just like to introduce to you and 

through you today to all members of the Assembly the potential 

future member for Regina Dewdney, no. 60, Gene Makowsky. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I’d like to join with the Premier and welcome Gene to 

the Legislative Assembly. I’ve been a long-time fan of one of 

the teams that he represents, as I think all members of the 

Assembly are. But, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad he has a seat in the 

Assembly in the gallery, and I hope, Mr. Speaker, that he enjoys 

the view from there for a very long time. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s rather unusual. We 

don’t have very many introductions today. But, Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Assembly 40 grade 12 students from F.W. Johnson 

Collegiate in the riding of Regina Dewdney, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re accompanied today by their teachers, Donarae 

Deringer, Mandy Gullickson, and Delaney Jackson, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I’ll have the opportunity later to meet and speak with these 

wonderful students. And we’ll have an opportunity to have a 

discussion about what they’ll see here during question period 

and proceedings this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with 

you in welcoming John Brockelbank, former Speaker, former 

minister, former MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], a 

colleague in our caucus for a number of years, also a very good 

friend of many of us in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

John and his wife Ina are strong representatives in Saskatoon in 

many organizations. I just want to welcome you here today, 

John, and I hope you enjoy. And I hope our members are in the 

best behaviour so that you can point that out to people in 

Saskatoon. So thanks for that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce to you Ms. Tina 

Friesen in your gallery. We had a nice meeting with the SAAG 

[Self-Advocacy Action Group] group this morning, advocating 

for people with disabilities and looking for changes to 

improvements, further improvements to our disability income 

support program called SAID [Saskatchewan assured income 

for disability]. And I’d like all members to welcome her to her 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

would like to join in in introducing to the House through you 

and to you all the members of the House, Tina Friesen who’s a 

strong advocate for those people who are living with 

disabilities. 

 

And she’s done an awesome job of advocating for people who 

matter a lot in our communities. And to that end, and she was 

explaining to many of the MLAs here today their trip to Berlin 

at an international conference, they raised over $35,000 to do 



6310 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2010 

this — an outstanding job, and represented our country and our 

province, our people very well. 

 

And as well, I’d like to mention that she’s also an executive 

member of the Regina Douglas Park NDP [New Democratic 

Party]. Thank you very much. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I’m first. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 

today to present a petition on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan who wish to bring to our attention that many 

seniors, Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed incomes and are 

victims of physical, emotional, and financial abuse; that 

Saskatchewan seniors have a right to social and economic 

security and a right to live free from poverty; that Saskatchewan 

seniors have a right to protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights, which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

This is from over 40 people who have signed from the 

communities of Val Marie, Climax, Hanley, and Melfort. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to rise and 

present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations, and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. And 

Saskatchewan’s income gap between the rich and the poor 

continues to grow, and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. And we also know 

that when governments reduce spending, often supports for 

social supports are cut first. I’d like to read the prayer. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Regina and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that calls for expanded hospice and palliative 

care here in Saskatchewan: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that all Saskatchewan people deserve quality 

end-of-life and bereavement care; that hospice and 

palliative care is known to help enhance the quality of life 

for those facing advancing illness, death, and 

bereavement; that a publicly funded and administered 

hospice and palliative care system, including residential 

hospices, would increase end-of-life care options for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to enhance and increase 

publicly funded and administered hospice and palliative 

care, including in-home hospice care services and 

residential hospices, in order to ensure that all 

Saskatchewan people have access to high-quality 

end-of-life care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present yet another petition from Furdale. A government 

ministry has directed SaskWater to cut off supplies of water for 

domestic use to Furdale customers. The same government 

ministry has directed that customers may no longer treat 

non-potable water using methods approved by Sask Health. 

 

The Furdale residents, in dealing in good faith with SaskWater 

for over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their domestic 

systems and in-home treatment equipment as well as for their 

livestock and irrigation lines. The alternative water supply 

being referred to by a government ministry is a private operator 

offering treated, non-pressurized water at great cost with no 

guarantee of quality, quantity, or availability of water, Mr. 

Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Furdale and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 



December 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6311 

again in the Assembly here today to present petitions on behalf 

of concerned residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to 

the unprecedented mismanagement of our finances by the Sask 

Party. They allude to the two consecutive deficit budgets tabled 

by the Sask Party and the amount of debt that is growing under 

the Sask Party — $4.2 billion in the next four years alone 

representing 55 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and having a direct 

impact on Saskatchewan people whether that be through 

increases in power bills, cuts to health care, or cuts to 

education, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens and good folks 

of Arcola and Fillmore. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

World AIDS Day 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 

World AIDS [acquired immune deficiency syndrome] Day. It is 

a day to recognize the disease and those that suffer from it 

around the world. It is a disease that has affected many people 

and many right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

We know, Mr. Speaker, that the number of new cases of HIV 

[human  immunodeficiency virus] have been climbing in 

Saskatchewan since 2003. And, Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of 

Health has been working closely with health regions, 

community-based organizations, First Nations and Métis, and 

the Public Health Agency of Canada. 

 

A comprehensive provincial HIV strategy has been created to 

guide the work to address the rising incidence of HIV. The 

overarching goals of the strategy, Mr. Speaker, are to reduce the 

occurrence of new cases of HIV, to improve the quality of life 

for those who are affected, and to reduce the risk factors for 

acquiring the infection. We have committed two and a half 

million dollars, Mr. Speaker, with the object of enhancing 

front-line services. Mr. Speaker, the HIV strategy includes 

short-, medium-, and long-term projects. And I’m happy to say 

one part of the plan already implemented has had a positive 

effect. The introduction of rapid point-of-care testing to 

increase the opportunity for testing high-risk populations is in 

effect and early reports are encouraging. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an important component of the HIV strategy is to 

enhance the capability of stakeholders both inside and outside 

the health system. This involves engaging communities to 

address HIV and AIDS prevention, education, treatment, and 

awareness. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Aboriginal AIDS Awareness Week 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is World 

AIDS Awareness Day, and it is also the start of Aboriginal 

AIDS Awareness Week. According to the Public Health 

Agency of Canada’s website, the number of people living with 

HIV including AIDS rose from an estimated 57,000 in 2005 to 

65,000 in 2008. And Saskatchewan has one of the highest rates 

of HIV/AIDS in all of Canada. And the government has voiced 

lofty goals to battle HIV/AIDS, but it provided little action and 

limited resources. 

 

Meanwhile there is a crisis at hand. In 2000, 34 Saskatchewan 

residents were diagnosed with HIV/AIDS. In 2008 there were 

174 new HIV/AIDS cases in Saskatchewan. The most recent 

Saskatchewan data is from 2009, where there were 200 newly 

reported HIV cases. Mr. Speaker, the trend line for this disease 

is on the rise, and it shows no sign of stopping. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Ken Clement, CEO [chief executive officer] of the Canadian 

Aboriginal AIDS Network, said in Monday’s Leader-Post, “We 

hear about the high rates of infection among vulnerable 

populations, yet we don’t see enough resources going into those 

communities.” Mr. Speaker, First Nations and Métis people 

account for 70 per cent of those affected in Saskatchewan. If the 

epidemic is left unchecked and ignored, then it will be even 

more difficult to fight this disease in those communities. 

Ignorance is not an option. And as I was reminded today at the 

Canadian Aboriginal AIDS Network Conference, AIDS and 

HIV is 100 per cent preventable, but it takes will, knowledge, 

and resources to get the job of prevention done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Girl Guides Celebrate Their 100th Anniversary 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 2010 

marks the 100th anniversary of the Girl Guides movement. The 

Girl Guides of Canada launched their centennial celebration on 

January 19th, 2010. They joined with millions of other Girl 

Guides throughout the world in celebration of their history. 

 

Girl Guides of Canada has always strived to prepare girls to 

meet the challenges they will face in their lives with strength 

and determination. Whether it was Agnes Baden-Powell 

teaching girls to bandage wounds during World War I or girls 

today working on our anti-bullying challenge, Guiding has 

continually changed with the times to reflect the needs and 

interests of contemporary girls and women. 

 

To commemorate the 100th anniversary of Guiding in 

Saskatchewan, over 100 Girl Guides from Regina have 

decorated the Christmas tree located in the Saskatchewan 

gallery. The festive evening saw the Guides decorating the tree, 

doing crafts, and enjoying cookies and hot chocolate. For their 

participation in this event, the Girl Guides will be able to use 

their efforts and time towards their community service badge. 



6312 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend congratulations to the Girl 

Guide movement on their celebration of 100 years. Thank you 

to the Guides and the leaders, past and present, for providing 

girls with the opportunities, skills, and knowledge they need to 

become the dynamic, effective leaders of tomorrow. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Extraordinary Examples of Leadership 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to offer 

congratulations and to recognize the extraordinary examples of 

leadership provided by Dr. Vianne Timmons and Dr. Anne 

Doig. These two Saskatchewan women continue to inspire all 

of us. Earlier this week, Dr. Timmons and Dr. Doig were named 

to the top 100 list of Canada’s most powerful women. 

 

This top 100 list presented by the Women’s Executive Network 

recognizes proven achievers who are strong contributors to their 

organizations, their fields of endeavour, and their communities. 

Dr. Timmons, the University of Regina’s seventh president and 

vice-chancellor, was honoured for the third year in a row 

because of her work with family literacy and inclusive 

education. 

 

Dr. Doig, a Saskatoon family physician, is a past president of 

the Canadian Medical Association. One of Dr. Doig’s key 

achievements has been the development of a charter for 

patient-centred care which has been supported by 

representatives of the patient advocacy community. Both these 

women and this list are testament to the fact that there’s no 

shortage of strong, smart, and caring women in our country and 

right here at home in positions of leadership, making a positive 

impact for all of us. 

 

This year’s theme at the Top 100 Summit and Awards Gala was 

The Power of Collaboration and Connectivity. This theme 

recognizes our lives are more connected than ever before and 

collaboration is the best way to guide an organization to 

success. It is women like Dr. Timmons and Dr. Doig who 

demonstrate how to harness the power of collaboration to get 

good things done. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 

recognizing the achievements of these two women who show us 

what leadership is all about. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

One of Canada’s Most Powerful Women 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

truly an honour and a pleasure to rise in the House to speak to 

the accomplishments of a very talented member of our society. 

For the third straight year, University of Regina President 

Vianne Timmons has been named one of Canada’s most 

powerful women. The top 100 list represents women’s . . . 

excuse me. The top 100 list presented by the Women’s 

Executive Network recognizes the hard work of 

executive-minded women. 

 

Vianne was honoured due to her work with family literacy and 

inclusion in education. She was also included in the top 100 list 

in 2008 and 2009. Mr. Speaker, Vianne has even been named 

one of the top 10 influential women in Saskatchewan in 2009. 

In September of 2008, Vianne Timmons became the president 

of the University of Regina, the seventh president and 

vice-chancellor. Before she began working at the University of 

Regina, Timmons spent six years on the Social Sciences and 

Humanities Research Council of Canada. Currently she is also 

president-elect for the International Association for the 

Scientific Study of Intellectual Disabilities and is the Chair of 

the Canadian Bureau for International Education. 

 

I would like this Assembly to join with me in recognizing our 

good friend Vianne Timmons for her incredible display of 

leadership in our community. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Dismantling the Medicare System 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is 

known as the birthplace of Canada’s public medicare system. It 

was in southwestern Saskatchewan in Swift Current Health 

Region No. 1 that the system was conceived within our 

province. Now from the same corner of the province comes the 

latest sign that this government is dismantling the medicare 

system that the people of this province pioneered. 

 

Doctors in the Cypress Hills Health Region, Mr. Speaker, 

withdrew services yesterday after a nearly two-year-long 

contract delay. This isn’t the first time the Sask Party 

government has shown this kind of disrespect for health care 

workers. They dragged out negotiations with front-line health 

care providers for over two years, ripped up a contract, a signed 

deal with chiropractors, and now risk driving resident 

physicians from the province by delaying a fair contract for 

them as well. 

 

This is a government that talks patient first, then cuts beds, 

underfunds ambulance care, and leaves communities that are 

trying to recruit health care workers abandoned and ignored. 

Mr. Speaker, this is a Premier who says he supports our public 

health system but disrespects those who deliver and receive the 

care while farming out to the private sector surgeries that could 

be done more cost effectively in the public system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province’s people value their health care 

providers, and they deserve better for their public health care 

system than a procrastinating Premier and a piecemeal 

privatizer who won’t protect medicare in the province where it 

was born. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Cadet Squadrons Honoured 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is truly an 

honour to rise in this House to speak about a very special group 

of young men and women in our province. Today, Mr. Speaker, 

three Saskatchewan cadet squadrons have been recognized for 

excellence within their respective communities. 



December 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6313 

The cadet program is one of the largest and oldest youth 

programs in our nation. For over 100 years, Saskatchewan’s 

cadet program has served to teach our youth the core values of 

loyalty, professionalism, and integrity. 

 

A selection committee comprised of senior officers from the 

North and South recommend top units, with the final 

determination selected by their respective league officials. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year’s deserving recipients are, firstly, the #45 

Royal Canadian Sea Cadet Corps, Jervis Bay from Saskatoon; 

secondly, #2293 the North Saskatchewan Regiment Army 

Cadet Corps from Saskatoon; and finally, Mr. Speaker, the #41 

Royal Canadian Air Cadet Squadron from here in Regina. 

These cadet units were evaluated on a series of disciplines 

including community involvement and member participation. 

 

I would like this Assembly to join me in honouring and 

congratulating each of the recipients, not only for their 

involvement within the community, but also for proudly 

participating in the most noble of traditions. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Management of Health Care System 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 

have come to expect and count on having good quality 

medicare in the province of Saskatchewan, at least until three 

years ago with the election of this government. But since that 

time we’ve seen mismanagement of the health care system to 

the extent that few could have imagined. 

 

In fact it’s led to such prolonged mismanagement that the 

doctors in southwest Saskatchewan, as of yesterday, withdrew 

services in a number of communities that the Premier will well 

know, including his hometown. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: when will the Premier come 

to realize that this kind of mismanagement and the failure to 

protect Saskatchewan families’ health care is important and 

needs to be dealt with? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When we took 

over as government from members opposite from 16 years of 

NDP rule, there were a number of realities that we faced in 

Saskatchewan. Wait times were longer than almost anywhere 

else in the country, Mr. Speaker. There was a dramatic shortage 

of nurses in the province of Saskatchewan. We weren’t training 

enough doctors. We weren’t training enough residents, Mr. 

Speaker. That government had not built one new long-term care 

bed in about 16 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

File by file, issue by issue, we’ve been making progress. We’re 

training more doctors today in the province. We’re training 

more residents today in the province. We’ve already met our 

four-year goal of 800 new nurses in the third year, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re adding new long-term care beds in the province, 

including in the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. We have a wait 

times initiative, Mr. Speaker, that is demonstrating progress for 

people who’ve been waiting too long for surgery, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re happy to compare the record of this government in three 

years to 16 years of NDP neglect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier doesn’t need to 

lecture members on this side of the Assembly. He should be 

talking to the doctors; he should be talking to the health science 

professionals, the 3,000 health care professionals who now in 

negotiations but negotiations have broke down, members of the 

various health care workers’ associations that feel let down by 

this government. 

 

My question to the Premier, based on the Provincial Auditor’s 

report of today . . . In the press release that was issued, the 

auditor says, and I quote, “Poorly-maintained medical 

equipment is putting Saskatchewan patients at risk, according to 

Acting Provincial Auditor, Brian . . . [Wilkins].” My question to 

the Premier is this: how in the world can he continue to defend 

his mismanagement of the health care system and his failure to 

defend and protect health care for the families of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I remember in this Assembly 

when members opposite posed questions just before the 

government settled with the nurses. Their position was, the sky 

was falling; there would never be a contract with the nurses. I 

remember similar rhetoric from members opposite just before 

the health care providers of this province eventually settled with 

a contract, Mr. Speaker, and are providing that valued service to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We hear it again now from the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 

Speaker. Negotiations with the doctors are under way. We’re 

confident that there will be an agreement soon, Mr. Speaker. 

And here’s something else we know. We know this, Mr. 

Speaker, that as long as those members stay on that side of the 

House, we will continue to make progress in training more 

doctors, in hiring more nurses; we’ll build long-term care beds; 

we’ll reduce the wait-list. Yes, using private partners; yes, 

providing arthroscopic surgery where none existed before, Mr. 

Speaker; yes, with the patient-first approach of our government. 

We will put the record of this government in three years against 

the record of members opposite over 16 any day of the week, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the words of the 

Premier are cold comfort for the families who couldn’t get 

health care service yesterday because the doctors — in 

frustration because of the lack of a contract for 19 months — 

couldn’t get health care service in many hospitals yesterday 

right here in the province where medicare was born. 

 

The fact of the matter is that the situation, Mr. Speaker, is not as 

the Premier describes. Many people in the health care services, 

whether they’re professionals in the health science, whether 



6314 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2010 

they’re doctors, whether they’re resident physicians, whether 

they’re the men and women studying to become doctors in this 

province, trying to make a decision whether to make their 

career here or move to other provinces where they are respected 

— they’re making that decision today. 

 

And one of the reasons we have 120 vacancies for physicians is 

because of the action of this Premier and of this government. 

When will the Premier recognize that his management has 

failed the families of Saskatchewan and the health care services 

in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the contract negotiations with 

doctors continues apace and, Mr. Speaker, we’re confident 

there’ll be a resolve to the current negotiations. In the 

meantime, Mr. Speaker, what we know is true in Saskatchewan 

today, in terms of doctors, is that there is on average 7 per cent 

more doctors practising today than when members opposite 

were in government, Mr. Speaker. We know well today, we 

know well today there are more doctors being trained at the 

College of Medicine than when they were the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know there are more residents being . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I 

recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we know there are more 

doctors being trained, Mr. Speaker. We know there are more 

doctors practising today in the province. And we know that 

because of this government, because of the leadership of the 

Minister of Health, that the wait times for surgery is reducing. 

In today’s StarPhoenix, Mr. Speaker, in big bold font that I 

commend the members opposite read, it talks about Surgicentre 

serving 100, Mr. Speaker. Wait-lists for surgery are being 

reduced, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government has stopped talking about health care and 

started fixing the problems left behind by the NDP. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — On May 10th of this year in this Assembly, 

the Minister of Health stated in reference to the Amicus nursing 

home deal, “We’re not guaranteeing any loan for Amicus, Mr. 

Speaker, not whatsoever.” And then twice on May 17th, the 

minister again denied to the Assembly that there was a loan 

guarantee saying, and I quote, “We don’t look at this as a loan 

guarantee.” And then a few minutes later he repeated, “This is 

not a loan guarantee.” To the minister: does he still stand by 

those words? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what we stand by is the 

patients of this province. We stand beside seniors that are living 

in acute care centres, Mr. Speaker, which was perfectly fine 

under the NDP, to have seniors living in acute care centres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through Amicus we’re going to add 100 new beds. 

That’s new beds over top of the old complement, Mr. Speaker, 

100 new beds, Mr. Speaker, that seniors will benefit as we 

move forward. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, where the opposition 

stands on that. Obviously they’d rather have them in acute care 

centres. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this is an important question. 

The minister has made a very clear statement. But I want him to 

be absolutely clear and I want to give him an opportunity to be 

completely forthcoming with this Assembly on this matter. So 

I’ll ask the minister again: has his government, either through 

his ministry or through the health region, provided what in 

essence is a loan guarantee to Amicus? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the agreement that is 

struck between the Saskatoon Health Region and the Catholic 

Health Ministry is not a loan guarantee, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

had many different people weigh in on that. 

 

She was trying to draw that bow last year, Mr. Speaker. It didn’t 

work for them then and I know she’s trying to draw it now. 

We’ve had many people weigh in and say this is not a loan 

guarantee, Mr. Speaker. It is an agreement between the 

Saskatoon Health Region and the Catholic Health Ministry to 

supply beds, Mr. Speaker, for seniors in this province. 

 

As I said yesterday, Mr. Speaker, she’s been fishing in this 

pond way too long. It’s time to move to the next one. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. Mr. Speaker, on page 1446 of my 

freedom of information request, there’s an email that’s dated 

April 6th, 2010, and that email is from Maura Davies, the chief 

executive officer of the Saskatoon Health Region. To the 

minister: can he tell the legislature what’s contained in that 

email? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, you know, I try and 

remember each and every email that goes across my desk. I 

don’t remember one that was on page 1472 and the exact 

wording of that email, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The opposition has been trying to frame this as a loan 

guarantee. We’ve had many people . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member was allowed to 



December 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6315 

ask the question without a lot of interference. I’d now ask the 

members to allow the minister to respond without interference. 

I recognize . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve had many people 

weigh in on this. They’ve looked at it and they categorize this 

as not a loan guarantee. I know the opposition wants it to be. 

They feel they can get great political points if it is a loan 

guarantee, Mr. Speaker. What this is, an agreement between 

Amicus, the Catholic Health Ministry, and the Saskatoon 

Health Region to supply appropriate care, which never 

happened under the NDP, appropriate care for seniors in the 

Saskatoon area. 

 

I find it quite astonishing a member that serves Saskatoon for as 

long as she has would be so against such a program. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to jog the minister’s 

memory and I want to quote from the email: 

 

As you can see, this deal provides Amicus with funding to 

cover both their operating costs, which are higher than the 

per diem provided to any other SHR affiliate, and their 

debt servicing changes with protection to the bank that the 

region and ministry will assume the debt if the deal falls 

apart or Amicus defaults on its loan. Many details of this 

arrangement were essentially agreed to by government 

before the region became involved in these discussions. 

 

So to the minister: why did he tell this Assembly — not once, 

not twice, but three times — that there was no loan guarantee 

when clearly there was? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll try this again. It is 

an agreement between the Catholic Health Ministry and the 

Saskatoon Health Region. The Catholic Health Ministry, 

through Amicus, is building a facility, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

entered into a five-year agreement with an extension of a 

five-year agreement to lease this facility, not only for the per 

diem cost but some for capital, Mr. Speaker, to cover their cost 

as they move forward. Mr. Speaker, this is not a loan guarantee 

in the terms that she’s trying to imply, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this again is a good deal for seniors in our 

province. Unfortunately, for years and years and years, that 

government would rather have seniors live in acute care centres 

than live in appropriate accommodations such as in Amicus, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I have one more question. It’s quite clear 

from the CEO’s email, and I quote: 

 

. . . with protection to the bank that the region and 

ministry will assume the debt if the deal falls apart or 

Amicus defaults on its loan. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want the minister to be very clear. He has 

told this Assembly not once, not twice, but three times there 

was no loan guarantee; yet the CEO of the Saskatoon Health 

Region says there is. Which is it, Mr. Minister? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, day after day we see that 

member come into this House and smear family names, Mr. 

Speaker, try and smear family names, whether it’s the 

Stensruds, Mr. Speaker, or the Donlevys. Mr. Speaker, we took 

it one step further later on, Mr. Speaker, last week . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Now there’s a half a 

dozen members on the opposition side that are not allowing the 

minister to answer the question. I ask the members to allow the 

minister to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Last week, we saw a member 

opposite talk about a person that got a contract through the IT 

[information technology] service, Mr. Speaker, that had the last 

name similar to mine, the same as mine, Mr. Speaker. And they 

I think were certainly spinning with the media that it was some 

sort of a conflict, that there was some sort of collusion there, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Not only did they do that, Mr. Speaker, but what they also did 

was phone my mother, my 90-year-old mother living at home, 

to see if she knew a Bill McMorris. My mom has lived in this 

province for 90 years, has never received a phone call about Bill 

McMorris. Later on that day, these members raised the 

question, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely unbelievable. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Children in Care 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, a fundamental role of government is to protect the 

most vulnerable in our society. Yet today the Provincial Auditor 

has reported for the second year in a row that the Sask Party 

government is failing to protect children who are in its care. He 

says this is an urgent matter. To the minister: why is this 

government failing to protect the children who are in its care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the children in our care is a 

very important issue, not just to me as the minister responsible 

but to everyone on this side of the House. 

 

I want to make sure that the members opposite are clear that 

some of the statements that were made by that member earlier 

today were not correct. He said that the Pringle report was 

going to be released . . . It was going to take two years to be 

released. Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the report for a month and a 

half. It’s going to be released in less than a month. It’ll be 

released by the end of this month. So that we will be sure that 

that information will be released. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have been doing for children in our 



6316 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2010 

province, making sure that they have what they need, is an 

important issue to our government. 

 

We talk about issues like foster homes, and it’s something that 

we as a government are very . . . are committed to. That’s why 

we’ve reduced the number of children in foster homes with 

more than four children by one-third since we’ve become 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor said 

that the Ministry of Social Services doesn’t even know how 

many children are in the minister’s care, who they are, or where 

they live. This is simply appalling, Mr. Speaker, appalling. To 

the minister: why is this government not even able to tell us 

today how many children are in its care, let alone who they are 

or where they live? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I would encourage the 

members opposite to go to the website where we have the 

Internet stats on the number of children that are in our care. And 

at September 30th we have listed, not only the number of 

children in out-of-home care. We have the number of children 

in care. We have the number of non-wards. We have the 

number of children in care on reservations. We have the number 

of children in our care in foster homes. We have the families 

receiving children protection services. And we have all the 

numbers just to identify for ourselves every day that we have a 

responsibility to children, and they are our future, and we are 

looking after them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this minister should stop being so 

smug about the stats that she drags out every day. This is about 

protecting children today. Today. Not about some stats. 

 

Now the Provincial Auditor has found that the ministry’s own 

policies for placing and protecting children are not being 

followed. And the auditor says this, and I quote, “As a result of 

these deficiencies, the Ministry did not know if the children it 

was responsible to protect were safe and receiving proper care.” 

 

Now we know, and the minister’s just referred to a report that 

cost nearly $1 million, likely sitting on her desk, and she’s 

waiting till the end of the month. Will she release that report 

today? And will she lay out the government’s immediate plan to 

start protecting the children in her care today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I a few minutes ago told 

the member opposite that I’ve had the report for about six 

weeks. That we’ve been involving the number of First Nations 

and Métis individuals who need to be looking at it as well. I 

will be releasing that report by the end of the month, and I’m 

sure that the members opposite will be quite delighted in the 

work that’s been done because children are very important to 

us. I also want to make sure that the members opposite know 

that we have a new database that was identified in February of 

2010 that gave greater rigour to the approval process and the 

reapproval process. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, maybe the members opposite should also 

realize that the Provincial Auditor talked about the significant 

efforts and progress that we’ve made in various areas of 

improving our staff. There is nothing more important to our 

government than our children, and we are looking after them. 

There’s nothing smug about children. They’re our future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Combatting AIDS 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, today is World AIDS Day. We 

know that Saskatchewan has the highest rate of HIV/AIDS in 

all of Canada and has alarming new cases reported every year. 

 

To the minister: what is he doing to address this epidemic in our 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, certainly the rise in 

numbers that we see in our province over the last number of 

years regarding HIV and AIDS is a deep concern to our 

province and, you know, our sympathies go out to those people 

that have contracted AIDS and HIV. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, our government has worked 

closely with the stakeholders, First Nations communities, public 

health organizations, Mr. Speaker, Westside Clinic, all the 

organizations to put forward an HIV/AIDS strategy for this 

province, something that this province hadn’t ever seen before, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve put $2.5 million into this strategy, Mr. Speaker, that will 

see more surveillance. And you know what happens when we 

see more surveillance? It’s extremely important we know the 

magnitude of this issue. As we do more surveillance, we’re 

going to see those numbers increase before we see them drop, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s just the nature of more surveillance. 

 

But I will tell you that we have programs in place through the 

communities, Mr. Speaker, to start addressing this through 

education and prevention. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well surveillance and 

sympathy aren’t working so far. HIV/AIDS is plaguing our 

First Nations and Métis communities. Seventy per cent of 

people with HIV/AIDS in Saskatchewan are First Nations or 

Métis, many of whom live in small, remote communities. 

 

Just last week the medical health officer in Prince Albert 

compared Saskatchewan’s situation to sub-Saharan Africa and 



December 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6317 

said this: 

 

If you think decimating the African population was bad, 

HIV in this province will kill 15 to 30 per cent of the 

Aboriginal population. Not all at one time, but over a five- 

to 10-year period. 

 

This is shocking, Mr. Speaker, and it demands urgent action. 

Again to the minister: talk is cheap; what is he doing to address 

this situation? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we have put 

together the committee that’s put an HIV strategy forward for 

the province. We funded it at $2.5 million through community 

clinics like the Westside community clinic. Mr. Speaker, 

$250,000 has gone to that clinic for education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is important that we know that this is a different issue than 

what was faced in Africa. Mr. Speaker, the spread of HIV/AIDS 

in Saskatchewan isn’t through the homosexual community, Mr. 

Speaker. It is through the intravenous drug use community, and 

that makes a huge difference, Mr. Speaker. We’ve realized that. 

We are taking steps, Mr. Speaker. There are programs in place 

through the needle exchange program and other programs, Mr. 

Speaker, that will help see the reduction of these numbers into 

the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been to Africa and I 

have been on a policy dialogue on HIV/AIDS and visited 

communities that had AIDS and HIV. This is like that. This is 

like that. This is spreading throughout the whole community. 

Babies are being born in our province with HIV despite the fact 

that proper medical care can almost entirely eliminate the 

likelihood of mother-to-child transmission. 

 

Stephen Lewis — if we’re going to talk Africa — the former 

UN [United Nations] special envoy for HIV/AIDS in Africa, 

said this about Saskatchewan: “It’s just inexcusable. It’s 

indefensible. It’s unconscionable that Aboriginal babies should 

be born HIV positive when it’s not necessary.” 

 

So to the minister: what priority is the Saskatchewan Party 

government placing on this crisis, and when will we see some 

urgency to address this unconscionable situation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said from the outset, 

the first answer, this situation is of deep concern to our 

government, and that’s why we’ve moved. The member 

opposite said, what are you doing? And I’ll point to many 

programs that we are doing, such as the point-of-care program 

that the member from Saskatoon talked about in his member’s 

statement earlier. Point-of-care contact, Mr. Speaker, is a 

program to prevent the very thing that that member just talked 

about — mothers giving birth to children that have contracted 

HIV, which is completely preventable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are taking steps through the Saskatoon Health Region, 

through the Regina Health Region, through the community 

clinics to make sure that, first of all, the education is out there 

so that expecting mothers know that they do not have to 

transmit HIV/AIDS to their children, Mr. Speaker. They have to 

identify, Mr. Speaker. Point of care is testing on the spot so that 

this transmission doesn’t spread to the children. We’re taking 

action, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I’m glad the minister is clear that the programs 

are just in Saskatoon and Regina. There’s the whole province 

that this is affecting — small communities, rural communities, 

northern communities. What’s being done there, Mr. Speaker? 

What’s being done to stop this HIV/AIDS epidemic in small 

communities, in rural communities, and in northern 

communities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I may have identified a 

couple of health regions. It was not limited to those two health 

regions, Mr. Speaker. There is work being done across the 

province, definitely in P.A. [Prince Albert] Parkland as well as 

Prairie North, Mr. Speaker, as well as the health regions, the 

two northern health regions. Work is being done through all the 

health regions to tackle this situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do see the numbers increasing. It is a concern. 

I will tell you that the numbers will continue to increase over 

the next two years or three years because of greater 

surveillance, but I will also tell you that there are programs in 

place to help drive those numbers down. Part of it’s education, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re there, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve funded it. 

And we’re going to see improvements into the future. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday I spoke to the amendments regarding the human 

rights Act and I’d indicated to the members opposite that I was 

providing somewhat more detail than I would ordinarily. And 

with regard to this Act I’m going to follow the same pattern and 

provide some further background information on this as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege today to rise today to move 

second reading of Bill No. 161, The Election Amendment Act, 

2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members will know that The Local Government 

Election Act is to be amended this session to require voters at 



6318 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2010 

local government elections to produce approved identification 

such as government-issued photo ID [identification]. The Bill 

will follow the municipal initiative to result in similar ID 

requirements being authorized for voters at municipal, 

provincial, and federal elections in Saskatchewan. 

 

Voters are already required to show approved ID in order to 

vote in federal elections and provincial elections in British 

Columbia, Ontario, and Quebec. This is a standard that will be 

followed during the next general federal election. It is 

appropriate that Saskatchewan move to meet this evolving 

national standard for improved voting integrity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, voters will now be required to show identification 

prior to voting. Those with approved government-issued photo 

ID and who have been enumerated will only need to show that 

ID in order to get a ballot. Those who cannot meet this 

requirement will be required to show additional forms of 

identification or have another voter with such ID vouch for 

them. A voter may vouch for only one other person. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s been some suggestion that this process will 

prevent people who want to vote from being able to do so. That 

is not the intention and in our view will not be the result. Our 

intention is simply to ensure that the existing long-established 

identity and residency rules for voting are demonstrably 

followed. It is not good enough to trust an out-of-date process 

with something so fundamental to our democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to ensure that no one is disenfranchised, we will 

include in the regulations a broad range of supplementary 

information that may be used to establish identity and address 

for a voter. We will be starting with the review of the existing 

federal alternative voter ID list for such information and then 

consider adding any forms of Saskatchewan information that 

would be of assistance here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal process provides a long list of 

approved information that a voter can use to establish their 

identity and address. The approved alternative identification 

cards or original information documents include driver’s 

licence, health card, Canadian passport, certificate of Canadian 

citizenship as in a citizenship card, a birth certificate, a 

certificate of Indian status, a social insurance number card, an 

old age security card, a student ID card, provincial/territorial 

identification card. A liquor identification card, a hospital or 

medical clinic card, a credit or debit card, an employee card, a 

public transportation card, a library card. A Canadian Forces 

identity card, a Veterans Affairs Canada health card, a Canada 

blood services card, a CNIB [Canadian National Institute for 

the Blind] ID card. 

 

A firearm possession and acquisition licence or possession-only 

licence; a fishing, trapping, or hunting licence; an outdoors or 

wildlife card or licence. A hospital bracelet worn by residents of 

long-term care facilities. Utility bills including telephone, TV, 

power, gas, or water. A bank or credit statement; vehicle 

ownership or insurance proof; correspondence issued by a 

school, college, or university. 

 

A statement of government benefits — employment insurance, 

old age security, social assistance, disability support, or child 

tax benefit. An attestation of residence issued by the responsible 

authority of a First Nations band or reserve; a government 

cheque or cheque stub; pension plan statement of benefits, 

contributions, or participation. A residential lease or mortgage 

statement, an income or property tax assessment notice, an 

insurance policy, a letter from a public guardian or public 

trustee. 

 

Any one of the following issued by the authority of a shelter, 

soup kitchen, student/senior residence or a long-term facility. 

They are, an attestation of residence, a letter of stay, an 

admission form, or statement of benefits. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these changes are being made to update the ID 

process and to continue to ensure the integrity of the provincial 

electoral process. As this partial list shows, it will not prevent 

legitimate voters from voting. Mr. Speaker, the reason I have 

read those into the record is specifically so that we are able to 

get an understanding of the steps that the government is going 

to ensure that people are not disenfranchised. 

 

But as I said yesterday in the media, Mr. Speaker, it is 

imperative that people get their affairs in order so that they are 

able to have their proper paperwork when they present 

themselves at the polling station. It will simply not be enough to 

arrive at the polling station a few minutes before closing time 

and indicate that it is your desire to vote and hope that they will 

either recognize you there or be able to vote. Voting is 

something that the people of this province can and should take 

seriously, and it is not an unreasonable request on the part of 

our democracy to ask people to be able to show who they are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, voters in Saskatchewan deserve nothing less than 

a process that is demonstrably fair. This Bill will ensure that our 

process meets the standard set federally, in other provinces, and 

now at the municipal level in Saskatchewan as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to move second reading of Bill 

No. 161, The Election Amendment Act, 2010. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill 161, The Election Amendment Act, 2010. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

privilege to rise and add comments into the Act to amend The 

Election Act, Bill No. 161. 

 

It was an interesting list that the minister just read into the 

record. And as I was listening to him read this wide-ranging list 

of papers, documents, Bills — I mean, it just went on — 

different licences, your blood donor’s card, all kinds of things. 

If that’s actually what he’s looking at, I’m wondering why 

we’re making these changes at all. Because I’m trying to figure 

out how that wide-ranging list of options for identification — 

other than making identification compulsory if asked, which I 

believe it is currently — why we are proposing these changes in 

the first place, changes that aren’t really changes at all. 

 

Another area that caused some concern. I was looking through 

the press release, through the Bill, through some media reports 

that have been put out when the Bill was first tabled and, Mr. 



December 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6319 

Speaker, in listening carefully to what the minister said in his 

comments. Now he talked about a wide range of supplementary 

information that would be considered allowable, and he read 

into the record this wide-ranging list of a wide array of 

documents. But then he made a comment to it that said he may 

consider adding . . . These are a range of documents that they 

may consider adding to regulations. 

 

So here, what we have is legislation that is being changed. It 

was first brought out and talked about in the Speech from the 

Throne as requiring photo ID to be able to vote. And there was 

quite a bit of backlash on requiring photo ID because that really 

discriminates against a number of sectors of society and many, 

many people across this province. It would be outright 

discrimination against those citizens and would really make 

voting more difficult for those citizens. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, now we hear a wide-ranging list of documents 

that may be allowed, may be considered, that the government 

may consider adding into regulation — not legislation, but 

regulation. And, Mr. Speaker, then you start to wonder why are 

we doing this. To move the requirement into regulation, getting 

the government to make changes as they see fit without it being 

brought to this Legislative Assembly, without citizens in this 

province having an opportunity to voice concerns or make 

comment on changes because we know regulations can be made 

in a cabinet meeting. They can be signed off by an order in 

council. We will learn of them a week after they have been 

brought into effect, and it’s too late. You would be fighting a 

huge uphill battle whether you agreed, whether you disagreed, 

whether you felt that they were discriminatory or really caused 

more damage than what they ever avoided. 

 

[14:30] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I look at some of these changes . . . In 

the initial press release that was put out with the government 

introducing amendments to The Election Act, it is referred to — 

photo ID — elections to produce approved identification such 

as government-issued photo ID. So that’s still being used as the 

example that was the main push that was talked about in the 

Speech from the Throne. And we talked about this in the House. 

I know many of my colleagues have spoken about it being 

discriminatory. 

 

And a basic question was asked. The minister again said, well 

Ontario does this. Yes, but Ontario allows a number of pieces of 

photo ID, and they also supply free photo ID to their citizens. Is 

this government going to look at free photo ID? Does that go 

hand in hand with photo ID being a requirement? And we’ll still 

wait and see if there is other options that are put forward 

because, as I said, the minister has said quite clearly and in the 

documents that it will be in regulation, that it won’t be in the 

legislation. So we’re just really going to have to wait and see. 

 

In the press release, the minister made the comment that it is 

appropriate and necessary that Saskatchewan follow suit to 

ensure the integrity of our provincial electoral process. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, we just went through a whole process of hiring a 

Chief Electoral Officer in the province of Saskatchewan, so I 

would find it somehow contradictory I guess is . . . I’m trying to 

be diplomatic about this. But it’s somewhat contradictory for 

the minister to talk about integrity of the electoral process when 

that government in effect meddled in the process that has been 

established in the province of Saskatchewan for the hiring of a 

Chief Electoral Officer in this province. 

 

It has been a recommendation by a panel of people that have a 

great deal of experience. They are well-respected in their field 

in the careers that they have chosen. They do the short listing. 

They look at the applications. They make a recommendation to 

the various steps through the Legislative Assembly so that this 

independent officer of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan is chosen in a fair manner, Mr. Speaker, taking 

into consideration all of the requirements are met and to be able 

to achieve the job that is needed to be done here in the province. 

And we know the uproar that was caused by this Saskatchewan 

Party government meddling in the process and the 

recommendation that was put forward. 

 

So now we have the minister who figures, I guess, it’s fair to 

meddle in the hiring of an independent officer of this legislature 

who would serve in an unbiased fashion the people of this 

province and uphold the requirements of his role, his or her, Mr. 

Speaker. But now we have a Minister of Justice who is 

speaking in his press release about the integrity of our 

provincial electoral process. Well gee, Mr. Speaker, I wish he 

had of thought of the integrity of the electoral process when he 

was meddling in the hiring and disagreed with the 

recommendation that had been made by the independent panel 

for a Chief Electoral Officer in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, maybe he’s just a johnny-come-lately. Could 

be. Maybe he’s going to realize the error of his ways and he’s 

turned around. But you know what? I doubt it. I sincerely doubt 

it. So that raises a number of concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the press release goes on to say that voters will be, 

with government-issued photo ID will be required to show other 

forms of ID. Voters without government ID will be required to 

show other forms of ID or have another voter with the required 

ID vouch for them. The list of other allowable forms of 

identification will be extensive. Which it is, Mr. Speaker, if 

that’s actually what’s put in the regulations. It will be developed 

after further consultation with stakeholders and set out in the 

regulations once the Bill has passed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in today’s story in the Leader-Post, 

December 1st, 2010, there is a comment from SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], the 

association of urban municipalities. Chief Executive Officer 

Laurent Mougeot said his organization will want to be part of 

the discussions around what ID is acceptable. Not that they are 

already involved, it’s just that they would want to be a part of 

the discussions. 

 

So I truly hope that this list that the minister just laid out, and at 

great length, and talked about just about every piece of paper 

you’ve got in your junk drawer at home in your kitchen . . . or 

that’s what I call it at my house, anyway. All the oddballs I 

don’t know where to put all go in this junk drawer. But he 

talked about just about every paper I’ve got in there would be 

eligible for me to go receive a ballot and vote. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I hope there is some consultations as we move 

forward. I don’t have a great deal of confidence in what we’ve 



6320 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2010 

heard so far. It raises many, many questions. But, Mr. Speaker, 

I know everyone in this House agrees that the people of this 

province have a right to vote. And that they need to be able to 

have their say on this decision that is being put forward or this 

change in legislation that is being put forward by the 

government. And any changes that affect the rights of citizens 

needs to have a thorough discussion and it really needs to be a 

broad discussion, Mr. Speaker. I feel that wholeheartedly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we all realize that having that right to vote 

is a right that we should exercise, and that all people in this 

society, a free and democratic society, need to follow through 

on that vote. And it’s not just people who are able to access 

appropriate photo ID. It’s just not for those of us who are 

comfortable or have the income to just take for granted that 

photo ID and passports are a part of life. But for people who 

may not be as privileged as us, Mr. Speaker, they also need the 

right to vote. They have the right to vote, and this government 

needs to make sure that that right is maintained. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this day and age I’m so surprised by this piece 

of legislation, for starters. I mean I was just surprised that it 

came about, that photo ID would be a push for this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you go to the universities or you go to any of 

the post-secondary institutions or even to high schools, Mr. 

Speaker, and you talk to young people . . . I don’t think there’s 

anyone in this Assembly who hasn’t at some time or another 

been in a conversation about how do we get young people 

interested in politics. How do we get young people to realize 

the impact that the decisions we make in this Assembly can 

have a huge impact on their day-to-day life? 

 

Politics, many young people talk about politicians and politics 

and places such as this Assembly as being rather irrelevant to 

their lives. And we argue against that, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve 

all debated. I’m sure the Saskatchewan Party has. I know that, 

as New Democrats, we often will talk about what’s the best way 

to encourage young people to be involved, to have their voices 

heard. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s not by putting more barriers in 

place when it comes to voting. 

 

I would have expected something to be a little more 

progressive. In fact I was at a . . . Instead of photo ID, I would 

have been looking at something a little more proactive for 

legislation that would have looked at taking advantage of some 

of the new technologies, making voting easier, making access to 

voting easier. 

 

You know we have had these discussions. I know as New 

Democrats, we have talked about why is it that electronic 

voting, voting from your home computer with all of the security 

techniques that are out there . . . And, Mr. Speaker, I know 

people need to be much more technical than I am to be able to 

explain this, but we’ve seen it done with no problems. Why 

aren’t we, as institutions, looking at moving forward and 

embracing the new technologies to encourage more young 

people to be involved, to encourage our citizenry to adjust to a 

more flexible system that accommodates their busy lifestyles, 

but the accessibility to technology . . . not being stuck in this 

same rut of looking at the same old same old and adding a few 

more barriers, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are so many options out there. We need to be 

open-minded, and we need to look at the opportunities not only 

on the municipal side but on the provincial side. 

 

This is a beautiful building, Mr. Speaker, but it is just a 

building. And we need to be able to reach out. We need to be 

able to encourage all citizens across the province of 

Saskatchewan to take an interest in politics, to take an interest 

in the day-to-day workings of the Government of 

Saskatchewan, and to look at how they can be involved because 

we will be a much better province the more involvement we 

have from citizens, the more input we have from citizens, and 

the more representative that this Assembly is of the population 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you don’t do that by putting in place 

barriers. You do not do that by putting in place barriers by 

requiring photo ID. I do hope the minister looks at expanding 

the list. I hope he . . . Again I’m back to where I started. I’m not 

sure why we’re doing this if we are going to have this 

wide-ranging option for identification at polling stations. 

 

But I would like the minister to say, while you’re looking at The 

Election Act, maybe you should look at being more proactive 

and look at opportunities to take advantage of technology, to 

embrace some of the ideas that younger citizens are quite 

comfortable with, and make sure that we are more inclusive in 

the long run. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know there are many of my colleagues that wish 

to make comments on this. And I guess there would be nothing 

less expected because, as politicians, all of us are quite 

interested in the democratic process. It’s probably one of the 

things that brought us into politics in the first place, our 

involvement. We realize the importance of it, and we also 

realize the importance of not disenfranchising citizens so that 

they don’t have the ability to vote. 

 

I know my colleagues have many comments to make on this 

topic. But at this time, Mr. Speaker, I will give my colleagues 

an opportunity, and I myself, to sit down and read exactly what 

the minister said in his second reading speech. But I’m sure we 

will have much more to say on the amendments proposed for 

The Election Act. And at this time, I would adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 161. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of Bill No. 162, The Local Government Election 

Amendment Act, 2010. Mr. Speaker, this Bill will amend The 

Local Government Election Act that provides the legal 



December 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6321 

framework for fair elections in municipalities and school 

divisions. This Act governs elections for mayor, reeves, and 

councillors in all types of municipalities, including cities, urban, 

rural, and northern municipalities. It also governs school board 

elections which are usually conducted by municipalities on 

behalf of school divisions. 

 

Amendments to the LGEA [The Local Government Election 

Act] are generally made in the time between municipal and 

school division elections. The next general elections are in fall 

of 2012. Rural municipality elections are in a staggered term, 

and the next rural election will be in the fall of 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to be in place for the next municipal elections, 

amendments are being introduced in this session to give our 

municipalities more time to prepare for the changes and for 

related regulations to be put in place. The amendments 

proposed in this Bill fit into three general categories: number 

one, amendments to address issues raised with the ministry by 

the municipal sector; number two, amendments to address 

issues that have arisen as a result of recent elections that are 

largely of a clarification and “housekeeping nature;” and 

number three, the third category of amendments fulfills 

government’s commitment to adjust the term of office for 

municipal and school elections to four years and introduce voter 

identification requirements to strengthen local election 

practices. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to discuss this last 

category of amendments first, namely those to increase the 

terms of office for local elected officials and those that will 

strengthen local election practices. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2008, SUMA, the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association, passed a resolution requesting 

amendments to extend the term of office for urban municipal 

officials from three to four years. SUMA felt increasing the 

terms of office will help improve the effectiveness of elected 

local officials. Following this, Municipal Affairs consulted 

extensively with the municipal and education sectors, and 

nearly all were in favour of four-year terms of office. 

 

In early 2010, both the Saskatoon and Regina city councils 

passed resolutions supporting a move to four-year terms of 

office. And in March 2010, the Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities, SARM, passed a resolution supporting 

four-year terms for rural elections, while retaining the current 

staggered election dates. And this position was reaffirmed at the 

SARM mid-term convention held in early November, just a few 

weeks ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments will fulfill government’s 

commitment to extend the term of office of locally elected 

officials to four years, commencing with elections in 2012, to 

help councils plan and implement longer term goals toward 

more effective and efficient local governance. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, this group of amendments will 

introduce requirements for voters to show identification 

verifying their name and address prior to voting. Mr. Speaker, 

some may question the need for these requirements. They are 

being added to local election legislation to improve 

accountability and transparency in local elections, to strengthen 

local election practices, and to reduce uncertainty and 

challenges regarding a voter’s eligibility at the polls by 

candidate representatives and election officials. Currently 

people need only sign a declaration saying they are eligible to 

vote in a municipal election. This does not provide assurance of 

a person’s identity or eligibility and does not safeguard against 

voter fraud. 

 

Voter identification requirements are already in place for 

federal elections and are being developed for provincial 

elections. The proposed amendments will provide for consistent 

requirements among all elections — federal, provincial, and 

municipal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we understand there are concerns this will make it 

more difficult for some people to vote and that not all people 

have photo ID. And so these amendments provide for other 

forms of identification to be produced that don’t have a 

person’s photograph but still establish a person’s name and 

residence. 

 

Further, the amendments provide for alternatives to assistance 

with situations where an individual is unable to produce any 

identification or where it may be impractical. These may 

include having another voter vouch for an individual and 

allowing facility administrators to provide quick certification of 

identity and residence. Other jurisdictions have developed 

methods of establishing identity for those without identification 

or without a fixed address. And, Mr. Speaker, the proposed 

amendments will allow for such methods to be delivered for 

Saskatchewan’s municipal elections. 

 

More detail of forms of identification that may be used and the 

alternate methods of establishing a person’s identity will be put 

in regulations after these amendments have passed and after 

extensive consultations with stakeholders again. Broad 

consultations will be undertaken with the sector to ensure all 

appropriate forms of ID are included and local situations and 

individual circumstances are addressed. 

 

I would now like to discuss the amendments requested by the 

municipal sector. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Association 

of City Clerks asked for a number of amendments to improve 

local election processes and enhance accessibility. These 

include moving the call for nominations up by one week to 

allow more time for a second call for nominations; allowing 

special polls and places such as personal care homes to be held 

other than on election day and only for the residents of those 

facilities; and providing for alternate methods of voting, such as 

mail and ballot systems. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say the 

proposed amendments in this Bill provide for these changes. 

 

The last set of amendments, Mr. Speaker, address issues that 

arose as a result of recent local elections and are primarily of a 

housekeeping nature to clarify procedures and improve 

consistency between urban and rural municipal elections. These 

include clarifying that canvassing within 100 metres of a 

polling place is applicable only when polls are open and not 

during the entire campaign period; harmonizing timelines and 

retention periods for election processes and materials so they 

are consistent for urban and rural elections; and clarifying the 



6322 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2010 

activities associated with such matters as revising voters lists 

and vote recounts, among others, must occur during business 

days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments were developed in consultation 

with representatives of municipal and education sector 

associations including SUMA, SARM, the Saskatchewan City 

Mayors’ Caucus, the Saskatchewan Association of City Clerks, 

the Urban Municipal Administrators’ Association, the Rural 

Municipal Administrators’ Association, the Saskatchewan 

School Boards Association, the Saskatchewan Association of 

School Business Officials, the Provincial Association of Resort 

Communities of Saskatchewan — PARCS — and the 

Saskatchewan Association of Northern Communities, New 

North. The Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Justice 

were also consulted. I would like to take the opportunity to 

thank all those individuals who took the time to provide input, 

advice, and feedback on the development of this legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes the importance 

municipalities play in our province’s future. These changes are 

being made to update and continue to ensure the integrity of 

municipal electoral processes. We intend to continue working 

with municipal leaders to ensure that we have responsible and 

appropriate municipal governance and fair, open, and 

transparent local elections to build the quality of life we desire 

in our communities and to provide a future for our families and 

young people. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 162, 

The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs has moved second reading of Bill No. 162, The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to rise today to speak on Bill 162 at 

second reading. Bill 162 is An Act to amend the Local 

Government Election Act and to make consequential 

amendments to other Acts. Mr. Speaker, the short title of this 

Act, some people may simply refer to it as The Local 

Government Election Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the minister introducing the 

legislation today, making remarks with regards to what the Bill 

does, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the explanation that he’s made, 

and I wish to make some comments in my remarks following 

the minister’s remarks. 

 

Just earlier, Mr. Speaker, before the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs introduced this legislation, the Minister of Justice, the 

Attorney General for the province, introduced Bill No. 162, 

which introduces photo ID into the province of Saskatchewan 

for provincial elections. 

 

The aspects of what the Minister of Justice had to say also 

apply in the case of Bill 162. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to draw 

the public’s attention to the comments made by my colleague, 

the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, Mr. Speaker, who 

spoke on Bill 161 immediately following the Minister of 

Justice’s remarks. Mr. Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw 

made it very clear what the community response has been to 

photo ID being introduced at provincial elections, Mr. Speaker, 

and I want to echo the comments that my colleague from Moose 

Jaw made, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And without going into all the detail that she did, although I 

might refer to some of her comments in a few moments, 

without referring to her whole speech, Mr. Speaker, her 

comments about the importance of democracy, the importance 

about ensuring that those people who wish to participate in our 

democratic process, that their right to do so, Mr. Speaker, is 

made as easy as possible as opposed to as difficult as possible, 

Mr. Speaker. And this legislation, Bill 162 at the municipal 

level and Bill 161 at the provincial level, Mr. Speaker, certainly 

lead us to understand that this direction for photo ID does make 

things more difficult. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice used the phrase, the 

legislation must be “demonstrably fair.” The process must be 

“demonstrably fair,” Mr. Speaker. And I think that this 

legislation and the provincial legislation, Mr. Speaker, aren’t 

meeting that test very well about being demonstrably fair. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in regards to 162, one of the arguments for photo 

ID that the Minister of Municipal Affairs used was that the 

current legislation does not protect against voter fraud. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, there has been no outcry about voter fraud in the 

province of Saskatchewan nor in the municipal sector, Mr. 

Speaker. The issue is not one in which either, as I will argue 

shortly, Mr. Speaker, that either the municipal sector or the 

public generally has called on the government, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure that we clamp down on processes to protect against voter 

fraud, Mr. Speaker. There’s certainly many different ways in 

which we can manage these matters. 

 

While I’m on the issue of photo ID, Mr. Speaker . . . And I 

realize that the local government elections Act, Bill No. 162, 

does more than just bring forward the Sask Party, the provincial 

government’s desire to bring photo ID to the province of 

Saskatchewan. I realize the Act does more than that. 

 

I want to talk about the photo ID provisions just for a moment. 

The idea was introduced to the people of Saskatchewan just a 

few weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, in the Throne Speech read in this 

very Chamber back on October the 27th. Right near the end of 

the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, in fact the last two paragraphs 

before the concluding remarks, the Throne Speech says these 

two things, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 

 

Changes to The Local Government Election Act will 

establish four-year terms for municipal politicians and 

give municipalities the authority to require photo ID when 

conducting local elections. 

 

My government will also be introducing a similar act, 

requiring voters to produce photo ID when voting in 

provincial elections. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those two paragraphs read from the Throne 

Speech. 

 

Two things come to mind, Mr. Speaker. First and foremost is 



December 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6323 

that immediately following the delivery of the Throne Speech, 

there was quite a negative response to this proposal, Mr. 

Speaker — people across Saskatchewan writing letters to the 

editor of newspapers; talking on talk shows; responding to polls 

that were run by radio, television stations, or newspapers, Mr. 

Speaker; and letters to various members of the Legislative 

Assembly and, I am assuming, to the Minister of Justice, the 

Premier, and the Minister of Municipal Affairs. Mr. Speaker, 

the public said, this is not right. We need to protect the rights of 

people to vote simply and easily for their government at the 

local level or the municipal level. So, Mr. Speaker, there was 

quite a response in the days and weeks following the 

introduction of this idea in the Throne Speech. 

 

Well here we are, Mr. Speaker, and we’re about four and a half 

weeks since the Throne Speech was read. All of the other 

legislation identified in the Throne Speech has been introduced 

already, Mr. Speaker. And this legislation, with only a few days 

left in this session to go, Mr. Speaker, appears to be the last 

package of legislation that the government is bringing forward. 

 

Why, if it was so important in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, 

did it take four and a half weeks to be brought forward? Well, 

Mr. Speaker, I think the reason for that is because there’s been a 

change since the public responded negatively and the 

introduction of the Act today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me go back to the Throne Speech and the exact 

language that was used in the Throne Speech. Paragraph 

number one, for municipalities, it says, “. . . and give 

municipalities the authority to [I quote, in better ways, Mr. 

Speaker] require photo ID when conducting local elections.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the paragraph following it, for provincial 

legislation, “My government will also be introducing a similar 

act, requiring voters to produce photo ID . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech, the idea brought forward by 

the government, the idea presented to the public, didn’t talk 

about options, Mr. Speaker. It talked about requiring photo ID. 

And that’s what the public responded to quite negatively. 

 

If the public or those who are reading these remarks, Mr. 

Speaker, refer to earlier in the day the comments from the 

Minister of Justice in introducing photo ID for provincial-wide 

elections, Mr. Speaker, he talked about this not being a specific 

requirement but an option, Mr. Speaker, one of the options. And 

the legislation is quite clear. You either produce one piece of 

photo ID or you produce two other pieces of ID, Mr. Speaker, 

that can identify you. Mr. Speaker, that list of other 

identification is quite extensive. The Minister of Justice 

outlined that in his speech. But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, 

those provisions already exist — presenting, if challenged, two 

pieces of identification, none of which need to have a photo on 

it. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that this government is trying to bring 

forward photo ID no matter what is said. But they are nervous 

about the public reaction, so they’ve watered this down. From 

the day they wrote the Throne Speech to the day they 

introduced the legislation in front of us today, Mr. Speaker, 

there has been a change. And that’s because members of the 

New Democratic Party, the opposition, has been speaking out 

on behalf of the public negative response on this issue, Mr. 

Speaker. And this government has responded with some fear, 

Mr. Speaker, about what the public feeling is on this. 

 

It comes back to the phrase, consultation with the people of 

Saskatchewan, which I’ve got more to say about in a few 

minutes, Mr. Speaker. But if the government was truly listening 

to the public and was truly concerned about, as the minister 

indicated in his remarks, protecting against voter fraud, Mr. 

Speaker, they would have given a lot more thought to what is 

being proposed here. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, getting a little closer to the other processes 

or the other provisions — that’s the word I’m looking for, the 

other provisions — in Bill No. 162, the local government 

elections Act. The member from Moose Jaw earlier today 

referred to an article in today, December 1st’s, Regina 

Leader-Post, in which the Saskatchewan Association of Urban 

Municipalities’ chief executive officer said his organization 

wants to be a part of discussions around the ID provisions in the 

Act. To quote the executive officer, “If the preparation to go to 

the polling station is such that you have to go to an extensive 

process, I think it might be discouraging to some people.” He 

also says there are other issues that need to be addressed, which 

is why consultation is important to ensure people who work at 

polling stations know what is appropriate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nothing could be more important. In municipal 

elections when people are sitting at the polling booth and 

somebody comes with four or five pieces of paper in their 

pocket, Mr. Speaker, that may appear to identify them, are the 

people at the polling stations fully aware of what they can 

accept and what they can’t accept? If the Minister of Justice, the 

Attorney General of the province of Saskatchewan, is correct, 

Mr. Speaker, the list is almost endless. Everything in your 

kitchen drawer that you’ve accumulated for the last 10 years, 

Mr. Speaker, could be identification. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is another problem, though, that hasn’t been 

identified here that I’m sure that municipalities will identify 

when they are consulted on this issue. Because it would appear, 

Mr. Speaker, from the chief executive officer’s comments, Mr. 

Speaker, it would appear that this is one of these issues where 

there’s been very little consultation with the municipalities as 

far as photo ID and voter eligibility is concerned, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But there is another issue. And in the city of North Battleford, I 

can tell you that this issue would be very important, and I’m 

sure that there are other communities across Saskatchewan 

where it would be equally important. 

 

The city of North Battleford has a fairly mobile population, Mr. 

Speaker. We have a lot of rural communities and First Nations 

communities within about an hour’s drive of The Battlefords, 

Mr. Speaker. And during the school year and other times, 

people move into the city in the months of September and 

October, and they may move back to their home communities 

or to their rural locations, Mr. Speaker, in the spring after the 

school season is over, Mr. Speaker. We have a fairly mobile 

population geared around the educational calendar, geared 

around seasonal employment, Mr. Speaker. There’s a number of 



6324 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2010 

reasons why people are moving in and out of the city of North 

Battleford. 

 

Well it just happens that municipal elections for urban 

municipalities are in the early fall, for the provincial election’s 

now on the calendar, Mr. Speaker, in early November. It’s 

entirely possible that individuals will be moving to a 

community, like the city of North Battleford, within the 

eligibility period to vote in the municipal and certainly the 

provincial election. But they will have moved at a time when it 

was not possible to, as the Minister of Justice has said, get their 

affairs in order. 

 

It’s entirely possible for someone to move into North Battleford 

in September from Red Pheasant First Nation, Mr. Speaker, be 

eligible to vote in the municipal election in the city of North 

Battleford in mid to late October, Mr. Speaker, but they have 

not yet got their identification in order that shows a North 

Battleford address. They may have taken a couple of weeks to 

find a location in which to live. They may not have a power bill 

or a phone bill or a telephone bill with that address on it yet. 

They may not have really the two types of identification or even 

photo identification, Mr. Speaker, that would establish a 

residence for that individual. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in a community where there’s a lot of mobility 

and you’ve got a volunteer sitting at the table that’s going to 

identify who is eligible and not eligible to vote, Mr. Speaker, 

there are going to be some challenges that municipal city 

managers and local elections officials are going to have to deal 

with, Mr. Speaker. And I know that the municipalities are 

keenly interested in ensuring that they are consulted further on 

this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the main reasons why the opposition will not be rushing 

forward with passing this legislation, because we want to ensure 

that the municipalities are completely comfortable with the 

practicalities that are brought forward in this legislation. 

 

Now this government is doing two things with this piece of 

legislation. On the one hand, they’re doing something the 

municipalities want, and at the same time, they’re doing 

something that municipalities are uncertain about. So, Mr. 

Speaker, municipalities are going to say, we need to have this 

legislation passed quickly because the four-year provision is 

important to us. But secondly, oh, we’ve got to take it a little 

more slowly. We’ve got to consult further, and we’ve got to 

know that all of the factors around this photo ID, this voter 

eligibility clause are dealt with in a manner in which we are 

comfortable. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the old ying and yang of this government: do 

something that the public wants and then add something that 

they may not want or might not want and then wrap it all up in a 

ball and say we’ve got to do this right away, no need to consult 

further. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we understand and we recognize and we 

support that municipalities and school boards, Mr. Speaker, will 

benefit from four-year terms. That part of the legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, has come from the grassroots. It’s been a part of the 

consultation process in advance. But, Mr. Speaker, photo ID has 

not been part of the consultation process — not with 

municipalities, not with school boards, not with the public of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It seems to have come out of 

something that the Sask Party believes is important for them but 

is not part of the demand of the public of Saskatchewan. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to make that clear before talking 

about some of the other provisions in the legislation in front of 

us. 

 

The minister did indicate that this legislation applies to cities, 

towns, rural municipalities, and school board elections, Mr. 

Speaker. So let’s take a look at some of these things. And more 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about consultation, 

something that we’ve talked about in this legislation on 

numerous occasions about the way in which the current 

government, the Sask Party government, has been managing 

their legislative agenda here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Municipal Affairs indicated that 

the request for a four-year term came forward from the 2008 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association conference. 

Mr. Speaker, 2008 conference occurred in late January, early 

February. We are only two and a half months away from the 

second anniversary of this resolution having passed, Mr. 

Speaker. Almost two full years have passed since the Urban 

Municipalities Association clearly indicated to government, 

after much consultation amongst themselves, that four-year 

terms was in order. 

 

We now see, Mr. Speaker, that by the time . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Yes 2008, ’09, ’10 — two years. In 2011, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re almost three years away. Pardon my math, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re almost three years away from this legislation 

having been passed or this request and recommendation from 

SUMA coming forward, almost three years ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So last year, Mr. Speaker, or pardon me, in November of 2008, 

six months after SUMA passed their recommendation, in 

November 2008, the opposition asked the then minister of 

Municipal Affairs when he was going to bring forward the 

legislation for a four-year term and actually were responding to 

comments that the media had picked up that the government 

was not going to respond immediately to the request for 

four-year terms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at that time on November 27, 2008, the minister of 

Municipal Affairs said, “On the other hand, in the way of doing 

public consultation [this is regarding four-year terms], we [the 

government, the Sask Party government, we] found some 

contrary views and other folks that aren’t entirely convinced 

that changing the terms are the right thing to do.” So, Mr. 

Speaker, the minister of Municipal Affairs, in answer to a 

question in this House about four-year terms, said there are 

contrary views. Not everybody likes this idea, Mr. Speaker. 

And in fact there are people who are not convinced that 

changing from a three-year term to a four-year term is the right 

thing to do. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that immediately begged the question: all 

right, who are these people with contrary views? Who are these 

other folks? Who would the government consult with? If the 

municipal sector is saying, from convention, we wish to have 

four-year terms, who else would the government consult with? 

Mr. Speaker, it was interesting. If there were contrary views 



December 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6325 

two and a half years ago, Mr. Speaker, then what has happened 

over this last two and a half years that the legislation is now 

coming forward as requested by the municipal sector? And 

there’s no reference to the government acknowledging contrary 

views and bringing the legislation forward — very interesting. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the opposition in 2008 then asked the 

then minister of Municipal Affairs, who were these people that 

he was going to consult with next? Well here’s the quote from 

the minister of Municipal Affairs on November the 22nd . He 

says, golly, Mr. Speaker who would they be kidding: 

 

You’ve got to wonder who writes this stuff. The people 

that we’re asking are the people who live in Saskatchewan 

. . . We decided that the respectful thing . . . would be to 

ask the public of Saskatchewan what do . . . [they] think of 

this interesting proposal. 

 

So November 27th, 2008, the then minister of Municipal 

Affairs said we are going to consult with the people of 

Saskatchewan about four-year terms. 

 

We weren’t satisfied with that answer, Mr. Speaker, so a third 

question was asked of the minister on November 27th. All right, 

let’s be a little more specific, Minister. We said who are these 

people? Where’s the advice coming from about not going 

forward with four-year terms? And the minister of Municipal 

Affairs said, “The people we are consulting are twofold. The 

folks that are elected, the elected representatives of SUMA and 

SARM and the New North and also another interesting group of 

people called the public of Saskatchewan.” 

 

So there we have it again, twice, Mr. Speaker, during question 

period. The minister of Municipal Affairs said it’s not enough 

to get advice from SUMA and SARM and the New North. 

We’ve got to consult with the people of Saskatchewan. So 

okay, Mr. Speaker, two and a half years later, where have the 

public meetings been on this issue, the consultation with the 

public of Saskatchewan? You know, just how did the 

government undertake this extensive consultation, the public of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that the minister of Municipal 

Affairs is talking about? 

 

Perhaps I didn’t see something, Mr. Speaker, but maybe they 

added a question about four-year terms when they consulted the 

public about selling off habitat land in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. The government said they were going to consult 

widely on habitat land in Saskatchewan. Oops, Mr. Speaker, 

wait a minute. They didn’t do that. There was no consultation 

there. 

 

[15:15] 

 

What about when they decided to de-index chiropractic 

services, Mr. Speaker? Did they add a question to the public 

about the four-year term for Municipal Affairs? Oh wait a 

minute. They didn’t consult the people of Saskatchewan on 

de-indexing chiropractic services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What about when the budget of last year removed the ethanol 

tax rebate, Mr. Speaker, and the government said they’d 

consulted on that particular issue? Did they also consult on 

four-year terms with the people of Saskatchewan? Oh wait, Mr. 

Speaker. They didn’t consult on removing the ethanol tax 

rebate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What about the consultation on the New West Partnership, Mr. 

Speaker? There’s an opportunity there to consult with the 

people of Saskatchewan on a four-year term like the minister of 

Municipal Affairs said they were going to do. But wait, Mr. 

Speaker. There was no consultation on New West Partnership 

in the province of Saskatchewan, another opportunity lost. 

 

What about consultation with the public on the photo ID before 

this was introduced into this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker? 

The consultation could’ve included the four-year term that the 

minister said was going to happen. Wait, Mr. Speaker. There 

was no consultation on photo ID. They couldn’t have consulted 

on the four-year term. 

 

What about working people, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, 

working people who the government said there were 

consultations on Bills 5 and 6, on Bill 40, Mr. Speaker . . . Bill 

80, Mr. Speaker? The government said we’re consulting with 

the public of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they could have 

added the four-year term to that consultation, Mr. Speaker. But 

wait. There was no consultation, Mr. Speaker, no consultation. 

 

How about when the Minister of Health said, I’m consulting 

with the public prior to giving fundraisers the opportunity to 

gain access to patients’ information, hospital patients’ 

information, Mr. Speaker? The consultation with the public? 

Wait a minute, Mr. Speaker. There was no consultation on 

fundraising and health care information to fundraisers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister two and a half years ago told the 

municipal sector, told the public of Saskatchewan, told the 

members of the legislature that they were not introducing this 

legislation — two and a half years ago — because they had to 

consult with an interesting group of people called the public of 

Saskatchewan. It didn’t happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government brought forward legislation now. Mr. Speaker, 

I suggest the government is bringing forward the legislation 

now so that they can bring the photo ID in, on the one hand, 

with something the municipalities want. Not that they want it 

because they didn’t consult. They didn’t talk to anybody. They 

wouldn’t do it before. They brought it in because the . . . 

[inaudible] . . . want it in order to get the photo ID stuff brought 

into law in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This is a simple do 

something with the left hand so that they can’t see what’s going 

on with your right hand, Mr. Speaker. This is this old magical 

trick, this illusion that indeed, Mr. Speaker, something 

important is happening around us. 

 

Municipalities should have the right to have their 

recommendations heard and acted upon quickly by government, 

Mr. Speaker. This was a simple matter of understanding what 

the municipalities want and finding a way to make it work. This 

legislation does not do anything about finding a way to make 

four-year terms work, Mr. Speaker. It simply says, it is now a 

four-year term. Municipalities want it. That’s a good thing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It appears that school boards want it. There wasn’t a lot of talk 

two and a half years ago about school boards. School boards 



6326 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2010 

didn’t have much to say publicly. This legislation includes 

school boards, Mr. Speaker, and that’s an appropriate thing to 

do. 

 

One thing the government didn’t do, Mr. Speaker, where there 

has been some concerns raised is change some of the hours that 

municipal voting can occur. We’ve just had a number of RM 

[rural municipality] elections concluded recently, Mr. Speaker, 

just a few weeks ago as a matter of fact. Those municipal 

elections, Mr. Speaker, some people were indicating that the 

hours that the polling stations are open in rural municipalities 

are not long enough to accommodate all the residents of the 

rural municipalities. 

 

I think many members in this Chamber will know that more and 

more people who live within a rural municipality are employed 

outside that municipality in jobs that are either related to mining 

or manufacturing or transportation or employment that takes 

place outside of the rural municipality, perhaps a 15-minute 

drive, perhaps a half an hour drive, in some cases an hour’s 

drive from home. In rural municipalities, the polling station can 

also be a half hour drive from home, 20-minute drive from 

home, Mr. Speaker. So individuals have been saying that the 

polls are closing in rural municipalities at 6 o’clock. Anyone 

who works in the city is unable to get to the polling station in 

time before that poll closes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There was an opportunity in this piece of legislation which does 

impact the election, the practicalities of elections in rural 

municipalities, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had information that’s 

come forward as immediate as just a month ago, Mr. Speaker, 

that would indicate that we should be looking at additional 

changes to The Election Act regarding municipalities. And I 

think it would be worthwhile for the government to entertain 

the idea that rural municipality polls should remain . . . or the 

hours should be reviewed. Let me put it that way, Mr. Speaker. 

The hours should be reviewed. Not saying they necessarily have 

to be changed, there’s an issue there. It should be reviewed, Mr. 

Speaker, and I would ask the government to do that because 

they seem to have chosen not to do that. 

 

And the final point that I want to make, Mr. Speaker, about Bill 

162, the local government elections Act, we know very clearly, 

Mr. Speaker, that municipal governments have considerable 

amount of responsibility to their own taxpayers. Local residents 

participate in these local elections. And the rules that govern 

municipalities overall have changed a number of times over the 

years, Mr. Speaker. And in fact we have seen in the last six 

years some significant changes in the legislation that affects 

municipalities. You will recall there used to be the urban 

municipalities Act, the rural municipalities Act, The Northern 

Municipalities Act. There’s now something called The Cities 

Act, and there’s The Municipalities Act. 

 

And we know, Mr. Speaker, that these pieces of legislation 

evolve, that as municipalities change — whether it’s technology 

or whether it’s some things that happen in other jurisdictions 

that prove to be better practices than what we’re currently 

having in Saskatchewan — there are amendments to legislation 

that take place from time to time. It is interesting to see that the 

Sask Party government, the new government, is recognizing 

that legislation evolves and it’s never static. What’s done one 

day may need to be changed sometime down the road. 

And I remember in this House, Mr. Speaker, when I stood as 

the minister responsible for Municipal Affairs and introduced 

The Cities Act, Mr. Speaker, the communities across 

Saskatchewan responded quite favourably. There were still 

rollouts that needed to be made, Mr. Speaker. The legislation 

was passed, and the consultations with the communities — the 

municipalities, the cities — continued, Mr. Speaker. And a year 

later amendments were made to The Cities Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I remember the opposition at the time saying, oh the 

government didn’t get it right. They failed the people. There 

wasn’t any consultation. They’re changing the Act just one year 

after they brought it in, changing the Act, Mr. Speaker. Well the 

municipalities didn’t fully appreciate those comments at the 

time because they understood legislation evolves and that 

ongoing consultation ensures that new legislation is brought in 

when there is an understanding and an agreement made that 

indeed changes to legislation need to be made. 

 

Well here we are, Mr. Speaker. The Local Government Election 

Act has been around for quite a number of years, but we’re 

amending it, Mr. Speaker, not that there were things wrong with 

it in the past but because through consultation with the 

municipal sector, we’ve found that some things need to be 

changed. And there’s no doubt that the municipal sector feels 

the four-year term is an appropriate change that needs to be 

made, and we’re pleased to accept that. And we will not 

criticize the government for the consultation that occurred in 

that case and the change that’s being brought forward today. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we also have to recognize and understand 

that there was very little consultation on introducing photo ID 

or a requirement for photo ID — not in this legislation and not 

for the province of Saskatchewan — that consultation needs to 

occur, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we will ensure that there is consultation made with the 

municipalities, with the school boards, and with the public of 

Saskatchewan to the best of our ability, Mr. Speaker, before this 

legislation moves forward. And we will ensure that there is a 

practical eye put on to this legislation to ensure that indeed, as 

the Minister of Justice said in his remarks, it is demonstrably 

fair, it is indeed fair. And, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the 

Minister of Municipal Affairs fully understands the municipal 

sector, that it works in the interests of the municipalities — 

urban, rural, northern — and the school boards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that having been said, I’d like to now move that the debate 

on Bill No. 162, An Act to amend The Local Government 

Elections Act, be now adjourned. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords 

has moved Bill 162, The Local Government Election 

Amendment Act, 2010, be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 



December 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6327 

Bill No. 159 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 159 — The 

University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s a pleasure to rise in this debate today. To state right off the 

top, I’m a proud University of Regina alumnus and certainly am 

very interested in looking into measures that relate to my alma 

mater, University of Regina. 

 

On the face of it, it would seem that the measures proposed in 

this legislation are fairly straightforward, fairly pedestrian in 

their nature. The minister’s remarks in introducing this 

legislation did give us some pause for thought or, you know, 

something that we’d like to see fleshed out a bit, where it’s 

stated that these measures are not universally well-regarded 

after what seems to be fairly extensive consultation and the 

impetus for these, for this piece of legislation and this basket of 

legislative measures, coming from the university administration 

itself. So we’re interested to see if there have been concerns 

raised about this legislation, what in fact those concerns are. 

 

And beyond that though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the 

changes around the office of the chancellor, the powers of 

convocation, the different ways that the senate . . . Their powers 

are adjusted somewhat as well as limiting the vote for the 

different senate positions to graduands within a certain district, 

raising the number of graduands required to sign off on an 

appeal for a special meeting. Again all these things seem to be 

fairly straightforward, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and not exactly 

something to write home about one way or the other. So we, on 

the face of it, we like the looks. I myself, I like the looks of this 

legislation. 

 

But I am interested to hear more about those that might have 

some concerns around this legislation. Certainly President 

Timmons has come forward saying that these are a basket of 

initiatives that go toward serving administrative efficiency and 

cost-effective governance at the University of Regina. It would 

certainly, to my mind it certainly seems, the measures certainly 

seem to line up with that claim. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So we’ll wait. We’ll be canvassing the different stakeholders as 

well to see what the concerns might have been, or perhaps the 

minister could have been a bit more forthright in the 

introductory remarks around this piece of legislation. But we 

will take that work forward. 

 

So with that being said, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Again I say 

this as a legislator, as a member of this Legislative Assembly 

based out of the city of Regina, the riding of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre; I say this as an alumnus of the University 

of Regina; and I say this as someone who’s got a strong interest 

in the affairs of post-secondary education in this province, that 

this would seem to be measures that come forward to aid and 

promote administrative efficiency. But there is a slight note of 

concern that we would cite certainly in the minister’s remarks 

— that was touched upon — but something that we want to take 

up with the stakeholders as we do the work of the opposition in 

terms of due diligence around this legislation. 

 

So that being said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 159, An Act to amend the 

University of Regina Act. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 159, The 

University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 160 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 160 — The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to rise today to enter into the debate about Bill No. 160, An Act 

to amend the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code and to make 

consequential amendments to The Labour Standards Act. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk first a little bit about what the 

minister’s proposed, the changes he’d like to make to the 

Human Rights Code. Right now the tribunal, currently the 

Human Rights Tribunal conducts public hearings of complaints 

that have been referred to it by the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission, and it reviews these complaints that have been 

dismissed by the commission at the request of the complainant. 

So what’s going to happen, or is being proposed in this Bill, is 

to move it to the Court of Queen’s Bench to be heard by a judge 

rather than by this tribunal. 

 

So right now in Saskatchewan, discrimination complaints can 

be based on race, colour, age, sex, sexual orientation, physical 

or mental disability, religion, marital status, family status, place 

of origin, or ancestry. And actually the Human Rights Code 

itself covers discrimination in a variety of contexts if you’re 

discriminated against with respect to your tenancy, 

employment, employment advertisements, publications, public 

services and facilities, purchases of property, and discrimination 

by unions or associations. 

 

So just a little bit of history here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 

tribunal was originally created as a replacement for boards of 

inquiry which were appointed by the minister to review 

individual cases where the commission decided they had merit 

or where the complainant was appealing a decision referred to it 

by the commission. So at that time, sometimes it would take 

months for a board of inquiry to be even appointed, let alone 

hearing the case, particularly if the minister’s office was having 



6328 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2010 

difficulty identifying a member of the Bar that didn’t have a 

conflict of interest with one of the parties in the dispute. So this 

delayed justice for the complainant which, in the case of human 

rights complaints, these are often very sensitive and emotional 

issues, and people deserve to have their cases heard in a timely 

fashion. 

 

So the tribunal was originally created in part to address these 

concerns and try to speed things up a little bit. But today, 

currently, many people have expressed concerns that the 

tribunal now takes too long to issue decisions or complaints 

referred to it. And that’s a very real concern. I’ve spoken to 

people who’ve gone through this process, and for some of them 

it has taken too long. And as I said, often human rights 

complaints cut to the very core of who we are. We have been 

discriminated based on something that we can’t change. It’s 

something about us that’s inherent. And so they really are very 

emotional and sensitive topics, and for that reason alone 

deserve to be heard in a timely fashion. 

 

So the opposition is very aware and mindful of the fact that the 

Human Rights Commission, and particularly the Chief 

Commissioner Judge Dave Arnot, has endorsed making these 

changes. In his words, I’d like to quote: 

 

The Commission anticipates that a move of the tribunal 

function to the courts would elevate the stature of human 

rights issues within the justice system and improve the 

current decision timelines. Dedicated . . . judges would 

handle hearings and provide decisions. 

 

So that’s a very good thing. Elevating human rights, making 

sure the people fully understand and are educated about them, is 

critical. So I understand where Judge Arnot is coming from 

with respect to that. 

 

The commissioner has also spoken about its desire. I’d like to 

quote here: 

 

. . . a decision making process which is informal and 

accessible to all, provides for review of decisions, and is 

handled by experts who reflect our diverse society. 

 

Again, we here in the opposition completely support that view. 

We want a decision-making process where people without a 

legal background can be heard. So it needs to be open to the 

average everyday citizen, and we want people who make 

decisions to have the necessary expertise and to reflect the 

diverse nature of our society. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve stood in my place here on 

many occasions in this legislature talking about the need to 

have, in particular, a diverse legislature. I think any decision, 

any item that’s studied, needs to be studied by a diverse range 

of voices because we bring . . . When we’re making decisions 

and don’t have the many voices around the table, sometimes we 

forget or we don’t always understand. 

 

So again, that notion of diversity around a decision-making 

table is very important to us here in the opposition. So the 

commission has . . . Judge Arnot has also stated: 

 

Under the court system parties to a complaint would see 

no change to current processes. The Commission’s 

complaint intake, mediation and investigation processes 

would not change. In addition the Commission’s lawyers 

would continue to represent the complainant at the 

hearing at no cost whatsoever, including any subsequent 

levels of appeal right up to the Supreme Court of Canada 

if necessary. 

 

That piece, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is absolutely imperative. The 

people who have suffered from discrimination continue to have 

the ability to seek justice without being forced to pay for a 

lawyer. So we’ve got vulnerable and marginalized people 

who’ve already suffered or allegedly suffered anyway in 

discrimination, and they shouldn’t be forced to pay the 

government. They shouldn’t be forced to pay to address some 

of these concerns, and currently they don’t have to do that. So 

there would be some concern that these changes, somehow 

costs could creep in. 

 

So the provincial government has spoken of its desire to attempt 

to resolve more disputes through mediation. I think that that’s a 

fine idea. I’ve been through mediation process myself, not 

through the Human Rights Commission, but someone who’s 

gone through a divorce. And my former husband and I chose to, 

instead of use lawyers, we chose to go the route of mediation. 

And it wasn’t always easy, but it was the best choice in the end. 

I think many of us would choose, instead of a confrontational 

situation, we’d much rather have the opportunity to sit down 

and talk in an appropriate setting. So I think a move to try to 

resolve some of these issues before they get to the judge I think 

is a very, very good thing. 

 

So every human rights complaint is an opportunity for 

education. I think sometimes we’re all a product of our 

experiences. Our values are shaped through our experiences — 

where we grew up, what we experienced as a child, through the 

education system, through workplace. We’re a product of our 

experiences. So sometimes we don’t always understand what 

it’s like to be the victim or be the subject of discrimination. And 

trying to create the opportunity for more of us to see what it’s 

like to be on the end of a discriminatory action is a very good 

thing. So more education around what are some of the areas of 

discrimination I think is a very good thing. 

 

So in terms of the opposition, I think our goal is always to have 

more information. And this Bill has just recently been 

introduced and it’s incumbent upon us as opposition to . . . 

We’ve heard Judge Arnot, the Chief Commissioner, speak in 

favour of this, but it’s very, very important for us to go out and 

speak to a whole different level of stakeholders. We want to 

speak to individuals and groups and have as much information 

as possible when it comes to making decisions. I’m a huge 

believer and I know my colleagues and I are huge believers in 

consultation and making sure that decisions are connected to 

people’s realities. 

 

I think often governments — and in particular I’ll point to the 

Sask Party government — has made decisions without taking 

into account the experiences or the desires or how these 

decisions will impact certain groups. So it’s incumbent upon us 

as opposition to make sure that we are gathering information 

and talking to as many stakeholders as possible because this is a 

fundamental shift in how human rights complaints are heard. So 



December 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6329 

it’s incredibly important to make sure that we in this Legislative 

Chamber have all the information necessary, and all that 

information necessary comes from the people who will be 

impacted by this change. So we will be spending the next little 

while seeking out information and people’s perspectives on 

these changes. 

 

And we have to say, there’s no doubt that speeding up this 

process is a very good thing because nobody wants to be 

dragged through a process two or three years long. As I said, 

human rights complaints by their very nature cut to the very 

core of who we are. But it’s always important to question why a 

government is making a change, who does it benefit, and what 

the nature of the decision is all about. 

 

And there is one particular red flag that in 2009 the Human 

Rights Tribunal in fact ruled that the marriage commissioners 

here in Saskatchewan were obliged to uphold the law and 

perform their duty to perform civil marriages to all 

Saskatchewan citizens regardless of their personal beliefs. So 

the Human Rights Tribunal in 2009 decided that, but the 

government’s response to that was to refer these two pieces of 

legislation to the Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to continue to discriminate against some 

Saskatchewan citizens based on their personal beliefs. 

 

So that is a bit of a red flag. So I’m not saying this is the case, 

but it’s important for us to go out and talk to all kinds of people 

because is this . . . The timing is a little suspect, the getting rid 

of the Human Rights Tribunal in favour of a Court of Queen’s 

Bench judge. Is this their motivation? I’m not sure. I’m not 

saying that is the case but it’s important for us to make sure we 

have all the information at hand. And it’s hard not to be a little 

cynical when the government . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Yes it’s tough on this side, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we also have a number of questions on this side of House 

about how these changes to the Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code would work. So the current 

process allows people to appeal a decision by the Human Rights 

Commission that their complaint has no merit by referring it to 

the Human Rights Tribunal. So currently if I have a complaint, 

if I file a complaint with the commission and the commission 

decides or doesn’t believe that my complaint has merit, there is 

still, right now there’s still a process where I can appeal to the 

Human Rights Tribunal and they will make a decision. So if I 

don’t feel the commission is addressing my concerns, I have an 

opportunity to appeal. So there’s a concern. 

 

How does this work in this new model where the Human Rights 

Commission itself has decided that a complaint has no merit, 

but the complainant still wants to appeal? So logistically is 

there still going to be that option? If the commission decides, 

rules that the case has no merit but the person is convinced that 

it does, is there an appeal process? 

 

And if there is an appeal process, who would represent the 

complainant then? So if a complainant had to find their own 

lawyer, one, would they have to pay for the lawyer themselves? 

And even if they didn’t have to pay for their own lawyer, they 

also need . . . Do they need to go out and find one who will take 

their case? So not everybody . . . The reality in this life is we 

don’t all start from the same place, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

not everybody has the wherewithal or the capacity to know how 

to even go about seeking, hiring a lawyer. Not only do people 

not have the financial capacity, but sometimes it’s beyond 

financial capacity. It’s just general life skills. We don’t all start 

at the same place, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And there’s some concern that (a) will there be an appeal 

process, and (b) is there the opportunity to support people in 

going through that appeal process if necessary. So one other 

thing to note. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So this amendment to The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 

Bill No. 160, seems to be based on the assumption or at least 

partly on the assumption that using the Court of Queen’s Bench 

would move things along faster. So definitely some of the 

delays in the current system are a consequence of the fact that 

human rights tribunals’ members currently have practices of 

their own and are busy and perhaps the human rights work 

doesn’t always get prioritized. But it’s also a fact that courts 

don’t always work as quickly as they could as well, and courts 

don’t always rule on matters in a timely fashion. So is this 

going to be faster? I’m not sure. 

 

Were there other ways to enhance and improve the existing 

system? This, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a major departure in how 

we currently deal with human rights complaints. So was there 

another way, a simpler way, a less costly way perhaps? I’m not 

sure. But just as effective . . . If it’s all about time, was there 

another way to make these changes to speed up the process? 

 

So those are questions we’ll be . . . When we talk to 

stakeholders, individuals, and organizations who understand 

this better than me and better than some of my colleagues, those 

are some of the questions that we’ll be discussing. 

 

So when the government . . . One other thing. The government 

has proposed changing the limitation periods for filing a 

complaint from two years to one year. So this also we need to 

ponder carefully because sometimes there might be 

circumstances in which it was not possible to file that complaint 

in one year. So what, where does this change come from? I’m 

wondering what the rationale, and I’d like to hear from the 

minister what the rationale is for making this change from, the 

limitation period from two years to one year. 

 

And I just . . . Again on the point around diversity. So the 

commission has noted, the Chief Commissioner has noted that 

it’s important to have experts reviewing these cases that reflect 

the diversity of our society. So again it’s a simple fact that the 

reality is we are a product of our experiences, and those 

experiences inform our views and our values and impact 

sometimes our ability to understand other people’s life 

experiences. So you have to consider too . . . And judges, I 

know, are skilful in their decision making, but the reality is 

many decisions, we can’t help but bring . . . It’s very hard, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, not to bring our experiences to the table. Even 

that notion of objectivity I think can be very, very difficult 

sometimes. 

 

So I think one of the merits of having more than one person 

hear a case is the diversity of voices around the table because 



6330 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2010 

you have more chance of someone around that decision-making 

table actually understanding the experiences of the complainant, 

perhaps. 

 

But as I said, we will need to talk to stakeholders, find out what 

they’re thinking and feeling. They may very well think that 

these changes are necessary. I want a little bit more information 

from the minister around his rationale on some of these 

changes. I think that that’s absolutely critical to know why the 

government is proposing this. Is it driven by the Human Rights 

Commission or is it driven by the government? So it’s 

absolutely imperative for us to understand all of this. And these 

changes may . . . There are definitely . . . The gist of the 

changes — speeding up the process — is definitely with merit. 

But is there another way to make these changes, Mr. Speaker? I 

would like to have some more input on that. 

 

So we will consult extensively and take our time to ensure that 

the government did in fact get this legislation right. Because as 

I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a big departure from how 

human rights complaints are currently heard. So with that, I 

know that I have other colleagues who are very interested in 

wading into this discussion. This is a very important Bill. And 

so with that, I would like to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 160, The 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 158 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert that Bill No. 158 — The 

Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Regina Dewdney, 

sorry. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I thought 

maybe somebody had stood up at the same time as me, so thank 

you very much for the recognition. Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely 

pleased today to enter into debate on this very important piece 

of public policy legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some people may have difficulty understanding 

the importance of this piece of legislation to our community and 

to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. But this is a 

piece of legislation that is designed, fundamentally, to protect 

the citizens of our province, those who work in correctional 

facilities and, Mr. Speaker, also inmates who are serving time in 

our correctional facilities, Mr. Speaker. Additional information 

and intelligence that can be gathered through the monitoring of 

telephone calls outside the institution can play an integral role 

in understanding what’s going on within an institution and 

understanding what planning or plotting may be going on that 

could affect others, Mr. Speaker. 

And as a result of being able to get greater intelligence and 

more information about what may be a potential harmful 

outcome either to individuals or to other inmates, individuals on 

the street, Mr. Speaker, or inmates or potentially staff, that’s 

very, very helpful in managing the affairs of a correctional 

facility, Mr. Speaker, but also very, very important in the 

protection of people in our society and in the public as well as 

staff and other inmates, as I mentioned a few minutes ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it also gives the ability of staff and the 

correctional facility management to understand where potential 

drugs may enter the institution, where other potential 

wrongdoings may be occurring that may not be of a nature that 

would be of potential immediate threat to any individual, but 

could have long-term consequences or could in fact have 

unintended consequences by the action, not to mention, Mr. 

Speaker, which is also illegal activity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Staff in a correctional system and management in a system of 

course are very concerned about the illegal activity, but they’re 

also very concerned about what that illegal activity and the 

outcome of that activity may have, to influence or endanger 

people within the system. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I heard a member opposite also mention just 

generally the potential of escapes or people leaving the 

correctional facility before their sentence is up, Mr. Speaker. 

Well of course that’s a concern always as well, Mr. Speaker. 

Intelligence gathered through the telephone system and 

monitoring telephone calls, Mr. Speaker, in fact, could give 

information that would lead to an investigation and prevent an 

escape. And, Mr. Speaker, preventing that escape could prevent 

a number of things, not just an individual that’s to be 

incarcerated being on the street, Mr. Speaker, but it could also 

help individuals who are potentially at risk as the result of that 

individual being out of the correctional facility, Mr. Speaker. 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is, for many reasons, good public policy. 

 

We do however have one or two concerns and, Mr. Speaker, 

those one or two concerns have nothing to do with the actual 

public policy issue that’s before us that’s in the legislation. It 

has to do with who is paying for this new initiative. Mr. 

Speaker, this initiative is . . . The majority of the cost is being 

passed onto the families of those being incarcerated and those 

who are incarcerated themselves, Mr. Speaker. The new phone 

system that was put in to accommodate the ability to monitor 

telephone calls is being paid for by an added surcharge to those 

who utilize the telephone system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as you would understand, I think — and the majority of 

people in the province — many of the people who are 

incarcerated in our correctional facilities don’t have great 

financial means or great financial resources, Mr. Speaker. So 

these new added charges can put their family members or 

themselves in situations where they’re not able to keep the 

normal family contact that’s appropriate. You could have a 

father or a mother potentially incarcerated with children who 

are not yet fully able to understand the situation, not old enough 

to totally comprehend, that need and want to talk to their parent 

each day. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that may be cost prohibitive for that family 

at a cost of $1.85 per call plus long distance and minute 



December 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6331 

charges, Mr. Speaker. It can become a very expensive, very 

expensive cost to that family, Mr. Speaker. And those costs can 

create additional troubles within a correctional facility if those 

individuals don’t have the ability to maintain that contact with 

their family. Family and those who are . . . Loved ones close to 

an individual are very, very important in the ability of an 

individual to rehabilitate themselves, to work on their problems, 

and to create a better life for themselves, Mr. Speaker, when 

they leave custody. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the monitoring of telephone calls and the 

intelligence-gathering process is without doubt great public 

policy. But, Mr. Speaker, who’s paying for it is really an issue 

that needs to be re-examined. Mr. Speaker, that should be a cost 

that’s borne largely by the system, Mr. Speaker, and 

traditionally has been borne or paid for by the correctional 

system, Mr. Speaker, so that individuals who are incarcerated 

. . . I think it’s fair ball to say they should have to pay for their 

long distance charges, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the way it’s been 

forever. 

 

We’re not saying they get free long distance. We’re not saying 

that there shouldn’t be some charges, Mr. Speaker, because they 

lose their freedom when they go to jail. There’s no doubt. And 

I’m not saying that there should be no charges. What I’m saying 

is that an additional $1.85 per call, if you were to call home 

daily, results in about a 12 or $13 charge per week. And that 

can be a significant, significant additional charge on a family 

who’s on very fixed resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in some cases it’s grandchildren phoning 

grandparents, and that grandparent is the only contact they have 

to the outside world to be able to talk about their issues and to 

be able to work through some of the problems that they face 

each day, Mr. Speaker. And so anything we do that limits the 

ability of an individual to have that necessary contact, Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t think is fair to the individual incarcerated or to 

the family because, Mr. Speaker, the majority of these calls are 

collect. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I said a minute ago, I’m not suggesting 

that they don’t pay the long distance charges. I’m not 

suggesting they don’t pay the same charges every other citizen 

in Saskatchewan would pay. All I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is 

they should pay the same charges as the rest of the people of 

Saskatchewan; they shouldn’t pay additional charges, Mr. 

Speaker. They should be treated as every other citizen in our 

province is treated as it reflects the utilization and cost of 

telephone service, Mr. Speaker. The additional cost of $1.85 per 

call, Mr. Speaker, is a charge for a system that the government 

chose to put in place, which I agree with. I’m not disagreeing at 

all with the system, but that’s a charge that the government 

should pay. 

 

And the individual incarcerated pays in many ways for that 

incarceration through a loss of freedom, Mr. Speaker, through a 

loss of other rights, Mr. Speaker. I agree 100 per cent they 

should pay the same phone charges that any other citizen in the 

province should pay, Mr. Speaker, but they shouldn’t pay any 

more. Our system and our society has been developed along the 

principles of fairness and equality and, Mr. Speaker, it should 

be maintained in this area as well. 

 

Now as I said, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to speak long about 

this because this is a piece of legislation we do agree with. The 

additional charge issue is a subsidiary issue to it, as to who pays 

for the actual installation and upkeep of the system itself, Mr. 

Speaker. And you and I as citizens in the province of 

Saskatchewan, our phones are paid for by the province, Mr. 

Speaker, or by the supplier of the telephone and it’s part of our 

cost per minute, Mr. Speaker, or our monthly charge. And, Mr. 

Speaker, all I’m simply saying is we should, in what we do, 

reflect the same rights and charges for telecommunications 

services for inmates as we do for any other citizen in the 

province — no more, no less. Whether they’re in jail or not, 

they are still citizens of the province and should be treated with 

the same rights and dignities of any citizen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I think that this piece of legislation 

should receive the support of all members of this Assembly 

prior to the end of this session, Mr. Speaker. So for those 

reasons, Mr. Speaker, I would at this time move this Bill to 

committee. 

 

[16:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Policing and Corrections that Bill 

158, The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010 be now 

read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill be 

referred to? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 158, The 

Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010 be referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Deputy Government House 

Leader has referred this Bill to the Standing . . . The 

Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010 be referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Justice, 

Intergovernmental and Justice Committee. 

 

Bill No. 157 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 157 — The Oil and 

Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 



6332 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2010 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to enter into this debate, the debate 

on the Act to amend The Oil and Gas Conservation Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not necessarily an authority on oil and gas, 

but I will share with the members gathered here my opinion on 

this Bill after having the opportunity to review some of it. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s truly a complex Bill. It’s a Bill that probably 

reflects the industry itself, the industry itself being quite a 

complex industry. And I guess it sort of goes hand in hand to 

suggest that the Bill would be a complex Bill to match the 

complexity of the industry. 

 

But I think it’s important to note and to be able to determine to 

what degree this Bill has effects on the various levels of the 

industry, both the industry itself as well as the industry players. 

And it will of course take some time to review and to consult 

with the various stakeholders across the province and the 

associations that are affected by the changes or could be 

affected by the changes to this Act, and to determine from them 

themselves as they see the effect on their industry and on their 

own particular operation within that industry. 

 

And so the need of course for that consultation is there, as is the 

need for the opposition to have the time to do that consultation 

and to be able to determine if the government has actually been 

involved in some serious consultation with the industry. And 

has that consultation taken a meaningful role? And has there 

been meaningful consultation? Has it been purposeful? Has it 

been able to identify the needs of the industry? 

 

And this is an extremely important industry to our province, to 

the economy of this great province of ours. And there is a need 

to be able to make sure that whenever changes are made, they 

are changes that will benefit the industry so that the industry 

can move forward, the industry can grow, and do so and have a 

positive effect, a positive effect on our economy and thusly a 

positive effect on the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that’s the role of any government. 

And I believe that’s the role and the desires of any government 

is to be able to effect change, but effect positive change so that 

that change in the long run benefits the people of this great 

province of ours. And that I suppose is a measuring stick by 

which we, the opposition, will measure the results of our 

consultations and the discussions with the industry around this 

particular Bill. But I think that’s also the measuring stick that 

the people of Saskatchewan will use when they’re measuring 

this government as to has this government been able to achieve 

those goals, to be able to achieve effective change, positive 

change. But positive change has had positive effect on 

Saskatchewan people, not only today and not just a small group 

of people but the masses, the population of this great province. 

But not just those changes today, but for those changes into the 

future for future generations who will benefit from those 

changes. 

 

So I think it’s . . . You know, any time we make a change, Mr. 

Speaker, we have to know what we’re doing. We have to make 

sure that those changes are the right ones. 

 

Now it’s very important today to help the industry move 

forward because as we see a reduction, and we’re seeing that 

reduction in the oil production from 2007 and . . . I find that 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, because at a time the world economy 

is growing, the demand for oil is growing, and yet what we’re 

seeing in Saskatchewan here for the last number of years under 

this government, we’re seeing the production of oil from 

Saskatchewan actually decline, actually going down. And that 

of course immediately, immediately brings up the question of 

why. Why are we seeing a decline in drilling? Why are we 

seeing a decline in oil production in this province at a time 

when the international economy, the world economy, is 

demanding more and more energy? 

 

And one would have to think once again, Mr. Speaker, it has to 

be the responsibility of the government to step up to the plate to 

identify what changes need to take place to ensure that the 

industry in this province grows, the industry in this province 

remains strong, and that the benefits, the benefits from that 

industry and the growth of that industry for the people of our 

great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see the reduction in the amount of wells being 

drilled in our province since 2007. Once again, Mr. Speaker, I 

do know that we have a good supply of oil in this province. 

Some of it is, as I understand it, is called sweet crude oil. It’s 

the lighter oil, easier to extract, more cost-efficient to withdraw. 

We also have some heavy oil, which is more costly but still, Mr. 

Speaker, well within the profitable level and certainly well 

within the desire of the industries to be able to extract those 

oils, that product and to do so in a way that is profitable to 

them. And we need to make sure that these changes don’t, you 

know, don’t have a negative effect on the industry, these 

changes don’t have a negative effect on the stakeholders within 

the industry. Changes should be, should be supportive of the 

industry and supportive of growth of the industry. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the economy of 

our great province of ours and we look at the oil and gas aspect 

of that economy and the impact oil and gas has on 

Saskatchewan, which is quite significant. Quite significant 

impact. 

 

We see that over the last number of years we were seeing a 

reduction or a contraction of our economy from, year over year, 

of about 3.9 or, rounding figures, 4 per cent, which is quite 

substantial, Mr. Speaker. It’s quite substantial when you’re 

seeing an economy going backwards. When you’re seeing your 

economy is shrinking at a rate of 4 per cent, that certainly has a 

negative effect on jobs. It has a negative effect on small 

businesses. It has a negative effect on disposable incomes that 

are spent in this province, and that is of course the engine that 

drives our economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What is, I think, readily proven is that the engines that drive our 

economy are the pocketbooks of ordinary people — the people 

who are raising a family, the people who are investing in their 

homes, the people who are growing this economy by having 

jobs, quality jobs that provides them enough money each and 

every month that will meet their monthly requirements, their 

monthly bills, pay their mortgage and pay their power bill and 

their heat bill, etc., but also be able to have disposable incomes 

that they can go out and purchase items that are required by 

them and their family, and services that are required by them 

and their family. And that money causes the economy to roll. 



December 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6333 

That is the money that causes the economy to grow, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we see a contraction of our economy, 

we have to be concerned. We have to be concerned at any time 

that the economy shrinks. Because when the economy shrinks, 

it means that we don’t have the engines of our economy 

working at full potential. We don’t have disposable incomes in 

the hands of the families who spend the money in our 

communities. 

 

And they don’t spend, Mr. Speaker, they don’t spend the money 

in Calgary. They don’t spend their money in New York or 

Toronto or Dallas. They spend their money right here, right in 

the communities of our great province — Regina, Saskatoon, or 

the smaller communities. It’s those folks out there who when 

they have a disposable income, have an income that meets the 

needs to meet their daily needs but have enough left over so 

they can participate in the economy by enjoying some of the 

prosperity of the economy. Then we all benefit. We all benefit, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what we really have to be concerned about is when we see 

an economy not growing, not growing over time. We’re seeing 

an economy that actually shrinks year over year. That, Mr. 

Speaker, has to be a concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a situation where Sask Trends says that 

Saskatchewan really has not enjoyed economic growth since the 

change of government. Mr. Speaker, since 2007, since the 

government has changed, Sask Trends is on record of saying 

that Saskatchewan has really not enjoyed any economic growth. 

What we’ve seen, the improvements in 2008, were simply the 

results of the inflation factor, the inflationary costs on items that 

consumers had to pay for. So the growth, Mr. Speaker, that we 

see from 2007 to 2008, well not real growth. It’s really nothing 

more than the inflationary factor being taken into consideration. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is not a foundation that you want to 

build your economy on. That’s certainly not a foundation that 

you want to be able to rely on in the future. That is not, Mr. 

Speaker, a growing economy that’s going to benefit the people 

of Saskatchewan not just today, but benefit the people of 

Saskatchewan into the future. It’s not a strong economy that the 

future generations will be able to rely on, future generations 

will be able to benefit from because we laid a strong economy 

here, a strong foundation and a positive economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that has got to be a concern. It’s got to be a 

concern with anyone who is holding down elected office. 

Certainly we on the opposition benches here are concerned 

about it, and I would hope, Mr. Speaker, some of that concern 

would be shared by the members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister’s second reading speech went to some 

length of suggesting that these changes were the result of the 

New West Partnership, about the moving of the rules to those 

similar to or equal to that of Alberta. Well, Mr. Speaker, when 

we see these changes being encompassed in this Bill, one has to 

begin to wonder what level of consultation did the government 

really do. Did the government get out there and carry out 

meaningful consultation with the industry, stakeholders within 

that industry to ensure that these are the changes that are 

required, these are the changes that are necessary to ensure that 

the industry grows in a strong and positive way? Is this 

basically going to benefit the industry and through benefiting 

the industry benefit the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Those are some of the questions, Mr. Speaker, that I would 

certainly have and some of the information that I would like the 

government to be able to come up with and assure us that the 

changes . . . And when you make changes, when you make 

changes in the rules and regulations that bring them into 

alignment with other provinces or other jurisdictions, that these 

are the changes that the industry stakeholders in this province 

want, these are the changes the industry stakeholders in this 

province need in order to grow the industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say it doesn’t really matter what 

industry you’re in. In order to survive in today’s world and to 

prosper within that industry, you need to grow. You either get 

bigger or you get out. That seems to be the rule of thumb in 

business. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we need to do is, when the government 

is proposing changes through amendments to a Bill, we need to 

know that those amendments are the amendments that the 

industry wants. We need to know that those are the amendments 

the stakeholders want. We need to know that those are the 

amendments the stakeholders have identified are the correct 

ones that will cause the industry to grow and cause them to be 

in a positive prosperity and play a meaningful role in that 

industry. And thusly meaning good wages will be paid to their 

employees, which will mean reasonable ability for those 

employees to enjoy good standards of living, at the end of the 

day having enough income to be able to meet their needs, meet 

the needs of their family, and having disposable income that 

will be able to trigger on and drive our economy. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at any time that you move to consolidate or to 

amend the rules of an industry, whether they be within Alberta 

or Saskatchewan or any other jurisdiction, it’s important to 

understand the impact, the impact that these changes may have. 

Because the impact can be both negative and positive. And we 

want to, Mr. Speaker, be sure that the changes lessen the 

negative impacts and enhance the positive impacts. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Basically the desire, I think, by any government is to see the 

economy grow, to see parts of the economy grow. The oil 

industry is certainly a major part of our economy in this 

province, and we need to make sure that changes that are being 

proposed by the government are changes that will be beneficial 

to the industry, are changes that stakeholders within that 

industry want, that they are the changes the stakeholders within 

that industry have identified are the right changes to cause the 

industry to grow. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t seen any evidence by this 

government that that consultation has taken place. We certainly 

have a lot of questions around this particular Bill and the 

proposed changes. Some of those questions that come to mind 

almost immediately is, who asked for these changes? Who 

asked for these changes? Was it industry that asked for these 

changes? Did stakeholders within the industry come forward 



6334 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2010 

and say, we’ve identified that change needs to take place in 

order for our economy and our industry to grow with the 

changing times and, in some cases, technology and the impact 

that that has when it’s introduced into an industry. Changes do 

have to take place. Changes within the regulation. Changes 

within the Act may have to take place to reflect a modern 

approach to the industry. 

 

But who asked for these changes? We see no evidence, Mr. 

Speaker, we see no evidence of who asked for the changes. Was 

it individuals within the industry? Was it associations within the 

industry? Or did anybody really ask for these changes? Is this 

something government wants to do because they have perhaps a 

hidden agenda or desire to see these changes for some other 

reasons, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And why was it determined that these changes needed to take 

place? Who made this determination? Again, Mr. Speaker, I 

ask, was it industry? Was it stakeholders within the industry 

that asked for these changes? If so, what did they identify as the 

reason for these changes? And how are these changes going to 

benefit the industry? How would these changes benefit the 

stakeholders within the industry? 

 

Those are the questions, Mr. Speaker, that certainly the 

government has failed to be able to provide that information 

within this Act and within the speeches of both the minister has 

given so far here to try to provide the information that would 

support the introduction of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again what consultations were carried out by the 

government? What did the government do to consult with the 

industry to determine that these changes were required and that 

these changes are the correct changes that will have a positive 

benefit to the economy and have a positive benefit to the 

industry? Did they hold industry-wide meetings? Did they meet 

with individuals? Did they meet with associations? Did they 

meet with anybody within the industry? 

 

And what form did those meetings take? Were they face-to-face 

meetings? Were they meetings that were held within the board 

rooms of the companies that are involved in the industry? Were 

these meetings that were held with individuals who are, I will 

say, viewed as experts within their field and are very much 

involved in the industry? Were the consultations simply done 

through perhaps a questionnaire? Or were the consultations 

done through perhaps an email being exchanged back and 

forth? What form did these consultations take, Mr. Speaker, and 

how in-depth were they? What did they really cover? 

 

What were the questions asked by the government and the 

government officials when they were meeting with the industry 

and the industry officials and the stakeholders from within that 

industry? What were those questions? How deep did those 

questions go, and how was it determined that these are the 

correct changes, these are, the amendments to this particular 

Act, are the correct ones that will have a benefit to the industry, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, who did the government consult 

with? Who did they meet? In their process of consulting — and 

we assume that they did consulting — who did they meet with? 

What organizations? What individuals? What groups? What 

associations? How did they meet? How did they consult? What 

were the subject matter of the discussions that took place 

between the two groups? And how was it determined, Mr. 

Speaker, how was it determined that the government feels 

comfortable with the amendments that they’re making here, the 

changes they’re making here, are the correct ones — the ones 

that will benefit, in the long run, benefit Saskatchewan? 

 

Because that’s what the role, I think, of any government is, Mr. 

Speaker, is to ensure that the changes that they bring forward 

are the correct changes, are the changes that will affect 

Saskatchewan people in a positive way, so not only the industry 

but the entire economy of this province, Mr. Speaker. Because 

oil and gas is a very big part of it, a very big part of that puzzle. 

And those changes will have good, positive effects if they’re the 

right changes. Same time, Mr. Speaker, they will have very 

negative effects if they’re the wrong changes. 

 

So we need to make sure that this government has met with the 

industry. But we need to know who they met with, when they 

met with them, what was the level of discussions, what form did 

the consultations take place. And how was it determined, how 

was it determined by the government that these changes that 

they propose in the Act are the correct changes? Are the 

changes that at the end of the day will serve the purpose, will 

serve the purpose of making sure Saskatchewan people benefit, 

benefit. Because that’s the role, Mr. Speaker, of the government 

when it introduced changes is to modernize the industry to 

make sure that changes are the changes that will affect and 

assist the industry to grow, to prosper. At the end of the day, if 

that’s achieved, then it will benefit Saskatchewan people. 

 

But we have to know how the government came to the 

conclusion that the changes that they are proposing here are the 

correct changes, are the changes that industry want, are the 

changes that industry needs. I suppose a yardstick to measure 

this, Mr. Speaker, is . . . A simple yardstick is, will these 

changes affect Saskatchewan people in a positive way? Will 

Saskatchewan people be the winners at the end of the day? Will 

they benefit from this? Will they benefit from these changes in 

a way that will secure a future in this great province? Not only 

secure the present, Mr. Speaker, but it’s important to know that 

the changes we make today will help secure our future for 

future generations in this province. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, that’s the role, I think that’s the role of 

anybody, whether it be within individuals within their family, 

whether it be the individuals within the fine province, or the 

role of elected people here, Mr. Speaker. At the end of the day, 

we will want to make sure that with the changes we make now, 

the things that we do now, will improve the future, will improve 

the lot of those people yet to come. 

 

Because I think that should be the goal of any of us is to be able 

to leave this legislature when the time comes — and they will 

look back on our time spent here whether it be in government or 

whether it be in opposition — and be able to say, you know, I 

believe that my participation in the process, my participation in 

the debates, my participation in the discussion of Bills and Acts, 

that we were able to set forward a framework, a structure of the 

economy that will make the economy stronger, make the 

economy better, for not only for the people who are here today, 

but for future generations yet to come. I think that’s very 



December 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6335 

important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another point, Mr. Speaker, is I would like to have the answer 

to — I haven’t been able to get it from the Bill; I haven’t been 

able to get it from going through the Hansard through the 

second reading speeches of the minister — is, how will these 

changes improve the welfare and the lives of Saskatchewan 

people? How will these changes improve things for 

Saskatchewan people? That certainly hasn’t been indicated 

here. 

 

We certainly have no suggestion from this government as to 

how these changes will have a positive effect on the people of 

this great province, whether they be involved in the industry 

themselves. And I’m certain we need to know that. We need to 

know how the people, the stakeholders within that industry, and 

how they will be affected and how these changes will improve 

their lot. 

 

But we also have to know that the people of Saskatchewan, 

people of Saskatchewan are going to be able to get a fair deal 

out of this and the people of Saskatchewan are going to benefit. 

And it doesn’t . . . And not those, Mr. Speaker, who are just 

involved in the oil and gas industry, but those people of 

Saskatchewan who are not involved directly in the oil and gas 

industry but are citizens of this great province of ours and who 

deserve to have an economy that is strong, is prosperous, and 

that they are able to provide for themselves and their families in 

a very positive and fruitful way. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot, there are a lot of questions left 

up in the air that certainly this government has failed to answer 

so far. And those are the questions, I suppose, that the 

opposition’s going to have to flesh out through our process of 

consulting with the industry and talking with stakeholders 

within the industry and trying to identify if the suggested 

changes here that the government is suggesting, proposing in 

amendments to this Act, are the right ones. 

 

Are they the ones that’s going to have a positive effect on the 

industry, have a positive effect on the stakeholders within that 

industry so the industry can grow, the industry can grow to 

support a growing economy? So that a growing economy will 

create a province of prosperity, a province where future 

generations will not only be able to live here, will want to come 

here and raise their families here, Mr. Speaker, because this will 

be a province where they can rely on a good, solid foundation 

of a solid economy, built on industries such as the oil and gas 

industry because the regulations and the changes within the Act 

are those that benefit the industry and benefit the stakeholders, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that a number of my 

colleagues will also have comments they will wish to make on 

this particular Bill. And there is a need to address this in a very 

detailed way, a very detailed way. So time will be required, Mr. 

Speaker, for the opposition to be able to carry out that 

consultation process and be able to ensure that the feedback we 

get from the industry and the stakeholders within that industry 

match with the suggestions that the government is making with 

their suggestions of the amendments to the Bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it will take time and we will require that time. 

So in order to ensure that my colleagues have ample 

opportunity to be able to express their thoughts and their wishes 

on this particular Bill and to make sure that we as the 

opposition have the opportunity to consult with the industry, 

consult with the stakeholders so we can make sure that when 

those changes are made, that they are the correct changes that 

will benefit the industry, will benefit the stakeholders within 

that industry so that the industry can grow and support a strong 

and growing economy in this province, so to do that, Mr. 

Speaker, we will need some time. And in order to have that 

time, I will now move adjournment of debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 157. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 144 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 144 — The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join in on debate here today with respect to Bill 144, 

The Litter Control Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker. And this is an 

interesting piece of legislation, and certainly we listened to the 

minister’s presentation as to why this piece of legislation is 

required, Mr. Speaker. We listened to the merits that were laid 

out, Mr. Speaker, and we have concern with specific aspects of 

why this piece of legislation has been put in place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

First of all from a practical perspective, it’s important that we 

understand what this piece of legislation actually proposes to 

do, and that is that . . . Right now the existing legislation allows 

government to increase or decrease both environmental 

handling charges and the refundable deposits, Mr. Speaker. And 

this proposed Bill lays out a schedule of fees, Mr. Speaker, 

makes a change to the ability to increase or decrease both the 

handling fees or the refundable deposits. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And it changes that environment, the new handling 

environment’s prescribed fees and lays out a schedule, Mr. 

Speaker. And this relates to a variety of containers and takes 

away the government’s ability to set environmental handling 

charges outside the legislature. But it does, however, allow the 

government to continue to set the refundable deposit by cabinet 

order, Mr. Speaker. So that’s one of the very practical pieces of 

what occurs through this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the minister laid out certain justifications as to why this 

legislation may be required, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve listened to 

that. But what is fundamental to this piece of legislation, and 

where we really think the crux of the debate should be at with 

this piece of legislation, is the changes to retroactivity within 



6336 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2010 

this piece of legislation. 

 

At the same time that it introduces provisions to prevent anyone 

from suing the government to recover environmental handling 

charges paid after April 1st, 1998, Mr. Speaker, so it prevents 

that recovery, Mr. Speaker, moving back to 1998. And the 

minister indicated that these charges are intended to address a 

current lawsuit and to prevent the province from being liable for 

up to $1 million or more in other potential legal actions, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So it’s a very, very interesting piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

at a fundamental question of making changes to legislation that 

go back and seem to, by the primary motive, to retroactively 

change property and civil rights of Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker, by expunging of property and civil rights, Mr. 

Speaker. So this is an interesting discussion and debate within 

this Assembly. 

 

It’s an interesting piece of legislation put forward by this 

government, Mr. Speaker, a government that is introducing 

legislation to prevent a potential lawsuit for somebody who may 

have been treated improperly by government in years past, Mr. 

Speaker, specifically as it relates to the charges that they’ve 

paid or the taxes that they’ve paid as it relates to environmental 

handling fees, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now of course this piece of legislation responds to pressures 

from a legal perspective on this government, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

also reflective of a Supreme Court of Canada decision in the 

1990s, as I understand, that made very specific that the service 

fees collected for purposes, these purposes, could not exceed 

the actual cost of the program, Mr. Speaker. And this was laid 

out in the 1990s and by doing so, Mr. Speaker, if in fact an 

individual or a business had paid more, Mr. Speaker, than the 

program or the service costs, Mr. Speaker, then the government 

could be liable. And that’s what we see in this circumstance 

where an individual apparently has made claim that that has 

been the case. 

 

So here we have a government that is reaching back 13 years, 

Mr. Speaker, and putting forward legislation that retroactively 

takes away the rights and affects the rights of Saskatchewan 

people. It’s an interesting piece of legislation. And I think we 

want to very, very sensitively and delicately consider the 

implications of this sort of reach from government into 

individuals’ lives and into reaching back in a retroactive fashion 

and to change a circumstance when there’s been a lawsuit filed 

against this government, Mr. Speaker. It’s pretty convenient for 

this government to simply change laws as individuals or groups 

that have been possibly wronged by this administration, by a 

previous administration. But the question is, is that fair, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

And as we look at this Bill as a whole, I think those are some of 

the contemplations that we have. Will this Bill fix the problem 

identified by the Sask Party? So I think that that’s a fair 

question. If in fact, as is laid out by the minister, and we talked 

about the different complications, will this Bill in fact fix the 

problems laid out by the Sask Party? 

 

And those are good considerations to have and I think, you 

know, we have lots of reason to be concerned that this 

government often misses the mark when it puts together 

legislation as it relates to its objective and then the unintended 

consequences that are subsequent to that, Mr. Speaker, and they 

haven’t done their due diligence in consultation and in deriving 

that legislation to make sure in fact it meets the objectives, Mr. 

Speaker, that they’re setting out to do. 

 

So that’s a fair, fair question. Does this legislation . . . Is it set in 

fact to provide the fix that the Sask Party is intending for it to 

provide, Mr. Speaker? That’s part one of the questions and I 

think the second question, and shouldn’t be dismissed in any 

small way, Mr. Speaker, is it fair? 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for permission 

with members of the House to take leave for the introduction of 

a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Greystone has 

asked for leave to introduce a guest. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone, the Minister for Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the House I’m delighted to 

introduce Rob Harasymchuk. He’s from St. Pete’s College in 

Muenster. He’s one of the leaders in that academic community, 

and certainly right across the province is recognized for his 

good efforts. And I just wonder if all members of the House 

would join me in welcoming Rob to his Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and we would 

certainly welcome . . . I’d like to welcome Rob Harasymchuk, I 

believe, from Muenster as well, representing our academic 

community, and able to observe an interesting discussion here 

this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to Bill 144, The Litter 

Control Amendment Act. 

 

And this really speaks about the reach of government, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s an interesting discussion here because 

basically this government found itself in a potential, a potential 

liability that they were having a lawsuit for an individual or an 

organization who had felt that they had been overcharged as it 

relates to environmental handling fees. And this government, to 

erase that problem, retroactively puts forward legislation that 

retroactively takes away the civil and property rights of an 



December 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6337 

individual, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now this is very far-reaching if we think about it from a 

perspective of whether or not this is fair. And this, you know, 

we need to put this in context, Mr. Speaker, and we have to 

watch whether or not this is a trend under the Sask Party 

government. Is this a willingness and a new direction of 

government wanting to reach well beyond its potential rightful 

jurisdiction and to actually expunge the property and civil rights 

of individuals here in Saskatchewan? It seems to be a little bit 

of a worrying trend, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

And the member from Cannington is heckling here right now. 

And I suspect he’s behind this legislation in a significant way, 

Mr. Speaker, that reaches out and takes away rights, Mr. 

Speaker, of individuals here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Very interesting piece of legislation. Interesting in the context, 

Mr. Speaker, where yesterday in question period the member 

from Prince Albert Northcote laid out the case and stood up for 

an individual, Mr. Speaker, who in fact was having some of 

their land expropriated in essence, Mr. Speaker, by this 

government. 

 

So it’s an interesting circumstance where yesterday, we have a 

farmer in here yesterday, a hard-working individual within this 

province who had land expropriated by this Sask Party 

government, actually taken away from him, or that was the 

proposition by the Minister of Agriculture as I understand it, 

Mr. Speaker, and by this Premier of course, Mr. Speaker. But 

now we see at this point in time a piece of legislation that in 

fact sets about expungement of the civil and property rights of 

an individual. A very interesting question. 

 

So I think we have to look at this legislation through a couple 

different lenses. And I was laying this out before because the 

minister laid out that they have some problems, and this 

legislation is in fact of course a solution to those problems. So 

what we need to make sure we understand is does this 

legislation provide the fix? Does it provide the fix required? 

 

Because what we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, on more cases than not, 

Mr. Speaker, is that in fact the policy derived, the legislation 

derived by this government isn’t in fact done so in a way that in 

fact will allow it to meet the objectives that they are trying to 

set out to achieve, Mr. Speaker. Sometimes they’ve actually set 

out in honourable pursuits, Mr. Speaker. Sometimes not. But 

they haven’t done the thoughtful consideration. They haven’t 

done the thoughtful consultation, Mr. Speaker, that allows them 

to then arrive to a point where their legislation will in fact 

address the problem that they’re trying to solve. 

 

So this is sort of the first part of these questions. Is this 

legislation like many other pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

that in fact will not provide the fix required and to what the 

minister laid out as the problem that was trying to be addressed, 

Mr. Speaker? And we’re not certain of that; that’s for sure, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s the first part that needs to be considered when 

we’re looking at Bill 144. 

 

But I think the most important part of this piece of legislation is, 

is the fix fair, Mr. Speaker? And this is a wider ranging debate, 

and certainly it will go on in other forums as well and certainly 

though committee structures and within this Assembly. 

I know many individuals who care about civil and property 

rights, Mr. Speaker, will be observing this Bill very closely. 

And I think it shouldn’t just be a passing glance that we look at 

what this government is doing; the reach within the personal 

lives of individuals, Mr. Speaker, and the willingness of this 

Sask Party government to expunge individuals of personal and 

civil rights, Mr. Speaker. And as we said yesterday, where in 

fact this Sask Party government, it would appear, is in 

movement to expropriate land from a hard-working farmer 

within this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it speaks to very interesting questions. It speaks to what 

role should government play in the lives of individuals, about 

boundaries, Mr. Speaker. And I find it interesting that the 

member from Cannington supports this piece of legislation that 

really reaches, reaches well beyond the traditional reach of 

government, Mr. Speaker, in fact retroactively going back 13 

years to 1998 and removing civil and property rights from 

individuals, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know many individuals from the constituency that that 

member represents in fact would favour themselves to be more 

independent of government than that. And they likely wouldn’t 

appreciate the hand of government coming in and playing the 

role that this government, that member, and this Premier have 

allowed it to do. And in fact I shouldn’t say allowed that, that 

legislation that they’ve created to reach well beyond the reach 

of government when we’re talking about civil liberties and 

rights of individuals. 

 

So these are the interesting questions. And I know it’s going to 

stoke hot debate, Mr. Speaker, across many communities and 

many groups, likely beyond our borders, that will be focusing in 

on this piece of legislation. Not so much, Mr. Speaker, about 

the actual Bill itself. Not even so much about how it relates to 

what it’s affecting on a practical level, but certainly in a level of 

what it does with civil and property rights of individuals, Mr. 

Speaker, and whether or not that’s the right decision for a 

government to make. And I think we need to be hugely 

thoughtful of this. 

 

And I don’t know if this Bill’s been debated within their caucus 

and discussed within their caucus. I don’t know if all members 

of that caucus were aware of the implications of this Bill and 

the kind of the step outside of the role of respecting the civil 

liberties of individuals — the rights, Mr. Speaker, of 

individuals, the rights to hold property, and to understand the 

impact of expunging of those rights, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think we have to be very cautious, Mr. Speaker. And if 

there’s a word that I would provide here, is that we want to 

exercise caution when looking at this piece of legislation and its 

motive, which is to basically deal with a problem where this 

government’s been on the hook for a potential wrongdoing — 

dollars owed to an individual where they’ve possibly been 

overcharged for a program, Mr. Speaker. And now this 

government by legislation is basically saying, well you’re not 

entitled to those dollars. You’re not going to have any . . . that 

circumstance dealt with. You’re not going to have those dollars, 

that could be by case argued rightfully theirs, provided back to 

them. 

 

So it’s a very interesting piece of legislation. And of course this 



6338 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2010 

is only one example when we talk about the one lawsuit. Of 

course there’s many different individuals who may find 

themselves in a similar circumstance. And now to have their 

rights circumvented or expunged through this piece of 

legislation . . . 

 

I think this is an interesting discussion. Goes well beyond sort 

of environmental handling fees and recycling programs, Mr. 

Speaker. Those are worthy discussions as well, and important 

discussions, important programs for us to make sure we are 

maintaining and in fact enriching, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And on that front we need to make sure that the consultation on 

this side from a very practical side has also gone on with the 

retailers, Mr. Speaker, with the recyclers, with Sarcan, with the 

different . . . right across the entire sector, Mr. Speaker, with the 

hoteliers, anyone that’s directly impacted by this legislation, to 

make sure that practically . . . Even if one were to believe that 

this piece of legislation were fair, and if one were to support it 

as this government is, Mr. Speaker, then is the fix that they’re 

putting forward going to be able to be effective in solving the 

problem that they’ve identified, Mr. Speaker? 

 

[16:45] 

 

Or is it like so many other pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

brought before this Assembly by the Sask Party government 

that have been derived in vacuum without the support of 

consultation and with those that understand their respective 

industries and sectors, Mr. Speaker? And has this legislation, or 

is this legislation going to have the same sort of impacts of 

those pieces of legislation that have been put together, Mr. 

Speaker, in a fashion that doesn’t support best public policy, 

Mr. Speaker? It doesn’t support it being successful in achieving 

the objective as laid out by this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s a discussion that we need to explore further. Of course 

we understand that this piece of legislation is partly in response 

to the Supreme Court of Canada’s ruling from the 1990s, Mr. 

Speaker, that as it relates to environmental handling fees, Mr. 

Speaker — and I’m sure that you would know this — that they 

can’t exceed the cost of the program or the service, Mr. 

Speaker. And if they exceed the cost of the program, they’re 

then seen as a tax, Mr. Speaker, and in fact an inappropriate tax. 

 

And so I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that that would be the 

justification for this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. And the 

changes, Mr. Speaker, is that an individual or a business must 

have put together a case that was supported, Mr. Speaker, that 

in fact detailed or put forward a argument that they hadn’t been 

treated properly and that they had in fact been charged too 

much, Mr. Speaker. And I think we have to be very cautious if 

someone has been wronged by government, someone has been 

wronged by government, that they get compensated and treated 

properly and at least fairly and equitably, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And to see a government go and change the rules, change 

legislation to expunge property and civil rights, Mr. Speaker, to 

avoid a potential payout where an individual’s been wronged, 

Mr. Speaker, seems to us to be reckless, Mr. Speaker. But to be 

going far beyond the practical piece of trying to save $1 million 

and setting a rather historic precedent, Mr. Speaker, inciting a 

willingness of this Sask Party government to reach into the lives 

of individuals, Mr. Speaker, and to do so in a way that really 

threatens what they own and threaten what they have, threaten 

what they know, Mr. Speaker, and threaten the civil rights that 

they’ve grown accustomed to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s a sad day in Saskatchewan in many ways when you 

have individuals that are worried about whether or not their 

government is in fact reaching too far in and expunging them of 

rights and civil liberties, Mr. Speaker — the freedom to own 

property, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a sad circumstance that we have 

individuals that raise these problems such as an individual, a 

farmer in the Shellbrook area that came to our Assembly here 

just yesterday, Mr. Speaker, and who had been — through an 

act of this government, a mistake of this government, admitted 

by this government — had been wronged, Mr. Speaker, who 

had purchased some land, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The response of this government to deal with the problem was 

to expropriate, Mr. Speaker. To bully the individual. To 

expunge and look beyond property rights and civil rights of an 

individual, Mr. Speaker, and to take his farm back, Mr. 

Speaker. To take his farm land back, Mr. Speaker. And I know 

many individuals, the number of individuals, that are going to 

be concerned about this, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . And I see the member’s heckling back from 

Cypress Hills, Mr. Speaker. And he’s defending the expunging 

of property and civil rights I suspect, Mr. Speaker, by doing do 

because he’s trying to intervene in this debate here, Mr. 

Speaker. And this is incredibly important. 

 

And here we have a government that’s set itself in a wilful 

fashion, Mr. Speaker, and put forward legislation that reaches 

well beyond the tip of the scope of government and in fact 

expunges property and civil rights. And then by very specific 

action, Mr. Speaker, we see a farmer from the Shellbrook area 

. . . and this may be just one example, Mr. Speaker, where this 

government is in fact, because of their own mistake, going to go 

and expropriate the land that has been purchased by this farmer, 

Mr. Speaker. This is cause for concern, Mr. Speaker. And I hear 

members on our side of the Assembly talking about other 

individuals that are calling their offices now as it relates to these 

kinds of behaviours, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a good discussion 

for us to have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we know where the members opposite line up. They think 

that they can overstep and take away property from individuals 

and expunge individuals of civil and property rights, Mr. 

Speaker. We see that by legislation here in Bill 144, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s their position, Mr. Speaker. We see that 

through action, Mr. Speaker, when they make a mistake and 

land is sold to an individual and their remedy to that is to 

expropriate that land from that individual, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well I can assure the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and I can assure 

the people of Saskatchewan that New Democrats are concerned 

by this kind of behaviour, this kind of knee-jerk bullying, this 

kind of overreach into the civil liberties and property rights of 

individuals, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we cast concern and caution over this piece of legislation 

that in fact serves as significant precedent if this piece of 

legislation passes. Where does it stop, is the question. Where 

does it stop? Today it’s as it relates to overcharging individuals, 



December 1, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6339 

individuals who are arguably entitled to dollars that they’re 

owed by government through a program or that they potentially 

have been overcharged. That’s what I understand they are 

putting forward through their lawsuit. And this government, to 

deal with that lawsuit, expunges them of the right to collect the 

dollars that they’re arguing that they’re rightfully owed by 

government. 

 

Well let’s compare that then to yesterday, Mr. Speaker, where a 

case is highlighted and one of our hardworking producers, 

farmers, in this province has to come to this Assembly to stand 

up for his land, Mr. Speaker, to stand up for his land as a result 

of this government making a mistake, Mr. Speaker. It wasn’t his 

mistake. It wasn’t some private mistake. It was a mistake of this 

government. And the knee-jerk bullying response of this 

government is to look beyond the civil and property rights of 

that individual and to expropriate his land, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This causes concern for us as New Democrats. It causes huge 

concern for Saskatchewan people, and I don’t think it represents 

the Saskatchewan that we believe in, Mr. Speaker, one where 

individuals can work hard to make gains, to build businesses, to 

build farms, all to simply be taken away from them by this Sask 

Party Premier and this government, Mr. Speaker, in many cases 

because of their own wrongdoing, because of their own 

mistakes, this government’s own mistake. 

 

So the question is what next piece of legislation is going to be 

brought forward? How far? This year reaches back 13 years 

retroactively, takes away the rights of an individual or business, 

Mr. Speaker. The question is what’s next? How far back are we 

going to reach, Mr. Speaker? What other areas is this 

government going to reach back, and what rights are they going 

to expunge Saskatchewan people of, Mr. Speaker? 

 

It’s of huge concern when it affects, Mr. Speaker, the 

livelihood, the business practice, Mr. Speaker, of individuals, 

the ability to own property, Mr. Speaker. And we see this 

government recklessly playing with these pretty crucial values 

to our society, Mr. Speaker — the ability that if you set out, 

work hard, buy some land, go about your business, and if 

you’re out some money, that you can collect on that; the ability 

that if you go and buy some land and you’ve worked hard and 

you grow your farm, that you should be able to farm it, Mr. 

Speaker; and in the case of a mistake, Mr. Speaker, a mistake of 

this government’s own making, that it shouldn’t come at your 

loss, at your hurt, and your detriment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That this government . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The 

member again is heckling, from Cypress Hills. He’s shouting 

from his chair, Mr. Speaker. I’d urge him to take his feet in this 

debate, Mr. Speaker. And I’m surprised, Mr. Speaker, that the 

member from Cypress Hills is so willing, so willing to support a 

piece of legislation which I guess I would understand he’s a full 

part of here, Mr. Speaker, that takes away civil and property 

rights of individuals here in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think what the member from Cypress Hills here and his 

willingness to support this legislation, Mr. Speaker, will likely 

face across his constituency are questions of what’s next, Mr. 

Member? What’s next, Mr. Premier? Is it my herd? Is it my 

land? Is it my home? Is it my business? What do you think, Mr. 

Minister, that you can next reach into and take? Something that 

individuals and businesses have worked hard to build in many 

cases, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking about businesses and farms 

in this province. We’re talking about individuals and families, 

Mr. Speaker, families that in many cases have passed along 

businesses by the generation and in the same case on the family 

farm, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we all have a different story that connects back to the 

homesteading time in this province and the family farm, Mr. 

Speaker. We can share the stories of different family 

businesses, Mr. Speaker, that are passed along through 

generations, that wealth of knowledge and the histories and the 

way of life, Mr. Speaker, that are fundamental, and the hard 

work, Mr. Speaker, to build those assets, to build that property 

base, Mr. Speaker, to build a business that is successful. 

 

And all of a sudden we have a government that believes they 

can run roughshod over what an individual is owed, Mr. 

Speaker. So if a business or an individual is rightfully owed 

money by government out of government’s mistake, they 

should have access to collecting those dollars, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

not fair just to change legislation that reaches back 13 years, 

retroactively taking away critical rights of what makes us proud 

and independent as Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, something that 

goes back and significantly impacts our heritage, our proud 

traditions, Mr. Speaker, reaching back into businesses in many 

cases or farms, Mr. Speaker, that have been built and have been 

passed along and have been worked for by Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker. Well I think this hand of government that 

this Premier and this Sask Party government . . . seems to all 

too willingly to reach well beyond the scope, of a rightful 

scope, Mr. Speaker, is of concern. The fact that they’re willing 

to go after individuals who are owed money by this 

government, changing legislation, expunging of property and 

civil rights, Mr. Speaker, should be of concern to all of us, Mr. 

Speaker, should be of concern to all of us. 

 

And if I were the member from Cypress Hills, I would get ready 

to explain. Instead of heckling in the Assembly to support this 

far-reaching legislation, I would get ready to explain to the 

ranchers, to the farm families in his constituency, the business 

owners, Mr. Speaker, about why he thinks he should be able to 

reach back in, Mr. Speaker, and take away the assets, the 

business that they’ve worked so hard to develop, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What’s next? Farm machinery? Livestock, Mr. Speaker? 

Horses? You know, this is the question, Mr. Speaker, because 

this is just politically expedient for this government to deal, to 

deal, Mr. Speaker, with a problem that comes out . . . a lawsuit 

from an individual who finds that they’re owed by government, 

that they’ve been not treated properly, Mr. Speaker, and in fact 

they’re owed dollars by government. 

 

Well does this government deal with them fairly? Do they deal 

directly with them? Do they deal with our judiciary through this 

process? No, Mr. Speaker. They expunge them of their civil 

rights, Mr. Speaker. This is a government, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

reaching well beyond where it should, that’s reaching into the 

independence of individuals and businesses, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

taking away the very rights that are important to people across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And we’re not going to simply pass, Mr. Speaker, a piece of 



6340 Saskatchewan Hansard December 1, 2010 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that has this sort of reach, that has this 

sort of reach. We’re going to pass . . . raise caution, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’re going to say, is this right? Because what we 

know is when these guys put together legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

they get it wrong on one front because they don’t consult. They 

don’t go about it in an even-handed fashion. They create it in a 

vacuum. And in fact they fail in the sense of they set an 

objective, and their legislation very, very rarely actually will 

allow them to achieve that objective, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the bigger question on this — because that’s the first 

question — will this fix the problem that they’re trying to fix? 

Will this fix this, provide the solution? The bigger question, Mr. 

Speaker, is, is it right? Is it right? Is it fair, Mr. Speaker? And 

this is where we’re going pause and say we need to push back 

when we see government overstepping boundaries, Mr. 

Speaker, when we see a government that seems so willing to 

take away land from individuals, when we see a government 

that’s willing to take and expunge the property and civil rights 

of individuals, Mr. Speaker, and we don’t see . . . We have huge 

concern, Mr. Speaker, with that aspect of this Bill. 

 

So this is the practical nature, Mr. Speaker, of, you know, is this 

handling, you know, environmental handling fees and whatnot 

properly? Does this work with the recycling sector, Mr. 

Speaker? Those are important questions from a practical nature. 

 

But a bigger one, Mr. Speaker, and one that I have huge 

concern for is that this oversteps, potentially in a major way, 

Mr. Speaker, the role of government in overstepping its bounds 

and expunging property and civil rights and affecting families 

and businesses and farms across this province and their ability 

to retain assets and own land, Mr. Speaker — something that 

just doesn’t sit well with me, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t sit well 

with New Democrats, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re going to continue to raise questions on this front because 

the question is where does it stop? Because once this precedent 

is set, Mr. Speaker, the expunging of civil and property rights, 

Mr. Speaker, what’s next, Mr. Speaker? What are they going 

after next? They might be asking the member from Greystone, 

Mr. Speaker, what are you coming after? And they’re the 

business people or landowners, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But at this point in time, with many questions yet to be asked, 

Mr. Speaker, on a Bill that should be thoughtfully considered 

from the question of fairness, Mr. Speaker, I will at this point in 

time adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Being now 5 p.m., this Assembly 

stands adjourned until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6309 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6309 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6309 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6309 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6309 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6309 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6309 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6336 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6310 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6310 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6310 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6310 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6310 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 World AIDS Day 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6311 

 Aboriginal AIDS Awareness Week 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6311 

 Girl Guides Celebrate Their 100th Anniversary 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6311 

 Extraordinary Examples of Leadership 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6312 

 One of Canada’s Most Powerful Women 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6312 

 Dismantling the Medicare System 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6312 

 Cadet Squadrons Honoured 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6312 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Management of Health Care System 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6313 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6313 

 Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6314 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6314 

 Children in Care 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6315 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6315 

 Combatting AIDS 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6316 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6316 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6317 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6318 

 Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6320 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6322 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 159 — The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6327 

 Bill No. 160 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6327 

 Bill No. 158 — The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6330 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 6331 



 

 Bill No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6332 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6335 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


