




















































Hansard: April 27, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 51B  TUESDAY, APRIL 27, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5099 

 April 27, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 13:30.] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

The Speaker: — Being now 1:30, the House will resume with 

the beginning of routine proceedings. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it is an honour for me to 

be able to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Assembly today some very special guests that are seated in 

your gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s well known across the province, and frankly 

around the world, that the best world junior hockey tournament 

was hosted in the province of Saskatchewan just a few months 

ago. And, Mr. Speaker, there’ll be a final report to be released 

on the success of that report just in a few hours from now. And 

the report will be released by the individuals that it’s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to members of the 

Assembly. 

 

Again, seated in your gallery today, in no particular order by the 

way, although I’ll go a bit off script and introduce His Worship, 

Mayor Atchison from Saskatoon, who was a key figure in 

attracting the tournament to the province of Saskatchewan. 

Mayor Atchison, it’s good to have him in the Assembly today. 

 

Also joining us, chief operating officer for Hockey Canada, 

Scott Smith. Scott Farley, also with Hockey Canada, has joined 

us. The president of the 2010 world junior championship host 

committee and just a community leader, a provincial leader 

really, owner of one of the other WHL [Western Hockey 

League] teams that doesn’t play in Swift Current, Jack Brodsky, 

has joined us today. Mr. Speaker, Al Hubbs is president of the 

Saskatchewan Hockey Association. John Lee, member of the 

2010 host committee, Ron Robison, commissioner of the 

Western Hockey League, has also joined us today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have Al Ford who was really involved in, 

well in all aspects of the tournament, but really helped make the 

Regina element of that tournament a success along with Mayor 

Fiacco and his team. We also want to welcome Joe Bloski who 

is a vice-president for the host committee. Dave Pettigrew has 

also joined us. And, Mr. Speaker, not in the gallery, but on the 

floor, also a vice-president for that successful host committee, 

the member for Silver Springs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to welcome these 

individuals to their gallery. And, oh, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know 

how I could have missed Hugh Vassos. Because if there is a 

successful event that is involved in the city of Saskatoon — 

whether it’s the best Vanier Cup ever or the best World Juniors 

ever — you know that Hugh Vassos is going to be a part of it. 

And more than that, he was a leader in making this event 

happen for our province. 

 

I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming these individuals 

to their Legislative Assembly today. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 

Premier in welcoming Mayor Atchison and the great team that 

put together a wonderful effort to attract the world junior 

champions, and most of all, to all the volunteers. And I know 

how difficult it is to put together a working group and a bid. 

And it’s just a great effort. 

 

And I want to say to the Premier, because I know his 

government obviously is involved as well in making these 

things happen, and also to Al Ford, good friend over the years. 

Good to see you here too, Al. A great effort and I just want to 

congratulate all involved in this effort and we’ll do it again. 

Congratulations. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s my pleasure today to introduce a school group visiting from 

my constituency, actually the first school group I’ve had the 

pleasure of introducing in this Assembly — of course northwest 

Saskatchewan being quite a distance from Regina. 

 

The school group is from Northwood Christian School in 

Leoville, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. There’s six students from 

grade 6 to 9, their teacher, Mr. Scott Toews, chaperones Murray 

Loewen and Dale Ensz, and students Kaylee, Mary-Jo, Sheldon, 

Paula, Emery, and Braden. And I look forward to getting 

together with them later today, and thank you very much for 

being here and welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Assembly it gives me a great pleasure 

again to introduce Heather Malek who’s a film and television 

editor here in Saskatchewan, in Regina, who is working very 

hard to try to help the government understand the error of their 

ways with respect to shutting down SCN [Saskatchewan 

Communications Network]. And she is in the west gallery. 

 

While I’m on my feet, actually I have two very special guests to 

introduce. In the east gallery, my husband Blair McDaid who 

has taken a leave from his job as a union rep at SEIU [Service 

Employees International Union] so I can do this work. He’s 

here today, as is my two-year-old daughter Ophelia who has 

taken leave from all her friends, little friends in Saskatoon, to 

come out and hang out here in Regina. And it’s very good to 

see them here today, although briefly, and it’s great to see them 

here actually while my toddler is awake. Anyway, thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

first want to join with the member opposite in welcoming 

Heather Malek to the Legislative Assembly. We had a very 

good discussion late yesterday afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m also on my feet I want to introduce to 



5100 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

you and through you to the members of the Assembly 18 

students from the adult basic education class at the Southeast 

Regional College in Weyburn. Mr. Speaker, they are joined by 

their teachers, Bev Kulach, Shannon King, and Anna Fish, and 

their chaperone Terri Wilkinson. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a class that over the last number of years 

that I’ve been the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

of, had the opportunity to introduce in this Assembly and also 

to visit them at their class in Weyburn. Ms. Fish, one of the 

teachers, has been always good in inviting me to class and I 

look forward to meeting with these students after the routine 

proceedings. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you I’d like to introduce 37 grade 

10 students from the Melville Comprehensive School in 

Melville. I also want to mention their teachers, Mr. Speaker, 

Perry Ostapowich and Glenda Yuzik. I think many of my 

colleagues will remember them. 

 

Year after year, Mr. Ostapowich and the teachers out there 

bring the students in, and we really appreciate that. We want to 

get that message through to him. We appreciate the interest that 

he takes in the legislature and passes on and gives the 

opportunity to the students to see how this legislature functions. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to welcome Mr. 

Ostapowich and Ms. Yuzik and the grade 10 students from 

Melville to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I’d 

like to introduce some guests from the labour community here 

with us today. Sitting in the east gallery, Larry Hubich, 

president of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, along with 

Gunnar Passmore, with the building trades. In your gallery, we 

have Don Anderson from the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of 

Labour], Cara Banks, and Larry Kowalchuk from RWDSU 

[Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union]. I ask all 

members to welcome these trade unionists to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 

like to join the member opposite, to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly, in reiterating that welcome to Mr. 

Hubich and other members of the trade union movement. 

Obviously they play an important role within contemporary 

Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I ask all 

members to join me in this welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, 

through you, and to all members of the Assembly two guests 

that are seated in the Speaker’s gallery today. Perhaps they can 

give a little wave when I introduce them. One of them is Adison 

Mosiondz and she is with Burton Gerspacher. That’s her 

boyfriend. And as you can tell, Gerspacher is a wonderful 

German name. 

 

I am very excited that Adison has found a nice young German 

man given that Adison is a proud daughter of Brigitta and 

Darrell Mosiondz. And Brigitta’s parents are Adi and Paula 

Traweger. Now Adi and Paula Traweger are very, very, very 

good friends of my family. They were very close with my 

parents, and so they are my daughter’s adopted grandmother 

right now, and grandfather. 

 

And so I’ve known Adison since she was born, and she’s a 

wonderful young woman. She’s going to be attending university 

this fall, and she’s getting ready to do that. And Mr. Burton 

Gerspacher has aspirations of going into medicine. So I wish 

them a very successful education in Saskatchewan here. And I 

would like all my colleagues to welcome them to the legislature 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, through 

you to all the members of the Assembly I’d like to join the 

Minister of Agriculture, the member from Melville-Saltcoats, in 

welcoming the Melville school group here today. 

 

There’s one very special person among that group, a family 

member of mine. I consider her a niece; she’s actually more of a 

cousin: Ms. Taylor Hudema, Mr. Speaker. We spend many 

Christmases together and very many family gatherings. And 

I’m very happy to welcome her here today. She’s actually 

giving me a little wave there, Taylor. Didn’t mean to embarrass 

her. But I’d ask all members to welcome Taylor to her 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned 

about the safety of our highways. This particular petition 

pertains to Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and the 

junction of No. 1. This highway, Mr. Speaker, is a year-round 

traffic route to tourist destinations as well as serving three 

major inland grain terminals. And the prayer goes on to read, 

Mr. Speaker, as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and 

the junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety 

for Saskatchewan’s motoring public. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this petition is signed by the good folks from Melville, 

Kelliher, Fort Qu’Appelle, Balcarres, and Lebret, 

Saskatchewan. I so submit. 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5101 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of the protection of wildlife habitat 

lands. And, Mr. Speaker, the wildlife habitat Act protects 3.4 

million acres of uplands and wetlands, or one-third of all 

wildlife habitat lands in Saskatchewan, in their natural state. 

And there is a number of people across the province that are 

concerned that this government is repealing the schedule listing 

these designated lands with the proposed amendments currently 

tabled in this House. And: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately and 

without delay recognize the importance of the protection 

of wildlife habitat lands and immediately withdraw 

proposed amendments that will negatively affect the 

protection of wildlife habitat lands; 

 

And in so doing, cause the provincial government to 

commit to meaningful and adequate consultation with all 

stakeholders that will be affected by future legislative 

changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens in Rocanville and 

Moosomin. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition in 

support of maintaining educational assistants in the province. 

This petition indicates that all children have the right to learn in 

a supportive and stress free environment and that government 

data shows the growing numbers of students requiring 

additional support in school in order to succeed. Mr. Speaker, 

the government has a document that was published that 

indicates that there’s going to be a significant reduction in the 

number of EAs [educational assistant] in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads: 

 

Cause the government to provide funding for the required 

number of educational assistants to provide special needs 

students with the support they need and maintain a 

positive learning environment for all students. 

 

And this petition is signed by people in Saskatoon, Bruno, and 

Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens in 

Saskatchewan calling for the reinstatement of the domestic 

abuse outreach program. And we know that the domestic abuse 

outreach program provided a number of valuable services to 

women victims of domestic violence and their children, 

including helping women to find emergency shelter and 

accompanying them to their homes, court, and hospital or police 

station. And we know this government cut the program on 

December 31st, 2009, without consultation with the 

community. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to reinstate the domestic abuse outreach 

program as a provincial government service and make it 

available in all parts of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens throughout 

the province. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of Highway 135. These concerns on the petition 

address the concerns of the community of Pelican Narrows. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to pave the 7 kilometres of Highway 135 

to the community of Pelican Narrows as committed on 

August 24th, 2007. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Pelican Narrows. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that has been circulated by the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition, a petition in support of affordable 

undergraduate tuition and a call on the Sask Party government 

to have its actions match its words. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average of 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitions will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Swift Current. I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of financial assistance for the town 

of Duck Lake water project. The petition is being circulated, 

Mr. Speaker, because of the exorbitant amount that Duck Lake 

citizens pay for clean, safe water, up to close to $200 per month 



5102 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

for drinkable water. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by good folks from the town 

of Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of rural residents who have 

been directed by a government ministry that they may no longer 

treat potable water using methods approved by Sask Health, and 

that they have been doing so for over 30 years and have paid 

large amounts for the domestic systems and in-home treatment 

equipment. And the alternative water supply referred to by 

government ministries is a private operator offering treated, 

non-pressurized water at great cost, with no guarantee of 

quality, quantity, and availability of water. And the prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives, to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management And Protection 

Act, 2002, and The Water Regulations, 2002, and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by the good residents 

of Furdale and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a 

petition in support of protecting Saskatchewan workers. Mr. 

Speaker, according to the Workers’ Compensation Board, 34 

people were killed in the workplace in Saskatchewan in 2010. 

Alone over the number of years, 52 potash workers have been 

killed on the job, and, Mr. Speaker, the working people of 

Saskatchewan should never be expected to put their lives at risk 

when doing their job. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Cause the government to immediately recognize the 

importance of creating a safe and healthy working 

environment for all people of Saskatchewan, and in so 

doing cause the government to support the hard work and 

integrity of occupational health and safety officers and 

respect their authority by supporting them in the 

performance of their duties. And in so doing create a 

culture and atmosphere of respect for working people by 

upholding the high standards of occupational health and 

safety and by honouring those workers who have been 

killed in the workplace in Saskatchewan. 

 

I so present. The petition is signed by people from Esterhazy, 

Tantallon, and Saskatoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

rise and present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. The petitioners note that freedom from poverty 

is an enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. The prayer 

reads: 

 

That the honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased 

to cause the government to act as quickly as possible to 

develop an effective and sustainable poverty elimination 

strategy for the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of the city of 

North Battleford. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 

about this government’s disregard for people’s legal, 

constitutional, and human rights. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today’s petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon and Moose 

Jaw and I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise once again here today to present petitions on behalf of 

concerned residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to 

the unprecedented mismanagement of our finances by the Sask 

Party. They allude to the two consecutive $1 billion deficits put 

forward in two years and billions of dollars of debt growth 

under the Sask Party. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5103 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Saskatoon. 

I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to rise again today to present a petition in support of the 

Saskatchewan film and television industry. This petition is 

signed by concerned citizens who are worried that this 

government has let the film and television industry languish for 

two and a half years and then has dealt a death blow or near 

death blow to the industry with the closure of SCN, based on 

ideology rather than good public policy. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to make changes to the film employment tax 

credit that will allow the Saskatchewan film industry to be 

more competitive with other provinces, to reverse its 

decision to shut down the Saskatchewan Communications 

Network, and to work with the industry to reverse the 

decline in film production. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed by residents of Moose Jaw and Regina. I 

so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Fellowship for Reconciliation and Peace 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Fellowship for 

Reconciliation and Peace is a group of Jews, Muslims, and 

other individuals in Saskatoon. The group dedicates to itself to 

help bring about reconciliation and peace locally and, by 

extension, to their sisters and brothers in the Middle East. The 

Fellowship for Reconciliation and Peace organizes support for 

Muslims and Jews, Israelis and Palestinians who are concerned 

about the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. 

 

In particular, the fellowship promotes understanding and action 

through dialogue within and between those communities. The 

fellowship emphasizes the human cost of violence in the 

Israeli-Palestinian conflict, taking a strong stand against all 

violence and working for peace. 

 

The Fellowship for Reconciliation and Peace has an eight-year 

history. It has hosted a number of public memorials for the 

innocent victims of the violence in the Middle East and it’s 

given presentations on peace and justice issues in Saskatoon 

and Regina. It has organized a number of interfaith dinners, 

enabling the Jewish population to attend a mosque, the Muslim 

community to visit a synagogue, and for each group to learn 

first-hand about the traditions and beliefs of the other. 

 

The Fellowship for Reconciliation and Peace is part of a global 

civil society movement seeking to advance justice, 

reconciliation of peace for all the peoples in the Middle East. I 

ask all members to join me in commending the Fellowship for 

Reconciliation and Peace in Saskatoon for its continued efforts 

in this regard. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Swift Current. 

 

Swift Current Fire Department’s 100th Anniversary 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 

Friday I had the opportunity to attend the open house hosted by 

the Swift Current Fire Department in honour of their 100th 

anniversary, Mr. Speaker. The construction of the first Swift 

Current fire hall was completed in 1910, even before the city 

was incorporated and, Mr. Speaker, it was a hub for the entire 

community and served as the town hall, the weigh scale. There 

was a bell tower that was tested four times daily. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in recognition of the event, the firefighters with 

the help of some volunteers brought back one of the earliest fire 

trucks in the community — a 1927 pumper truck that was used 

through till the 1960s. I had the chance to ride on the truck — 

not operate it, I want to be clear, Mr. Speaker. It’s currently 

now housed in a museum but everything seems to be in working 

order. In addition to the open house, there was a plaque 

unveiled to help commemorate the anniversary. The firefighters 

had a gala dance and dinner on Saturday for the past and present 

members of the fire . . . that the member for Cypress Hills 

attended, Mr. Speaker. The government helped mark the 

occasion with a grant under the Building Pride program. And 

Acting Fire Chief Pilon and his staff really made this possible, a 

celebration for the entire community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, we want to 

acknowledge the 100th anniversary. We want to acknowledge 

the firefighters in Swift Current, past and present, indeed 

firefighters — volunteer and career — right across our province 

who continue to make Saskatchewan as safe as possible. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Festival of Words Launches Program and Honours 

Moose Jaw Couple 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I along 

with the member from Moose Jaw North were in attendance at a 

very important event on April 22nd. The Saskatchewan Festival 

of Words announced their lineup for their 14th annual festival 

to be held in Moose Jaw. This year the festival will run from 

July 15th to 18th and will feature more than 60 events. Several 

award-winning authors will be in attendance along with a 

poetry slam, a songwriting workshop, a musical production, and 

programs for children and teens. Each year the Festival of 



5104 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

Words attracts people from far and wide, and I am certain that 

this year will be no different. The exciting list of presenters and 

activities promise to appeal to literary fans of all ages. 

 

But not only did the festival launch this year’s program. They 

also paid tribute to two well-known citizens of Moose Jaw. 

Leith Knight and her late husband, Cy, were the recipients of 

the Moose Jaw Honours Award. Leith and Cy have been 

dedicated members of our community for many years. Cy, as 

the host of the Mailbag show on CHAB, was known by many in 

the area. And Leith continues to provide insight into our history 

in a Moose Jaw Times-Herald column as well as presenting to 

local groups. 

 

The honour was certainly well placed, and I ask all of my 

colleagues to join with me and the selection committee and 

countless Moose Jaw residents to thank the Knights for their 

service to our community and to join me in congratulating the 

Saskatchewan Festival of Words on the launch of their 14th 

season. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Spring Fling Supports Persons with Intellectual Disabilities 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This previous weekend I 

had the pleasure of attending Regina and district’s annual 

association community fundraising Spring Fling. This 

association was founded in 1952 by a group of parents with 

children with disabilities. Now these parents shared the belief 

that children with mental disabilities should be included in 

society rather than institutionalized. These children are capable 

of amazing feats. 

 

One example is the Best Buddies Blues Band from LeBoldus 

High School in Regina. Now this band is made up of singers 

and musicians with intellectual disabilities. Mr. Speaker, they 

sure do know how to sing the blues and bring a crowd to its 

feet. 

 

I would like to recognize Ms. Iris Miller-Dennis, who did an 

outstanding job of coordinating the banquet. Now the tireless 

effort of Iris and the banquet committee made the evening a 

resounding success. The evening was emceed by Elizabeth 

Popowich and her son Nick. Now Nick has Down’s syndrome, 

but with a little help from his mom he did a magnificent job as 

master of ceremonies for the event. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like the Assembly to recognize the Regina 

& District Association for Community Living for helping those 

with intellectual disabilities live life to their fullest. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Prince Albert Resident to Head Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce will soon have a new chairperson. Prince Albert’s 

own Richard Ahenakew will take over the reins in May when 

the chamber holds its 2010 conference, fittingly in Prince 

Albert. 

 

Ahenakew is currently a Vice-Chair of the provincial chamber, 

and will be the first First Nations citizen to head up the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. And Mr. Speaker, his 

hometown could not be more proud. 

 

Richard Ahenakew is a member of the Ahtahkakoop First 

Nation. He has been the general manager of the Northern Lights 

Casino for five years, and has worked there for a total of 14 

years. He’s well known throughout our city and contributes 

tremendously to our community. 

 

Richard is instrumental in organizing the perpetually successful 

Thanksgiving Day powwow each year in Prince Albert. He 

supports a number of other organizations as well, such as this 

year’s Tim Hortons Camp Day fundraiser. And in his capacity 

as general manager of the Northern Lights Casino, Richard is 

often seen presenting cheques to organizations such as the 

Victoria Hospital Foundation, local schools and charities, and 

community organizations. 

 

It seems that where there is a need in Prince Albert, Richard 

finds a way to help out. I know that he will do a great job as 

president of the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. His 

tremendous people skills and his acute business acumen will 

serve him well in his new position. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all 

members join with me in congratulating Prince Albert’s 

Richard Ahenakew, the next president of the Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Saskatchewan Party Nomination in The Battlefords 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night the 

Saskatchewan Party nomination was held in The Battlefords, 

with two great candidates seeking that nomination. It is certain 

that The Battlefords will be a hotly contested seat during the 

2011 election and I am proud to announce that the 

Saskatchewan Party will be aptly represented by Herb Cox in 

2011. 

 

Mr. Cox said, “I think our chances of winning this seat this time 

around have increased substantially.” Mr. Speaker, I think he’s 

right. The current NDP representative is seen as part of a tired, 

old government that has lost touch with the people of 

Saskatchewan. The NDP member for The Battlefords is even 

publicly against $700 million investment in a natural gas power 

plant in his area. It is no wonder more than 400 people came out 

to choose a candidate that will win in The Battlefords. 

 

The people of The Battlefords have grown tired of his 

increasingly tired rhetoric and inability to deliver on promises. 

The people of The Battlefords have seen that the Saskatchewan 

Party can deliver well in government and are excited that in 

2011 they will be served by a Saskatchewan Party MLA. I 

would like to congratulate Herb Cox who is part of . . . the 

Saskatchewan Party candidate and believe that he will serve his 

constituents well after 2011. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5105 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Coyotes in Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, 37 coyote carcasses were found 

last week in Alberta with their paws cut off. According to a 

spokesman for the Alberta government it’s “possible the hunter 

was hoping to cash in on a bounty offered by the Saskatchewan 

government.” 

 

As of March 15th, 3,500 coyotes have been killed as a result of 

the Sask Party government’s coyote killing program. This 

means that the Saskatchewan taxpayers have paid $610,000 of 

their hard-earned money for an ill-thought-out and short-sighted 

program. And now we find out that the money is going to 

Alberta. 

 

Instead where has this government turned to save a measly 

$610,000? They cut funding to the domestic outreach abuse 

program. They cut funding to the Dutch elm disease program. 

They tore up the bilateral agreement that marked the remaining 

shred of consultation between the FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations] and the Ministry of 

Environment. Instead we’re paying Albertans to kill coyotes in 

their province, leaving the carcasses in a provincial park, 

chopping off their paws, and driving across the border to collect 

a quick 20 bucks. And to top it all off, is this program even a 

little bit effective? 

 

According to an article in The Globe and Mail last weekend, 

and I quote, “Animal scientists are virtually unanimous in 

saying no . . . Dalhousie University ethologist Simon Gadbois 

says taxpayers are putting out money for something with no 

positive outcome.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Sask Party government is asking 

Saskatchewan people to pay the price for their short-sighted, 

ineffective, and ridiculous proposals. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to 

introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Joining us I see in the gallery is a delegation from 

India. They come from Chandi. They’re here hosted by Mr. 

G.V. Shankar who is a successful business person in Saskatoon. 

The Minister of Energy and Resources and myself look forward 

to meeting with the group. 

 

And we can’t stress enough the importance of trade missions 

from India and the trade that takes place with Saskatchewan and 

Canada. Mr. Speaker, a stat that I know all members are very 

proud of, 46 per cent of all trade between Canada and India 

originates here in Saskatchewan, and that’s something that we 

pay tribute to the delegation, and we look forward to your 

meeting. I ask all members to join with me in welcoming this 

delegation to our province. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from The Battlefords on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Taylor: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has asked 

for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, I want to join the Minister of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan in welcoming the delegation from India. The 

New Democrat opposition agrees that international trade is very 

valuable to the people of Saskatchewan and to those we trade 

with. We recognize the value that India provides to 

Saskatchewan traders, Mr. Speaker. And we hope that the 

delegation enjoys their time in Saskatchewan and that it is a 

very productive time while they are here. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce a 

guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Greystone has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you to all members of this House, I’d like to 

introduce Dr. Janusz Koziński, the Dean of Engineering at the 

University of Saskatchewan. He’s joined us this afternoon. Dr. 

Koziński also plays a vital role as far as serving the people of 

this province, as he serves on the board of Innovation 

Saskatchewan. And I’d wonder if all members of this 

distinguished Assembly could join me in welcoming the dean to 

his Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Melville-Saltcoats 

on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 



5106 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in the west gallery I’d like to introduce Helen 

Finucane from Carlyle. She’s on the board of directors of the 

Stock Growers. Also with Helen today is Chad MacPherson 

who is general manager of the Stock Growers, Mr. Speaker. 

And they’re here today taking in the proceedings of the 

legislature with great interest in The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act that’s going to be debated later today and hoping that that 

Bill pass. So I’d like everyone to welcome them to their 

legislature. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Interprovincial Agreements 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, on March 30th 

a notice of motion was put forward in the British Columbia 

legislature, and on April 10th a debate was taking place and part 

of the motion introduced by, or the speech by Mr. Horne was, I 

move, “Be it resolved that this House support the creation of the 

New West Partnership”. 

 

My question to the Premier is, in light of the fact that this is 

being debated in other provinces in western Canada, is the 

Premier planning to sign the new West partnership/TILMA 

[Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement] later this 

week? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — No, Mr. Speaker. We wouldn’t be signing a 

document as referenced just now by the Opposition Leader. 

We’ve said pretty clearly prior to the election, we’ve said since, 

that TILMA was not on for the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

We also said we did seek a improvement in internal trade, 

improvement in internal labour mobility. We wanted to build on 

the success of former Premier Calvert and former Premier Doer 

in terms of their national efforts on labour mobility. And ours 

was a focus nationally, but yes, also regionally. 

 

There are the three have provinces in western Canada: Alberta, 

BC [British Columbia], and Saskatchewan. They represent a 

significant gross domestic product market that we wish our 

people to be able to access with as few barriers as possible. Mr. 

Speaker, November of ’07, the people of Saskatchewan got rid 

of the biggest barrier to economic growth in the province — 

members opposite as the government. 

 

But if we can, but if we can sign an agreement, Mr. Speaker, 

that accommodates what we said prior to the campaign, Mr. 

Speaker, we said we would do that. We signed the agreement in 

principle September of last year. It’s not much of a story, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the Premier 

signed a memorandum of understanding. The question is 

whether he’s going to sign the actual agreement this week 

because many people are concerned, including his Deputy 

Premier who while he was in opposition, in a letter to the 

Leader-Post made the following statement. And I quote: 

 

Given the impact of TILMA across the province, we also 

believe the provincial government has an obligation to 

consult with stakeholders and the public prior to accepting 

or rejecting Saskatchewan’s participation . . . 

 

My question to the Premier is, on what day does he intend to 

start the consultation with the public in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I can understand how the 

member opposite is unaware of the significant consultations 

that already happened in the province of Saskatchewan, when a 

joint committee of this Assembly — well he wasn’t home, he 

wasn’t back home yet — but a joint committee of this 

legislature had wide-ranging consultations with respect to 

TILMA. 

 

As a result of those consultations, the Saskatchewan Party, then 

in opposition, said while we support the principles here of an 

agreement to reduce barriers to create this large economic 

trading region, maybe the largest in the country, we had 

concerns with respect to TILMA’s impact on municipalities, on 

tax abatement programs for municipalities, and on Crown 

corporation subsidiaries. Mr. Speaker, we will not sign any 

agreement that does not accommodate the concerns we had 

prior to the election. 

 

We will, though, endeavour to partner with Alberta and British 

Columbia and build what will be a very powerful economic 

force in Canada. We will endeavour to make sure that 

Saskatchewan continues to lead in the new West and lead in the 

country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, again my question to the 

Premier is along the line, is where is the document that he plans 

to sign? At the very time where in most jurisdictions in Canada 

and really around the world are really very concerned about 

consultation and working with Aboriginal groups to have 

meaningful dialogue, and this is true everywhere, if an oil 

company’s going to drill wells, they go and consult with the 

community. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: on what day does he plan to 

meet with groups that we’re getting calls from, people from 

environmental groups who say that we’re signing an agreement 

with common airshed so that pollution coming from other 

provinces will not be able to be dealt with in the future, tying 

the hands of this government and future governments? My 

question to the Premier: when will we see the document here in 

this Assembly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5107 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is 

benefiting right now from a growing economy. That economy is 

very dependent on trade. That economy is very dependent on us 

ensuring that we are removing barriers, access to various 

markets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we can, for example in an agreement, in an 

agreement if we can for example ensure that businesses who are 

registered to do business in the province are automatically 

registered right across Western Canada, if we can remove 

barriers to growth, other than the previous government, Mr. 

Speaker, if we can do all of these things while being consistent 

with what we said in opposition, we’re going to look very 

carefully at that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There may well be developments happening very soon. They’ll 

be consistent with the consultations that have already happened, 

Mr. Speaker. And they will be consistent with Canada’s, with 

the aspirations of Canada’s leading economy continuing its 

leadership position in the new West and right across the 

country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Conflict of Interest and Changes to Legislation 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Justice. At the time the PC [Progressive Conservative] trust 

fund was created, was he one of the board members responsible 

for the ongoing operations of the Progressive Conservative 

Party of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I remind the member of the rules of the 

Assembly that questions should be related to ministerial 

responsibility, and anything related to parties outside of the 

Chamber are unacceptable. I recognize the member from 

Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we know that, we know in fact that 

the Minister of Justice was. Mr. Speaker, The Trustee Act falls 

under the responsibility of the Minister of Justice. The Minister 

of Justice has brought forward changes to the Act that included 

changes to the conflict of interest provisions within The Trustee 

Act. 

 

To the minister: is this not a conflict of interest, considering he 

was one of the board members responsible for the ongoing 

operations of the PC Party of Saskatchewan when the PC trust 

fund was created? 

 

The Speaker: — On many occasions it’s difficult for the 

Speaker to determine exactly where the question is going or 

whether it fits within the rules, but this question certainly seems 

to be directed around the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, 

so it’s difficult to determine whether or not the question relates 

to the minister responsible. So I’ll allow minister to respond as 

they so wish. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, The Trustee Act was 

amended last year, routine amendments that were recommended 

by the Law Reform Commission. In fact, Mr. Speaker, those 

amendments had the effect of making it easier to determine 

when there was a conflict of interest and making it easier to 

disqualify people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it raised the standard for trustees, both 

professional and non-professional. It deals with the process for 

removal of trustees and, Mr. Speaker, I can advise the House 

that that was a routine update of that legislation, and it was 

legislation that had in fact existed for nearly 100 years without 

any significant amendments. So it was a makeover 

recommended by the Law Reform Commission, and in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, the changes that were made were made in nearly every 

jurisdiction in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, over a week ago I asked the 

Minister of Justice, before proposing the changes to The Trustee 

Act, did he receive a legal opinion that said that this will not 

interfere with the PC trust court case before the courts, and if he 

did, would he make that opinion public. To the Minister of 

Justice: has he made the legal opinion public? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the House that 

there was nothing untoward with this piece of legislation. There 

was no personal involvement on my part or on the part of 

anyone else. It was a routine amendment that was brought 

forward by the Law Reform Commission as in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, it was done in most jurisdictions across Canada. 

Nobody focused on anything else other than updating 

legislation as is the mandate of this government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the House and the members 

opposite that where it is appropriate to bring forward 

amendments and to update our legislation, it is the role of this 

government to do it. And we will continue to do it in an 

aggressive and appropriate and fair manner. This Bill was dealt 

with as was every other Bill that was brought forward, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Habitat Protection and Sale of Crown Land 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: why 

is the government changing the law to allow it to sell off 

specific wildlife habitat protected lands without first consulting 

with the public or debating those sales in the legislature first? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, on numerous occasions, 

there have been requests of the government for people who are 

leasing Crown land, such as renters, to be able to purchase that 

land. It is currently under wildlife habitat protection, the land 

that was originally set aside for habitat protection. It has since 

evolved, Mr. Speaker, to include other things such as species at 

risk. 



5108 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

I asked the ministry, when I became minister, if there was a 

values inventory done of this land. There was not, Mr. Speaker. 

We held all this land. We didn’t know what kind of ecological 

value it actually had. We have now completed the modelling. 

It’s a science-based modelling approach to determine what kind 

of land we actually hold. 

 

Some of that land, Mr. Speaker, will be available for sale. Other 

land will be able to be sold under a conservation easement plan, 

and the rest will stay under wildlife habitat protection, Mr. 

Speaker. And a vast majority of the land will be protected under 

current legislation such as The Ecological Reserves Act, Mr. 

Speaker, which would have to come before the House for full 

debate if any changes were to be made. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, many lands are included under the 

Act as a result of public debate. Now this government wants to 

make decisions to sell off specific parcels of land behind closed 

doors. No one objects to a science-based ecological assessment 

of lands currently protected under the Act, but that information 

should be part of a public debate on which land should be 

protected or sold off, not information for the minister’s eyes 

only. 

 

To the minister: why is she selling specific parcels of land 

without debating those sales in the legislature first? Why is she 

refusing to be accountable to the public? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite 

would know, Crown land that does not fall under wildlife 

habitat protection is sold through an order in council process, 

exactly the same process that the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

had in place except, Mr. Speaker, the difference was they put a 

freeze on land sales, took people’s money and didn’t hand their 

land over. We’ve changed that process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So some of the land under wildlife habitat protection, when its 

value is on the lowest end of the scale, will be available for sale 

under the order in council process as it is currently, Mr. 

Speaker. But I would point out to the member opposite, there 

are many very specific sites within our province which will 

continue to have full protection of the legislation and 

regulations currently in place. These include the Assiniboine 

Slopes Provincial Ecological Reserve, the Buffalograss 

Provincial Ecological Reserve, the Qu’Appelle Coulee 

Provincial Ecological Reserve, migratory bird sanctuaries, 

recreation sites, Representative Area Ecological Reserves, and 

others, Mr. Speaker. This land will continue to be protected 

through legislation in this House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s what’s cold comfort 

to the people of Saskatchewan. Here’s The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act. Here’s what’s going to remain from the Act, 

and the rest of this is the land that is going to be under the 

minister’s discretion after this Bill goes through. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister says that these changes won’t 

compromise wildlife habitat protection on lands important to 

Saskatchewan people, but yesterday the minister said that her 

legislation would allow her government to sell protected lands 

without a full and open public debate. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

already started to receive calls from people who are concerned 

that habitat for owls, badgers, moose, and deer could be turned 

into landfills at the stroke of the minister’s pen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, too many people worked too hard to protect these 

lands to let this government sell them off in a fire sale brought 

on by its financial mismanagement. Why are the years of hard 

work by people concerned about wildlife being put in jeopardy 

by this government’s financial mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for her question. And she could either continue to 

fearmonger on this legislation in this House, or they could pass 

this legislation into committee and she can ask as many 

questions as she wants, over a course of hours instead of 

minutes, and get some answers to her questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But as an example, the Great Sand Hills falls under The 

Ecological Reserves Act. That land cannot be touched unless it 

goes through this House as a change to legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

with full openness and transparency that this House affords, Mr. 

Speaker. And as far as the land that we want to sell to people 

like ranchers, Mr. Speaker, we know that the NDP has a 

complete disconnect from rural Saskatchewan. And I would like 

to read a letter from the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association. 

It says: 

 

Dear Mr. Lingenfelter: 

 

Ranchers and farmers in Saskatchewan have been 

excellent stewards of the native prairie ecosystems for 

generations and will continue to do so, along with the 

conservation easement and past care given to this land by 

ranchers and farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people who use this land for their livelihood 

are the best stewards of this land. We agree with that. The NDP 

do not. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, by no means are we worried about 

the ranchers and the Cattlemen’s Association. We trust their 

judgment. What we don’t trust is the judgment of that minister 

and that Premier, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yesterday the minister said that it would be her preference that 

lands like the Great Sand Hills would not be sold without being 

first debated in this Assembly. But as I’ve said before, Mr. 

Speaker, the real test of a government’s sincerity is whether 

they’re prepared to make a legally binding commitment. Mr. 

Speaker, to the minister: will she amend her legislation to 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5109 

ensure that the minister can’t sell wildlife habitat protected 

lands without debating those sales here in the legislature first? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I will restate for the 

member opposite because apparently she didn’t hear my 

answer. I just said, in my previous answer, the Great Sand Hills 

is protected under The Ecological Reserves Act . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — As an example, Mr. Speaker, the Great 

Sand Hills falls under The Ecological Reserves Act. Any 

changes to that legislation will come before this House in an 

open and transparent debate, as it is currently, Mr. Speaker. 

That hasn’t changed. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite just said she trusts 

ranchers. Who does she thinks uses the land now? All they want 

to do is own it, Mr. Speaker. They have leased this land for 

generations. They have taken care of this land. They have 

received national and provincial awards for their management 

of this land. All they want to do is own it, Mr. Speaker. We 

agree with that. The NDP does not. 

 

From the Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association, Mr. 

Speaker, and I quote: 

 

Dear Mr. Lingenfelter: 

 

The Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association strongly 

supports the transfer of Crown land to individual private 

ownership. We feel that farmers and ranchers are the best 

stewards of the land, and it is due to the responsible 

management of producers that the remaining native prairie 

and ecologically valuable lands in Saskatchewan have 

been preserved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we agree with . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Financial Management of Crown Corporations 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to hear 

the minister actually read her briefing notes after her answers in 

the rotunda yesterday. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in a desperate attempt to hide this 

government’s deficit and growing debt, the Premier has not 

only drained $700 million from the rainy day fund, he’s also 

stripped over $1 billion from our Crown corporations. Mr. 

Speaker, why does the Premier think it’s okay to put our Crown 

corporations at risk in order to hide his own incompetence and 

fiscal mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the people of the province 

own the Crown corporations. The money that is available 

through the Crown corporations is also available when it comes 

to the needs for education, for highways, for health care. And 

when there is money available and there is a need in the General 

Revenue Fund, then the people would expect to spend the 

money — their money — to make sure that our province 

continues along the economic recovery that the rest of the world 

is looking forward to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased that we have the opportunity to 

use our Crowns to make sure that our budget is balanced and 

that we continue to lead the provinces. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if we listen to that 

minister, that’s like selling the farm to pay for the tractor, Mr. 

Speaker. It doesn’t make a lot of sense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier once said this about his time serving 

Grant Devine, and I quote, “You look back on that time, and I 

think that it was an asset that I was involved in a government 

that lost its way on these issues.” Well it’s clear what lessons 

that the Premier has learned from his time with Grant Devine. 

The surplus is gone. The deficit is mounting and the Crowns are 

being stripped. History does repeat itself, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again to the Premier: why is he putting the Crown 

corporations at risk to cover his own mismanagement and fiscal 

incompetence? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the people of the province 

are pleased that we have strong Crown corporations. In fact the 

annual reports that have come forward in the last few days 

prove that our Crowns are strong, and that they are not only 

maintaining their own businesses, but they’re able to put 

dividends towards the General Revenue Fund of the province. 

 

In the last 10 years of NDP government, they averaged about 

$500 million a year towards rebuilding the infrastructure of the 

Crown corporations. You know, we have done as a Sask Party 

government, $1.3 billion in the last year as we continue to build 

the infrastructure. Our Crowns are strong. We’re proud of them, 

and the people of the province are proud of them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think if the minister will 

go back and look at her document, she’ll see that the Crowns 

borrowed that money to build infrastructure. It wasn’t we that 

did anything. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in the 1980s Grant Devine stripped the 

Crowns just like the current Premier is doing. But there is a big 

difference. Grant Devine at least had some megaprojects to 



5110 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

show for the billions of dollars in debt that he left behind. Not 

this Premier. The surplus is gone, the rainy day fund is just 

about drained, and now the Crowns are being stripped, and the 

Premier has nothing to show for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is the Premier following the Grant Devine 

model of budgeting when we all know that it leads to financial 

disaster? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, our government is more 

than proud of the work that we have done, not just in the Crown 

corporations but when it comes to the work that we’re doing 

right across government. We actually are looking at the fact that 

our debt has decreased in the General Revenue Fund by $2.4 

billion. Forty per cent of that debt is gone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At the same time, our Crowns are making sure that they are 

building the economy for the future, Mr. Speaker. They have 

the opportunity to maintain not only the work that they’re 

doing, but building. And, Mr. Speaker, the previous government 

had the opportunity to make sure they maintained their Crowns, 

but instead they decided to take the money and invest it outside 

of our province. 

 

They decided to invest money in Channel Lake. They decided 

to invest money in Guyana. They decided to invest money in 

Retx and tappedinto. They weren’t investing money in the 

people of our province or their Crown corporations. We believe 

in our Crown corporations. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the sad part of this is is that for 

years to come Saskatchewan people will be paying the price 

because this Premier has stripped everything from our Crown 

corporations to hide the fact that he can’t balance the budget. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, all you have to do is look at the 

government’s own budget documents, and it shows that Crown 

debt will increase almost 98 per cent by 2014. With 

skyrocketing debt and every last cent of profit being stripped to 

cover the Premier’s incompetence, our Crowns will be a lot 

weaker and Saskatchewan people will pay a lot more. 

 

To the Premier: why should Saskatchewan people pay higher 

utility rates for years to come just because he can’t manage the 

budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the members 

opposite aren’t listening at all. They’re listening to their own 

rhetoric, but they’re not listening to the facts. The fact is that 

over the last 15 years they allowed our Crown corporations to 

deteriorate to the point that it was difficult for them to actually 

work with our economy. There was little money spent on the 

Crown corporations, and we’re proud of the fact that in the last 

two years . . . 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, and there was little money 

spent on actually building, and in fact the money that was spent 

was just maintaining the status quo. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when there is money spent on our Crowns, the 

debt to equity ratio increases. We’re proud of the fact that our 

Crowns have more value now because we’re actually investing 

money in them, and the people of the province can count on 

them. 

 

Think of the money that we’ve spent in the areas like . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The members want opportunity 

. . . I’ll ask the Leader of the Opposition to come to order. I ask 

the minister to wrap up her comments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very . . . It’s interesting 

that the members opposite obviously knew nothing about rural 

Saskatchewan and had no faith in them, were not willing to put 

the type of money that we are into rural Saskatchewan when it 

comes to SaskTel — our wireless connections, cell coverage 

connections. We know that rural Saskatchewan has to be 

provided a service by our Crowns, and we are doing that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to have to wait till 

Hansard comes . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask the member to allow the 

member to place the question without interference. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to have to wait till 

Hansard comes out and read that answer because I believe the 

minister said that as a debt increases, the value increases. I’m 

not quite sure. It sounds a little suspect. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would remind the minister, or maybe 

suggest to the minister, that she looks at her own financial 

documents coming out of the Crown corporations. Yes, they’re 

doing very well. Yes, they’re providing good service for the 

people of Saskatchewan. But yes, the Saskatchewan Party 

government is stripping every bit of revenue out of the Crown 

corporations to cover your own budget deficit and increased 

debt.  

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will be the ones to 

pay through higher utility rates. How does the Premier explain 

that to people, that to cover his incompetence, taxpayers will be 

paying more? 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5111 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

obviously are not reading the people in the province. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the opposition members 

now to allow the minister to respond without interference. I 

recognize the Minister of Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Obviously the members opposite don’t 

understand. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I just ask the minister to respond to the 

question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we have a growing 

economy. In order to accommodate a growing economy, we’re 

going to need infrastructure within all of our Crowns — 

SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskEnergy, SaskWater. We have them 

there making sure that, when we invest our taxpayers’ money, 

they’ll be invested in a growing economy for all the people in 

this province and we are proud of these Crowns. 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Before orders of the day and 

pursuant to section 25 of The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act, 

I’ll lay on the Table the annual report of the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner. As well, in accordance with the provisions of 

section 14.1 of The Provincial Auditor Act, I lay on the Table 

the Report of the Provincial Auditor. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, on a point of 

order. 

 

The Speaker: — Member may state his point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During 

petitions this afternoon, the member from Saskatoon Nutana 

was using an exhibit or a prop as a backing for her petition that 

was plainly visible on television, Mr. Speaker. I ask that you 

review the tapes and chastise the member for breaking the rules, 

Mr. Speaker, of the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney, the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To respond 

to the point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Clearly the member stood and read from a 

petition with a number of papers in her hand. If the member saw 

something on the back page of the paper she was speaking 

from, Mr. Speaker, members routinely stand with papers, Mr. 

Speaker, and they may or may not have something on the back, 

Mr. Speaker. I think that this . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member from Regina 

Dewdney is trying to respond to the point of order and is having 

great difficulty because of the noise around him. I recognize the 

member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, there are times when members 

stand in this House with a group of papers. There’s often on the 

back of papers a picture or some other writing, Mr. Speaker, 

that could be construed to be anything, Mr. Speaker. In fact I 

can look today and see a sticker on the member from 

Cannington’s laptop, Mr. Speaker. I think that perhaps that’s a 

prop that he’s using, Mr. Speaker, to try to indicate some form 

of intimidation to the members in this House, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

hard to say from here. And I think these matters are somewhat 

trivial in nature, Mr. Speaker, and should be dealt with in that 

manner. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’ve listened to the point of 

order. I’ve listened to the member from Regina Dewdney. I was 

observing the proceedings this afternoon. From what I 

observed, there was nothing that stuck out in my mind that 

certainly impeded the work of the Assembly. And I am more 

than prepared, if so, to bring a ruling, but as I’ve already said, if 

there’s nothing untoward, this is the last of the debate. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 132 — The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was up this morning 

talking on this Bill, and I have many more things that I would 

actually like to add to it that I didn’t get a chance of talking to 

this morning. And having listened to question period and again 

some of the minister’s answers, I’m still not at all reassured that 

anything will change from my concerns from this morning. But 

I do want to read into the record and, for those people who 

weren’t listening this morning, to talk about the status of the 

wildlife habitat in Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan contains one of the most modified landscapes in 



5112 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

North America. Because of our extensive agricultural industry 

during the past century, we have seen over 75 per cent of our 

natural areas in the agricultural region disappear to cultivation 

and other developments including roads, towns, and cities. Now 

that suggests, Mr. Speaker, that if you sell the land for 

agricultural use or leave it unattended, it deteriorates and we 

don’t have it for wildlife habitat. And this has been proven over 

the years that 75 per cent of our natural areas in the region have 

disappeared to cultivation and other developments such as I’ve 

mentioned. 

 

And between 1976 and 1981, we lost 2 million acres of natural 

landscape, and as more land is broken, natural habitat 

disappears and it continues to shrink. And as I said this 

morning, there are many ecological . . . and there are species, 

endangered species that are in Saskatchewan that are protected 

by this wildlife Act and by these protected areas. 

 

Animals like the whooping crane, the piping plover, the 

burrowing owl, the sage grouse, the swift fox, the black-footed 

ferret, the plains grizzly bear, greater prairie chicken, and the 

Eskimo curlew — these are some of the animals that are in 

danger if we let some of these lands go back to the evolution of 

cultivation and then they lose their natural habitat. 

 

Conserving natural habitat of course provides food, water, and 

shelter for all these species. And as I said this morning, we are 

in a connected ecosystem, and as humans we rely on the land 

and the other species to maintain our quality of life as well. And 

it would be a shame for us to forget that in our rush to do 

whatever the minister has intended to by putting these lands up 

in jeopardy, the 3 million acres that are protected under this 

Act, putting them in jeopardy of being sold without any 

scrutiny. I know she was speaking of that in question period 

today. But under regulation, it certainly seems like, in that Act, 

that the regulation would not require the government to bring 

anything to the legislature. And I’m pretty sure that being not 

required, they will not do it, since even the rules that do require 

them to do things, they break or change. 

 

So I think that conserving the habitat that helps provide food, 

water, and shelter here for all the species that I’ve mentioned 

and might even contribute to taking some of those species off 

the endangered list if we take care of them. And the 

Government of Saskatchewan has been committed to 

completing identification and designation of sites within each of 

the province’s 11 ecoregions and have that done in a timely 

fashion. 

 

The government will then meet its commitment to the rest of 

Canada to help complete a national network of protected areas. 

The establishment of a network of ecologically important land 

and water areas across the province is important to the Ministry 

of the Environment, or it should be important to the Ministry of 

the Environment. The legacy that we left as a government that it 

was of extreme importance . . . and it would be extremely 

disappointing to the people of Saskatchewan and to us as 

legislators to see that stewardship erode. 

 

We have systems in our province that include national and 

provincial parks, wildlife refuges, ecological and other reserves 

in the province, and this is known as the representative areas 

network or RANs. And The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is 

part of the provincial government’s answer to conserve 

vanishing native ecosystems in the agriculture regions of the 

province. So that’s why we have 3.4 million acres which 

amount to only about 5 per cent of Saskatchewan’s agriculture 

region and about 80 per cent of this region’s total protected 

natural areas, and that includes the parks and protected wildlife 

and ecological sites. 

 

And protecting these lands has been found to be the best 

preventative medicine to ensure habitat for the survival of 

endangered species and spaces for the species. And when we 

were in government, if there was any sale of Crown land, we 

had a net loss policy that if any Crown lands were taken out and 

sold and the habitat was lost, then we would find other land to 

replace that, so there was a net loss policy. I see no mention of 

that in this legislation. So there’s contemplation for lands being 

sold, and I understand that ranchers and cattlemen that are the 

lessees of many of these acres would have an interest in buying 

the land. But I see nothing; there’s no onus on the government 

or no contemplation of maintaining the policy of net loss. So I 

saw . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No net loss. Thank you. So 

no net loss. 

 

And I think that that is a significant gap or omission in this 

legislation, and I do think that we would have to see some 

assurance that any land that was sold for whatever reason . . . 

I’m not sure exactly what the contemplation is of the minister of 

why land would be sold, other than the fact that there is some 

history of lessees wanting the land. But I think that in past 

practice that has been what has fallen under the no net loss 

policy. And I think that we need to absolutely have assurance 

that that will be continued as the policy of this government. 

 

I think that we are, as legislators, the stewards of our land and 

this doesn’t reassure me or assure me or the public that that 

stewardship is being taken seriously. We do have some of the 

. . . What has happened in Saskatchewan is we have Fish and 

Wildlife Development Fund lands, and they’re managed to 

provide the best possible wildlife habitat year-round for the 

greatest number of species. Wildlife lands are not reserves or 

sanctuaries. These natural areas have been bought with hunter 

and trapper dollars and can be used by everyone. 

 

Some people have donated their land to this three million acres 

and have left it in trust to the government to keep for the 

people. What happens to that land? Who determines whether 

that can be sold or not when it has been left in trust in 

somebody’s will, with expectation that that land would remain 

the natural habitat, a protected habitat, in perpetuity actually? 

And so we certainly don’t see that. 

 

There’s a lot of issues about the use of land. If it’s under a 

lessee, then there’s restrictions and contracts and certain 

requirements of those people to use the land. If we sell it, then 

there are no such requirements or no such restrictions. 

 

It isn’t possible to actually have a great deal of faith in the 

government. When you put something in regulation, I think you 

have removed the accountability and the scrutiny portion of the 

work of the legislature. And that part of the Act has been 

significantly weakened. 

 

[14:45] 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5113 

The fish and wildlife . . . The ways that they say that you can 

support the sustainable management and use of the fish and 

wildlife resources includes supporting legislation that conserves 

wildlife habitat. This is a direct contradiction to what is exactly, 

actually on the government’s own website. So I’m not sure how 

selling off the Crown lands without a no net loss policy does 

that, and I think it does fly in the face of their own Environment 

department’s policies which are up on the website. 

 

There are six national wildlife areas open to hunting in the 

province: Last Mountain Lake, Stalwart, Webb, Prairie, 

Bradwell, and Tway. And these are also areas where people can 

actually hunt. There’s fishing can be done on some of them, and 

there’s certain restrictions about no camping and certain things 

like that, but the land is actually used for the benefit of the 

people, and they can actually go and watch the native animals 

in their native habitat. 

 

So I have a serious concern that we would see a weakening of 

the intent of the Bill. It has been many years in the making — 

since 1984 I think was the first Bill. It’s changed its name and 

has had strengthening amendments to it. This, I don’t think, is 

one of them. I think there’s going to be significant sales 

happening. And without a no net loss policy, I don’t see any 

benefit to the environment and to the people of Saskatchewan 

other than a few people who may have an interest in that 

particular acreage. And right now, those people are good 

stewards of the land, but they also have contracts that require 

them to manage the land in a certain way. Without those 

contracts, we then see a natural . . . what we’ve said, naturally 

75 per cent of the land has gone back into . . . With construction 

and roads and cities and all kinds of other buildings and 

activities, we have lost the actual natural habitat. 

 

So when the minister talks about fearmongering, I don’t think 

people are actually . . . It’s not fearmongering. It’s actual, 

serious questions that people are asking. Although mentioning 

that the Great Sand Hills could be sold was certainly not 

something that would reassure many people who have a 

significant attachment to the environment and environmental 

issues. And we need those people to speak up in times like this 

because obviously there is some other agenda at play here, Mr. 

Speaker, and I don’t understand why this would be an important 

Bill for anyone given the fact that there is such a huge 

connection to the land, a huge commitment, and a commitment 

to future generations that this land is maintained. 

 

And I don’t see how we can possibly say that 3 million acres, 

which is such a small percentage of Saskatchewan’s geography, 

is something that has to be given up to sale. I think it’s a 

specious argument and I don’t think that people will actually 

think that that’s something that is a reason for actually passing 

this. I know people are going to be coming to talk about this. 

And I think it’s a good idea for us to listen to those that are 

affected, the Wildlife Federation, which has a lot of members 

around the province who have interest in this Act and certainly 

in protecting the wildlife and The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act itself. 

 

I don’t think anybody disagrees that the philosophy of the Act 

was to conserve wildlife habitat while enabling compatible, 

traditional uses to coexist. And I spoke of many of those where 

people have leases and are using the land for various uses, even 

including oil and gas companies that can explore and drill, but 

they must ensure that they do very little damage to the surface. 

 

So daily operations and routine developments such as . . . Daily 

operations such as grazing and that sort of thing are allowed. 

The routine development such as fencing and dugout 

construction can also take place. So the land can be used while 

it still maintains its habitat protection function. We certainly 

have, like I said, people who are using the lands now and that 

are good stewards of the land, and the land and the wildlife is 

benefiting. So I don’t think anybody disputes that. 

 

What is worrisome is the fact that to take out the sale of the 

land and put it in regulation is absolutely the wrong way to go. 

OCs, orders in council, are the only things that people will see 

if they see it at all — because it comes to the media and then it 

comes to the opposition — and the land sale will have been 

done without any scrutiny or any debate. I’m not sure exactly 

how the minister’s going to commit herself to having every sale 

debated in the House when by regulation it doesn’t have to be. 

So if the minister thinks that we should discuss every sale of 

land in the House, then the Bill is really of no value and should 

be withdrawn. 

 

We do see that many of the people that are interested in this 

probably haven’t had a chance to enter into the debate. And I 

know that there’s many people who want to come and speak to 

the Bill, including when it gets to committee. And I think that 

we . . . I certainly hope that we have an opportunity to hear 

from them all. And I know there’ll be different sides to an issue 

because there always are. And consultation means that you 

actually listen to both sides. 

 

And I don’t think we’ve heard from the Wildlife Federation. I 

know people are expecting to come and talk about this. I think 

it’s interesting that we’ve heard from the stockholders and the 

cattlemen. I think that that’s interesting because that’s one side 

and one issue and one perspective. But I think that there are 

others who need to be heard, and I do think that they have 

significant and serious issues and concerns with this Bill. 

 

It’s interesting that many of the provisions that are expected to 

change or put out for change have just fallen under the, kind of, 

housekeeping sort of thing, which would . . . might be the intent 

to lull us into thinking there was nothing really of import in this 

Bill. Not so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When you talk about how the lands can be sold, that is the most 

important aspect of The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. That is 

its key. Its key function is to protect the land from being sold or 

being somehow other devalued or made not useful for wildlife 

protection. And we certainly have had a commitment for many, 

many years in this province that that is what we want to do. 

And we don’t, I don’t see us in any way giving up that 

connection or giving up that commitment. I think that 

commitment is still as strong. 

 

And so those 3.4 million acres, I think, need to be our 

significant stay-in-place number of acres. And like I said, if we 

do sell, and we have done over the years, sell some Crown land, 

the policy was always to have the scrutiny of what was being 

sold, what for, and to who, and also then to do the no-net-loss 

policy. So there was a real stewardship of the land and the 



5114 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

protected wildlife habitat. 

 

So I hate to see us even contemplate giving up that level of 

stewardship. And it certainly doesn’t bode well for a 

government who is talking about doing the best for the people. 

It doesn’t sound as if this would be the best for the people. And 

it’s certainly not best for, not only the current people, but for 

generations to come. If you sell something and it erodes and it 

is no longer protecting wildlife, you can’t get that back. Once 

you’ve done it, it’s done, and you cannot get it back. 

 

So what we do today really does have serious implications for 

the future. And I hope that we take this Bill seriously and have 

a discussion that encompasses all aspects of the debate and that 

we do what is best for the province and the land and the whole 

ecosystem, which includes us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that, those remarks . . . And I hope that 

I’ve covered the basic things that I said this morning and added 

in — because the only thing I actually did miss was the 

no-net-loss policy which I significantly wanted to talk about. 

 

And I also want to just mention again and stress how some 

people in this province have left the land in their wills, in a 

trust, expecting that land to stay in perpetuity. And those 

people’s wishes should be respected, and in no way should they 

ever, that land ever be sold because that is something that was 

willed. And that intent, I don’t see any protection of that. From 

my understanding of the wording of the Bill, any regulation 

could sell any acre. 

 

And I also know there’s . . . I’ve heard that there’s some issue 

around a certain area wants to buy some of the wildlife habitat 

to do something with it for their town, which is interesting too, 

but I don’t think it should be the motivating factor behind 

changing a Bill and changing it to this magnitude. I really don’t 

think we need to have that sort of using a bomb to kill a fly 

instead of the fly swatter. I think this is sort of what I see with 

this Bill. It’s really a huge change to make some smaller thing 

happen. And it does worry me, and I think it will worry the 

people of Saskatchewan. So with those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I 

would adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Eastview has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 125 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 125 — The Crown 

Minerals Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, to take part in the debate 

on Bill 125, The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2009. You 

know, again there’s changes here, and maybe some of the 

changes that are being brought forward are positive ones. And 

there’s always going to be two sides to an argument. And on the 

government side, you read some of the stuff that they’re going 

to do with having a new, web-based mineral registry system, 

and it’s a new system, may give an opportunity to the industry 

and some savings and maybe a process for the ministry that 

deals with that industry to actually — the registry — to deal 

with some of the issues that the industry has. 

 

But having said that, there’s always a process that, you know, 

and be very clear that it’s cost saving and it might be a quicker 

response time and can move it faster. And that’s fine to say that. 

But I ask, who was consulted? And who did they talk with? 

 

And really some of these points might be just housekeeping 

issues that have to be addressed, and they might’ve addressed 

them. And that might be all it is, and that’s simple. And 

sometimes, you know, you hope when you read through. 

 

But I know back home there’s been some concerns. People are 

concerned with this legislation. Now I always say there’s 

always pros and cons, but you have to make sure that you talk 

to the people and you go out. So I’m not sure who they have 

approached, who’s given their input and who they consult. And 

there is a duty to consult to make sure that people that are being 

impacted are shared with. 

 

But you know, I give examples. And in the North, I know that 

this may have a huge . . . We have a huge land base in the North 

this may impact. We have people who actually work in the 

industry, who make a living to provide income for their family 

and, Mr. Speaker, some of this legislation that’s passed, these 

individuals will no longer be going on the line, will no longer 

be doing the actual work that they have been doing — and some 

of them second generation. They have worked up there in the 

North. They go out. Sometimes they’re helicoptered out. They 

work in teams, and they do some important work. 

 

But having said this, I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. Who did they 

consult when they brought this legislation in and have they 

brought enough of the individuals with concerns forward? And 

that’s going to be interesting. 

 

But I want to use examples about duty to consult. You know, 

we passed a Bill, The Northern Municipalities Act, 110, got 

passed in this House. And some good work. I have to admit 

there was some good work, Mr. Speaker, with Bill 110, The 

Northern Municipalities Act that passed. But I also want to be 

very clear. In estimates I asked some questions and made it very 

clear. I asked the minister, when did this process start? When 

did they start to talk about addressing this Bill? Did it happen in 

. . . And out of Hansard I have it. It was October 2005 is what 

the minister said. Under the previous NDP government it 

started. 

 

So it started with the ministry and they moved forward. And I 

gave compliments to the ministry for the work that they had 

done and with the communities, the leadership, and a group and 

a committee that came together. So I just want to show the 

example when you consult and you make sure the stakeholders 

are involved and leadership and community members get a 

chance to talk. So I gave the minister, you know, and his 

ministry with Municipal Affairs, to be honest I said this was a 

good job, a good tool you could use to go out to consult with 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5115 

the rest. 

 

So in 2005, October, they started that work. 2010 it got passed. 

So under the previous government, the ministries worked with 

the communities. And I mean there was a lot of work. And I 

gave compliments out there to the ministry because of the hard 

work and to the people in the committees in the North. They 

took it serious. They came together and they were consulted and 

they wanted this Bill to pass. They put the time and the effort 

into it. That is some good work. People were consulted and it 

works. And I think that’s very positive. 

 

Unfortunately sometimes people want to use that in a negative 

way and that’s sad, but that’s okay. That’s the game. I’m 

learning. I’m learning. But you know it’s unfortunate. And I’m 

going to make it very clear. When I gave those compliments I 

wanted to make sure. But I want to talk about the duty to 

consult, and that’s what I said, the opportunity to make sure that 

people have an opportunity to share their views and points. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So you have a Bill 125. It’s the same thing. You want to be very 

clear, Mr. Speaker, and I think we need to be very clear. Who 

did they consult with? Did they go out? Have they heard from 

the people that are most impacted very clearly? And the 

minister can sit there from his side of the chair and say 

whatever he wants. It doesn’t matter. The people are tired of not 

being heard, not being consulted. I gave him a tool, if you want 

to say, a suggestion to use that duty to consult, and to use a tool, 

that Bill 110. That worked very good. Five years to get here. 

There was some good work done there. It’s a very thick 

document but I think it served a purpose that was required and 

it’s going to be an excellent piece of legislation for the people 

back home. Obviously there was input. 

 

Now I’m going to go back to Bill 125 and again, why isn’t it so 

easy to ask? And I question like this. You should hear from 

everybody out there, saying yes, we had an opportunity to hear 

about this information. If we wanted to have our input, we were 

invited to a meeting. Did that happen? Probably not. That’s not 

this government; they don’t do that. They don’t invite you to 

the table. They make Bills and they bring legislation in and they 

do different ways. 

 

And you know, sometimes it’s not very pleasant to watch what 

goes on. But you know what? I guess from their side, as they 

say, I’ve heard some of the members opposite say, you know, 

the people elected us and we’re going to do what we’re going to 

do. Well that’s fine. I think people will clearly send a message. 

 

You know, and you go to back to that because there is so much 

frustration out there. And sometimes it’s just feeling like people 

have an opportunity to have their opinions heard, their views 

heard, and sometimes they have real issues and concerns. And 

that can affect anywhere, whether you have trappers, we have 

commercial fishing, where you have traditional land users, 

where you have outfitters, where you have recreation people 

that have used an area for a long time, whether you have . . . 

And I guess trappers are a huge one. They’re the one that gets 

impacted lots. But they don’t feel like they get the opportunity 

to be heard by this government, and that is unfortunate. 

 

So when I talk about that process that has to happen and they 

want to feel . . . First Nations, Métis want to feel like they’re 

being . . . their input. 

 

And you look at the Supreme Court of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

Very clear. Didn’t say the government may want to, the 

government may, the government if it wishes to. It said, the 

government will. Make it very clear — Supreme Court of 

Canada said the government will consult First Nations and 

Métis and people most impacted when they go on to land. So I 

mean it’s very clear and I think sometimes, you know, the 

government doesn’t take that ruling for whatever; I don’t know. 

 

To me what I’m hearing, the frustration, people are not feeling 

like that opportunity’s happened, that that is not being fulfilled. 

And we know that there is different process that they can use. 

The option’s theirs. The ministry, the minister, he can or she 

can, whichever, can make a decision, can take . . . Like let’s 

take this serious; let’s start doing the right thing. And I 

encourage them to make sure. People want to feel like they’re 

heard, and this government is not hearing. And that’s 

unfortunate. 

 

So you see Bill 125, like I said, it might do some good things 

for the industry and it might move the ministry’s opportunities 

for getting revenue in and save some costs to the industry. 

 

But back home when those individuals went to work and now 

when we use an electronic system like this — whether it’s 

satellite or however it’s going to accomplish that — when we 

had individuals going out on the actual . . . and making out the 

lines and making very clear, making the mark and marking out 

a territory, where now that may not happen. That may not 

happen. And those community members that are going to be 

impacted do not have that revenue for their family to come back 

and generate the revenue back home. 

 

And I know there’s been some individuals with concerns about 

this Bill. And I hope that, you know, they were consulted, and I 

hope that the government went and talked to them, that 

industry. When you bring legislation like this forward, the onus 

isn’t on the community members and shouldn’t be on the 

stakeholder. It’s on the government to make sure people had a 

chance to be heard, that the government took the information 

and made a decision — but an informed decision, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s crucial. 

 

Bill 125, here it is. And I hope when I go home, they say oh no, 

we got all invited and, you know, the ministry invited us to a 

meeting to share our views. We heard about this legislation. It’s 

the government’s responsibility to go out and share that 

information to make sure that the people know that this Bill is 

going forward. They have an obligation to the people. 

 

And it’s very clear. The people take that seriously, supposed to 

trust the government. It’s a trust thing, that your government 

will make sure you know what they’re doing. And they will 

come out and they will make sure that you get to express 

yourself. And they will have meetings. 

 

And when they don’t do that, and legislation passed, we will do 

what we need to do as official opposition to try to make sure 

that the government is held accountable, that the government 



5116 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

made sure it went out and consulted and worked. And you 

know, you have the Supreme Court of Canada to make it very 

clear. They didn’t make that decision just to say, you may if 

you feel like it. It’s very clear. 

 

So we see things happening that are impacting First Nations and 

Métis. And to be honest with you, that is appalling, that they 

would even . . . And I don’t know, you know, did they consult 

with First Nations and Métis? Like clearly I’d like to know, did 

the ministry invite them to the table? Did they ask them, here’s 

what we’re doing; we’re making some changes. Did they talk to 

the people that would be impacted by this, whether they’re 

northerner, whether they’re Aboriginal, non-Aboriginal, the 

industry, the people that are, you know, doing subcontracts? 

 

It’s very clear, but you have to make sure that you go to the 

people that are most impacted. And this government doesn’t 

like doing that. It likes to create legislation. It doesn’t want to 

consult and talk. But I encourage them to do that. It’s a right. 

They have an obligation to make sure that the people feel that 

they have an opportunity to express themselves to the 

government that’s making legislation. 

 

We can fight on behalf of the opposition. And we will. We’ll do 

all we can to make sure that we hold the government 

accountable. The people expect that. But on the other side, I 

think people in the other members’ constituency, I think it’s 

very clear, very clear, very clear that they hold this government 

accountable and that is important — very clear. 

 

You know. And the members can, from their chair, say what 

they want. They try to move away. But remember this: the 

Supreme Court of Canada didn’t say the government may. The 

government ought to. It’s very clear. The government made it 

very . . . The Supreme Court made it very . . . It is the 

government’s obligation to do this. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen, we’ve seen and the people have 

seen exactly what this government’s willing to do when they 

pass legislation, exactly what they’re willing to do. They’re 

willing to push whatever they want as long as it’s theirs. So you 

talk about being bully. You talk about the process of consulting, 

of involving the community members, stakeholders. You know, 

the obligation isn’t on the stakeholders and the community 

members to bring this information. The obligation’s on the 

government. The Supreme Court of Canada made it very clear. 

So sometimes I wonder. 

 

You know. And some of these things might be just minor 

housekeeping issues that they’re dealing with. And I’ve said 

that it might be. But some of these might be impacting the 

industry, the communities. And when you look at it, Mr. 

Speaker, if that is happening, then truly I hope that the 

government has put their hand out and has invited them out to 

come and share their views. That’s important. People want that. 

And it’s fine at the end of the day, people expect that, we know 

that, you’ll go through . . . We’ll debate things. And at the end, 

Mr. Speaker, make it very clear, if it’s an informed decision, 

people will accept that. But you have to make sure that they’ve 

made an informed decision. 

 

And sometimes it’s bully tactics. Sometimes they do it the way 

they want. It’s not that they want to consult anybody. Like I 

said before, it isn’t consult, it’s insult. And sometimes that is 

the nastiest thing you can do to people. You don’t want to 

consult. You don’t call them. You don’t involve them. You’ll 

pay a price for that. 

 

And I know some of the members opposite, they chuckle at it 

and think it’s funny. Well you wait. That’s all right. Let them 

have that. That’s good. Keep that attitude going. See how it 

works for you. 

 

But Bill 125, Bill 125. Bill 125. Very clear. Bill 125, Crown 

minerals. So they’re making a change to the mineral. So here 

they are with changes, and again I go back to this, Mr. Speaker. 

Who was consulted? Who was talked to? Was it just the 

industry or did you talk to everybody out there — stakeholders, 

people that were impacted? Did you have meetings, public 

meetings? Did you go out? Did you involve? 

 

So you know, you have a process like that and you have some 

people that are not happy and they want to be able to express 

themselves and they want to make sure the government hears 

their concerns. It isn’t that . . . Legislation has to be passed. The 

government has a job to do. Everybody knows that. But it’s 

their track record that people are scared of. 

 

It’s the honesty that a person has to make sure you trust. 

There’s a trusting and people have to trust the government will 

do the right things. And sometimes the people aren’t feeling 

that way, and it’s very clear. They’re making that known to 

many of us on this side, and I think members opposite will be 

hearing that from their constituencies that the frustration . . . 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, just want to go back and I can refer to the 

work that was done previously. And there has been, you know 

— Bill 110 — a lot of work back at home and I commend the 

people back home for the work they put into that Bill. They 

spent a lot of time discussing the issues around it. They had 

many meetings, many opportunities to have input into the chain. 

And it was under the previous NDP government that that 

process started. They wanted it, they asked it, and that was 

done. 

 

And I think that process was great. It did what it needed to do 

and the people spoke, and that is exactly what we are talking 

about. That is a good piece of legislation that the process of 

duty to consult was done. That is good. I’m not, I’m not . . . 

And I said that before. I complimented the communities, the 

way they worked, the leadership, the mayors. They’ve done an 

excellent job of making sure that legislation will work for them. 

And they worked, and they had their input, and I commend that. 

So I want to be clear on that. 

 

I know people will have other things they would like to say 

about this Bill, but like I just want to be very clear. You know, 

the minister across says, oh yes, they were all talked to. Oh yes. 

From his chair said, yes, you know, oh yes, you know we 

consulted them. We had community meeting; we talked to 

them. You know, he’s shaking his head yes and making his 

comments. That’s good; I’m glad. That makes me feel better 

about that. So on that note that that happened, I’m actually 

prepared at this point to go ahead and move this Bill into 

committee. 

 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5117 

The Speaker: — The question before the committee is the 

motion put forward by the Minister Responsible for Energy and 

Resources that Bill No. 125, The Crown Minerals Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read the second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill 125, The Crown 

Minerals Amendment Act, 2009 be referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 135 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 135 — The 

Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 

again it gives me a great deal of pleasure and I want to express 

the honour it is to have the privilege of rising in debate in this 

House and to do so on behalf of the fine people of Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an interesting Bill which we have before us 

here, the Bill 135 — just trying to find my notes here to give the 

correct title — Bill 135, The Act to Amend the Prescription 

Drugs Act. And, Mr. Speaker, in principle I think this Bill has 

some parts of this Bill that certainly is worthy of the changes to 

the Act and the amendments to the Act. And I think they are 

forward-looking, and that is unique, I suppose, as many of the 

Bills that come forward from the government have not 

necessarily fit that category. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think, as it’s outlined, that currently 

pharmacists in Saskatchewan here can’t sell more than 50 

tablets without a prescription and must record all sales in their 

store, but are not required to share that information. And I 

think, Mr. Speaker, there is a real need to establish some type of 

a central agency here where prescription drugs can be 

registered, I guess you would say, to ensure that the health care 

professionals within our province have access to that 

information in a timely fashion. 

 

There’s also a need, Mr. Speaker, to be able though to have that 

information held centrally so that we can ensure that there is no 

abuse or misuse of our prescription drug systems by any 

individual or individuals, so that we have a record, have an 

ability to keep track of what is happening as far as prescription 

drugs are concerned. 

 

And I know myself, Mr. Speaker, recently having had some 

medical procedures, I was surprised that when I was being 

admitted to the hospital, the amount of information that was 

available to my health care professional as far as my past use of 

prescribed prescription drugs. And, Mr. Speaker, I was 

impressed. I was really impressed that what, a small amount 

that I have used over my life, that was available to that 

professional. And I was pleased it was, because, I mean, I think 

we want to have all our health care professionals have the best 

of information on our history as possible and have that 

information available to them as quickly as possible. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, there is the concern over privacy. I 

think we want to have that information held centrally. We want 

to have that information held in a way that would be available 

to health care professionals when it’s required for medical 

purposes. But we also want to ensure that we have a system that 

ensures a privacy that my health records, or anyone else’s 

health records, and prescription drug records are being kept in a 

secure manner that is not available to somebody who is not a 

health care professional and/or is not being misused by those 

who may be health care professionals but for whatever reason 

believe that they need that extra information for purposes other 

than that which’d be in my best interests of my health. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that is part of the concern that we have 

with this Bill is the degree of privacy. Where is the privacy? 

What is the privacy levels that will ensure, ensure that that 

information is kept private and is kept secure in a manner that 

will cause us to be able to be relaxed in knowing that that 

information is there in case our health care professional needs 

it? In case there was ever an incident, perhaps something that’s 

medical that wasn’t planned, an accident, or something along 

that line, and a health care professional treating a patient would 

have the ability to be able to immediately, immediately call up 

those records and know that the past history, as far as 

prescription drugs is concerned, of the patient was, and be able 

to add that to the information that is used to make the proper 

decision as to the treatment for the individual. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s very important. And I think it 

goes without saying. It will be helpful to be able to share that 

information between pharmacies and pharmacists, doctors, 

hospitals, and to provide the patient with the best of health care 

services, the best of services, and to do so in a safe atmosphere 

to ensure that there is no misuse of drugs, I guess you would 

say, or misapplication of drugs in the event that there is an 

incident that does take place. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that is of a much of a concern in this 

Bill, is that we are able to develop that system that would be 

best to serve the people of this great province of ours, but to do 

so in a fashion that provides the security of privacy within that 

system so that we can, quite frankly, simply relax and know that 

our information is going to be kept private and is not going to 

be available to people who are not within the health care system 

or who simply don’t need that information. 

 



5118 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, once again we wonder what level of consultation 

has taken place. Who has this government talked to? What level 

of consultation did they do? How did the . . . What form did that 

consultation take, if any? And what was the feedback? What did 

those people they talked to . . . First of all, who did they consult 

with? Who did they consult with, we need to know that. 

 

After we know who they consulted with, we would like to know 

in what manner did that consultation take place? Was it done 

one-on-one? Was it done through perhaps telephone contacts or 

was it done through a newsletter or was it done through a 

questionnaire? What method was used to gain information or 

gain comments from the stakeholders involved and those who 

are involved within the system? And who will be affected by 

the changes to this Act? 

 

What system was used to contact them, to discuss this issue 

with them so that we could glean back the information required, 

so that the government would be in a position to be able to 

make a good sound decision on the recommendations for 

amendments to the Act to ensure that this Act will do what we 

want it to do, and that is to act in the best interests of the 

patients or the best interests of Saskatchewan people who find 

the need to, on occasions, to use a medical system, find a need 

on occasion to use a prescription drug. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we want to be able to ensure that that 

information that was gathered by the government was gathered 

in a manner that would be able to be incorporated into the 

changes to the Act, to best reflect the best benefit for 

Saskatchewan people. And, Mr. Speaker, that is just another 

question I would have in regards to the level of consultation and 

the method of consultation this government may have carried 

out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it goes on to say that we need to ensure 

that we have that level of privacy within the Act. And we do so 

by proper and correct consultation with the good folks out there, 

who many of them are on the front lines. Many of them are 

using prescription drugs. After all, in today’s day and age — 

and I think perhaps as of a result of the marvels of modern 

medical science — that a lot of drugs have been developed that 

go a long way in relieving medical problems and causing 

perhaps a relief in medical problems. Perhaps even saving 

surgery, in a lot of cases for a corrective surgery where drugs 

today and modern medicine today will have a long ability to be 

able to address some of these concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to be concerned about the direction of 

this government, particularly when it comes to the drug plan. 

Somebody once said that putting the Sask Party government in 

charge of prescription drugs is a little like putting Colonel 

Sanders in charge of the chicken coop. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that is a reflection of this government’s inability or lack of 

desire to be able to provide drug plans that will be beneficial to 

the people of Saskatchewan as a whole. 

 

In fact, Mr. Minister, we see that the drug plan that does exist 

here in Saskatchewan, this government has taken it to a level 

where seniors — and the quite active seniors, Mr. Speaker, the 

people who have built this great province of ours, people who 

worked in this province, sacrificed in this province to build this 

great province that we’ve inherited — will now find themselves 

subjected to a means test in order to qualify for a prescription 

drug program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s unfortunate because after all it’s the seniors, 

it’s these people that should enjoy the better part of their golden 

years with some degree of security. And to do so, Mr. Speaker, 

they don’t have to be subjected to a means test simply to be able 

to receive some support on a prescription drug program. Mr. 

Speaker, I wonder why this government would treat our seniors 

with that degree of meanness, really. It’s because it’s . . . It’s a 

means test. It’s a mean means test, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that we have to be concerned 

when this government is introducing amendments to the 

prescription drug program here, and amendments that may 

reflect on the privacy of drug information that’s provided to, 

essentially to our health care professionals. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, this government has clearly demonstrated their 

inability to manage, they’ve clearly demonstrated over the last 

three years their inability to manage the affairs of this province. 

They’ve clearly demonstrated their inability to manage the 

financial affairs of Saskatchewan, taking the province from a 

position that they had inherited of over $2 billion — a $2.3 

billion surplus, that’s what they inherited when they became 

government — and within three years, Mr. Speaker, they’ve 

taken this government to a point of being $1 billion in debt. A 

billion-dollar deficit, Mr. Speaker. In three years they’ve blown 

$3 billion. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, if all the numbers were added up in a 

proper method, it would be even greater than that because to 

lessen the debt, to lessen the deficit this year to a mere $1 

billion, to lessen that deficit, they stripped all of the revenue 

from the Crowns. They stripped all of the revenue from the 

Crowns, all the profits from the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. They 

stripped that away from the Crowns, forcing the Crowns now to 

not to be able to use their own cash to reinvest into their 

companies. But now they’re forcing them to go out and borrow 

that money, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this government has 

clearly demonstrated that they can’t manage the affairs of this 

province. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, in most recent days, recent hours in fact, 

they’ve clearly demonstrated they can’t even manage the affairs 

of this House, Mr. Speaker. And that was very evident 

yesterday with their motion to extend the hours, making it much 

more difficult for the opposition members to be able to consult 

with the stakeholders across this great province — those who 

are going to be affected by the changes to the Act, those who 

are going to be affected in this Act also, Mr. Speaker, those 

changes. Mr. Speaker, we need to be able to consult with those 

stakeholders, and you need the time to do that. And you can’t 

be in here, Mr. Speaker, and be out in your office and be 

contacting your contacts throughout the industry. 

 

So that, Mr. Speaker, simply adds to the lessening of the ability 

of the opposition to do its job, and that is I think what the 

government wants. I think the government wants to be able to 

restrict the opposition from doing its job. And why? It’s quite 

simple, Mr. Speaker, they’re losing. They’re losing the debate. 

They’re losing the issues. They’re losing political ground across 

this great province. 

 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5119 

That became very evident in the last session, and it’s 

compounded in this session. And what they want to do, Mr. 

Speaker, is they want to get out of this House as quickly as 

possible. They want to get out of this House quickly as possible 

because they’re losing. They noticed the trend line is there, the 

trend line is down. Their popularity is sliding. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

only a matter of time, it’s only a matter of time until the trend 

lines are down, their popularity is down. The only thing that’s 

going to be out, Mr. Speaker, is going to be those members over 

there after the next election. They will be out of this House, and 

they will be out of government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is something that is becoming more and 

more evident that they would just as soon — they meaning the 

government opposite — would just as soon not allow the 

process of democracy would take place. And perhaps if they 

need more time to get their work done to get legislation through 

to extend the number of days that this House sits so that there 

would be a number of more opportunities for the opposition to 

be able to ask questions of the government, they want to curtail 

that. They want to suppress that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there is a number of issues that of course 

come out of, not only perhaps the amendments to this particular 

Act, but are certainly related to it. And that would be of course 

the decision made by this government to de-insure the 

chiropractic services, services that have been insured through 

our health care system or co-insured for some time now. But, 

Mr. Speaker, this government for whatever reason, and I would 

think perhaps it was trying to save a few dollars here and there, 

but they really didn’t care who they hurt to do the saving. They 

picked on the people who are vulnerable — people who need 

medical services, people who need chiropractic services — and 

they are saying to them, you’re no longer going to get any 

support or assistance in receiving that service. You’re going to 

be on your own. 

 

What that means quite simply, Mr. Speaker, is that these folks, 

many of them won’t be able to afford a chiropractor on their 

own, so they will turn to our medical system. They’ll turn to our 

emergency wards. They will turn to our emergency centres. 

They will turn to our health care clinics. They will turn to our 

medical professionals for that help which increases the cost of 

health care in this province, puts greater pressure on our health 

care system. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s a case of being a penny-wise and pound 

poorer. And that’s what this government here . . . They saved a 

penny, they saved a few pennies by de-insuring the 

chiropractors, but it’s going to cost the people of Saskatchewan 

a lot more money just to be able to provide the pain relief, in 

many cases, and medical services to those people who 

previously were receiving that from their chiropractor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing their record, their record on rural 

health care simply shrinking. The number of rural doctors in 

Saskatchewan has shrank under their governance. And, Mr. 

Speaker, there is no plan in place. There is no plan presented to 

the people of Saskatchewan, presented to this legislature to 

address that problem, the problem of rural doctor shortages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a result of that, we’re seeing hospitals go on 

bypass on a regular basis. A hospital in Kamsack is on bypass 

almost half the time. Yet, Mr. Speaker, when that would happen 

on occasion previously when we were the government, the 

member from Canora-Pelly would make a big issue out of it. 

When he was in opposition, he would be very concerned 

because Kamsack Hospital would be on bypass on a certain 

weekend. And now, Mr. Speaker, if you listen to the news out 

there, and I get a number of reports from folks who live out 

there that they are very concerned because the Kamsack 

Hospital is on bypass most of the time. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we’re seeing is a deterioration of our 

health care services throughout Saskatchewan under this 

government. And, Mr. Speaker, those are some of the reasons 

that we have concerns over Bill 135 and that we need to further 

discuss those concerns. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, the best 

place for those detailed discussions to take place, would be to 

take place in the committee. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move 

that Bill 135 be moved to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 135, 

The Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2009 be now read the 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 135, The 

Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2009 be referred to the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Bill No. 107 

 

[The Assembly resumed the debate on the proposed motion by 

the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 107 — The Weed Control 

Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased this afternoon to stand and enter into debate on a very 

important piece of legislation, The Weed Control Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with this piece of legislation, like many others, 

there are aspects of the Bill that are definitely positive, both for 



5120 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

producers and for municipalities across the province, Mr. 

Speaker. But there’s also a number of concerns that any piece of 

legislation raises in the public, issues that we need to take into 

consideration when reviewing the impact of this particular Bill 

on the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill addresses a problem that may or may not 

be relevant in municipalities across the province, but it 

definitely is in certain municipalities, Mr. Speaker. And it gives 

new powers to municipalities to deal with weed control within 

the municipality. The problem is, Mr. Speaker, what one 

producer may feel is a noxious weed or a problem, another may 

not. What a RM [rural municipality] may feel is a noxious weed 

and the producer believes is a noxious weed may not be the 

same. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, although this legislation I believe is 

intended to deal with a problem in municipalities across the 

province, Mr. Speaker, it may not always be without some 

hardship, some disagreements and in some cases, Mr. Speaker, 

perhaps even the difficulties that remain for several years into 

the future, Mr. Speaker. Because there’s nothing that a producer 

guards more closely than his own fields, his own land, Mr. 

Speaker. And to have somebody say what he can and cannot 

grow on his land, or that he should lose a crop due to a noxious 

weed, Mr. Speaker, is very significant to a producer. Producers 

work very hard to produce a crop and to work their land, Mr. 

Speaker, and to have somebody come from the outside and say, 

well you have to spray this or you may lose a crop as a result of 

it, Mr. Speaker, is something that producers wouldn’t take 

lightly. 

 

I also feel relatively secure that RMs wouldn’t take that lightly 

either, Mr. Speaker. Municipalities need to work seriously with 

producers to deal with the issue of noxious weeds in their 

communities and in their RMs across the province, Mr. 

Speaker. But it’s that co-operation between the RMs and the 

producers and the RMs and landowners, Mr. Speaker, that 

would make this Bill be successful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, where there are disagreements . . . We hope 

they’re few, Mr. Speaker, but inevitably there’s bound to be 

disagreements between producers and landowners. It wouldn’t 

matter what piece of legislation was passed in the legislature, 

Mr. Speaker, there is always some disagreement and some 

agreement with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act allows for some very aggressive steps to 

be taken against an individual who is deemed to have noxious 

weeds and is not taking appropriate steps themselves to deal 

with it or to look after the problem, Mr. Speaker. Some may 

argue too aggressive a step, Mr. Speaker, that there should be a 

greater emphasis on co-operation versus the enforcement. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in the end of day, if there is a problem that’s 

affecting your neighbours, affecting the municipality, Mr. 

Speaker, at some point you have to act. And this particular Bill 

gives the authority to act, Mr. Speaker, and deal with the 

problem. It has penalties attached to failure to comply. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it will inevitably at least have some impact on the 

spread of noxious weeds throughout the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I look at this particular Bill and look at its 

subparts, Mr. Speaker, it talks about powers to enter an 

individual’s land. It allows a weed inspector to enter land or 

enter premises, other than a private dwelling, for the purposes 

of performing the duties of exercising the powers determined in 

this Act. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this particular Act will give powers for weed 

inspectors to enter an individual’s land — not their personal 

homes or dwellings, Mr. Speaker — but onto their farm land or 

onto their pasture land and to in fact inspect whether or not a 

claim of noxious weeds is in fact valid, Mr. Speaker, and to 

determine the extent of the problem. Hopefully first the weed 

inspector would work with the producers or the landowner in 

order to try to deal with the problem in a co-operative way, but 

there are measures to be undertaken when and if there is not 

co-operation with one another. 

 

It goes on to talk about consultation with the landowner — the 

positive things we like to see. It talks about orders in order to 

force the landowner to take certain actions, Mr. Speaker. And in 

the extreme circumstances, you can order up to the destruction 

of a crop. But it also has some criteria listed that have to be met 

before a weed inspector could actually order the destruction of a 

landowner’s crop, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it also says that 

rules or orders must always be in writing, they must be in the 

form prescribed in regulations, Mr. Speaker, and it must be 

served in person to the owner of the land or property. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, although there is some concerns about this Bill 

and its application as it would pertain to landowners in the 

province and to rural producers and to municipalities, Mr. 

Speaker, on balance we see the virtue of this particular piece of 

legislation for the overall well-being of the province, Mr. 

Speaker, and in moving forward the concerns of the people of 

the province in regards to handling and dealing with noxious 

weeds within our province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this particular piece of legislation allows for 

an appeal mechanism as well, if there’s a disagreement as to 

what would be the appropriate step to be taken. The appeal is to 

the Municipal Board, Saskatchewan Municipal Board, Mr. 

Speaker, and so it, this particular piece of legislation covers 

what I would say are the fundamentals of an individual’s rights. 

 

If you don’t agree with the decision of the weed inspector and 

the orders which the weed inspector puts forward, you have the 

right to appeal that to a municipal board. And the Municipal 

Board has the right to pass judgment on whether or not the 

weed inspector has overstepped his authority, whether he’s 

overstepped what might be the best course of action to deal with 

the problem, Mr. Speaker. But we need to keep in mind that this 

particular legislation first and foremost requires consultation 

and working with landowners to deal with the problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we would hope that the particular situations that 

result in controversy around this legislation would be few and 

far between, requiring very few, if any, appeals to the 

Municipal Board. But inevitably, as with any piece of 

legislation that could have as significant an outcome as 

destruction of a crop, Mr. Speaker, we would expect that there 

would be from time to time disagreements. And when you’re 

dealing with potentially thousands or tens of thousands of 

dollars as a result of a destruction of a crop, Mr. Speaker, that’s 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5121 

important to that landowner, important to the individual. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it might also be just as important to the 

neighbouring landowners to stop the spread of that noxious 

weed. It may be just as important to the municipality to stop the 

spread of that weed across a much broader spectrum, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, having spent some time on this Bill, many of 

my colleagues having spent some considerable time reviewing 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker, and the fact that the questions that we 

have would most appropriately be placed in committee, Mr. 

Speaker, at this time, I would move this Bill to committee, 

which will give us the opportunity to ask those more refined 

questions, as we want to scrutinize this legislation in committee 

in the near future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Question before the Assembly is a 

motion by the Minister of Agriculture that Bill No. 107, The 

Weed Control Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 107, The Weed 

Control Act be referred to the Standing Committee on the 

Economy. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 129 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 129 — The 

Enforcement of Money Judgments Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 

to rise and speak about The Enforcement of Money Judgments 

Act. And this is legislation that has a substantial size in the 

sense that it’s got many, many pages to it. But it effectively, it’s 

a consolidation Bill. 

 

Now I want to make one comment about the speech made by 

the Minister of Justice for this particular Bill, and he rose in the 

House on March 8th to present the second reading speech for 

this particular Bill. And I only make the comment that this 

speech also fits with a number of the other ones that have been 

made by ministers in this session, which is that there’s not 

much substance to the speech. 

 

And what we know is that when the courts have difficulty 

interpreting legislation, one of the first places that they go is the 

second reading speech of the minister to provide some further 

judgment or further information for any judgment that they 

might have to make in the court. And the information that was 

provided by the Minister of Justice on March 8th was quite 

short, quite cursory. And unfortunately, I think there was a 

missed opportunity to actually set out a number of the 

principles that were involved in more detail so that subsequent 

years, when people are looking at this particular legislation, 

they would have some guidance. 

 

Now the reason I say that is that this legislation is a 

consolidation of quite a number of different pieces of legislation 

that have been around for many, many years. And so the net 

effect of this judgment is to repeal The Executions Act. Now 

that’s kind of a harsh name but basically it means an Act that 

allows for the execution of a order or a judgment. It also 

eliminates The Exemptions Act, gets rid of The Creditors’ Relief 

Act, The Absconding Debtors Act, and The Attachment of Debts 

Act. 

 

Now those old names have a lot of meaning to lawyers but, for 

most people in the public, they don’t have a whole sense of 

meaning because . . . unless they are the ones that are caught in 

these particular ones. And so quite often, The Executions Act, 

you would not have heard about it unless you happened to 

purchase some land, for example, and there’s a writ of 

execution that shows up on the title based on the name of the 

person who you purchased land from. And all of a sudden, 

you’re having to deal with paying for a judgment that you 

didn’t know about. 

 

The same with The Exemptions Act, and we’ll talk about that a 

little later. That sets out the kinds of things that are protected for 

you if you are a debtor and the matter’s being enforced against 

you. That provides some protection as to what things you can 

keep to allow you to continue to live and perhaps get to your 

job. And same with The Creditors’ Relief Act. 

 

The Absconding Debtors Act, that’s the one that allows for 

special provisions to take place when you know that 

somebody’s going to leave town or leave the province to get 

away from paying their debts. 

 

And then finally The Attachment of Debts Act, I think 

everybody has a little bit of a sense of that. But that’s basically 

the legislation that allowed for a judgment to be registered 

against your wages or other money that was owed to you. And 

all of a sudden, you find out that you’re getting maybe 10 per 

cent of the amount you’d earned on your paycheque, and that 

would end up being obviously a major problem in your life. 

 

And so all of these various pieces of legislation have now been 

lumped into the enforcement of judgments for the payment of 

money Act. And so effectively we’ve lost all those rich, old 

words and we’ve gone to words that talk about enforcement and 

judgment. And I thought it was quite interesting that, rather 



5122 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

than talk about a sheriff or some of these other terms that have a 

lot of history around them, we’re going to now be talking about 

an enforcement officer and an enforcement proceeding and an 

enforcement instruction. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And I think it’s probably fine to go with some new language, 

but clearly we miss out on much of the rich history that has us 

refer to the Sheriff of Nottingham hundreds of years ago or 

sheriffs in the Wild West in the United States of a couple of 

centuries ago, and now we’re coming down to enforcement 

officers. And so that’s what this particular legislation is about. 

 

Now the key issue for us, when we look at this legislation from 

the point of view of the public, is what will the effect be on 

individuals? Well clearly the goal here is to provide a more 

rational, a more complete system for those people who are 

owed money to be able to collect their money from those that 

owe it to them. And that, if you’re a business, that’s good news 

to hear. If you’re a person that is owed money, well clearly you 

want to have something that’s simpler to use. 

 

I think though there are also areas where money is now deemed 

to be owed which might not have been there a few decades ago. 

And one of these areas is the whole victims of crime issue and 

the issue where there’s compensation for crimes that have been 

committed. And the minister has said that this, these kinds of 

orders that will be made in criminal proceedings or civil 

proceedings after a criminal conviction will be able to be 

enforced under this legislation. 

 

So another positive aspect of this from the business 

community’s side is clearly that it enables a much easier use of 

the electronic registries that we have in Saskatchewan or, for 

that matter, across the globe as judgments are enforced 

extrajudicially or extra-jurisdictionally. And so what we’ll have 

in this legislation is legislation that ties in with the Uniform 

Law Conference recommendations for all of Canada and also 

the appropriate ties into the Uniform Commercial Code in the 

United States. 

 

So let’s talk a little bit about what the Bill deals with, and I will 

then point out a couple of areas where there are not necessarily 

concerns but where I think the public needs to be clear on 

what’s being intended here because it will have consequences 

for a number of people in our community. 

 

So when you look at the format of the legislation, basically we 

start out in the legislation in section 4, and effectively what this 

does is allows for sheriffs to authorize people to do their 

functions which are available in this. And this basically relates 

to the enforcement officer. 

 

In the part 2, there’s a whole section on preservation orders, and 

this basically relates to a number of issues that were located in 

quite a number of different pieces of legislation, but practically 

it relates to The Absconding Debtors Act where people would 

try to get away with their personal property and hide it away 

from the creditor who was looking for it. This also is a 

legislation that probably can be used in matrimonial property 

cases where one party may try to cover up or hide assets from 

the other party. It gives quite substantial powers to the court to 

make orders that would allow for the tracking of property and 

doing other things like that. But it’s all done in the new format 

of legislation. 

 

Another aspect, the next section of this particular Bill deals with 

obtaining information from a debtor. And once again, it sets out 

some fairly clear ways that a creditor can ask questions of 

somebody who owes them money to find out what assets they 

have and what assets are available to actually pay the debts. 

 

And this may be, I think, an important area to see that we’re 

actually doing this, as we know that the subject of debt and the 

discussion of debt has become an issue in the province. And 

when we’re in an economy like we are in right now, where 

people are incurring much more debt, there usually is a 

reckoning. And this legislation looks like it probably will be in 

place at the time that that reckoning comes. And so this will be 

one area where people will want to have their affairs in order if 

they’re being required to provide information about their assets 

to satisfy a creditor. 

 

The next area is the whole area of registration of judgments, 

and I think this is the area that allows for the electronic 

registration. What we’ll have in Saskatchewan is pretty quick 

ways of finding out where judgments have been obtained, who 

they’re against, and making sure that they are in a position to be 

attached to a whole number of assets that show up on electronic 

registries. 

 

And this is an area that sort of butts up against the whole issue 

of privacy and information like that. But most often people who 

have borrowed money will have, in the contracts where they’ve 

borrowed the money, given up the rights to the creditor to go 

through all of these privacy protections to find any assets that 

they might have which would then satisfy the debt. I think the 

plan is, as I understand, that the judgments will be in an official 

judgment registry. 

 

Used to be, when I first started practising law, that there were 

registries of judgments that were in all of the various land titles 

offices, and that was one way that you could figure out possibly 

whether somebody had some land assets or interest in a lease or 

something that you would be able to attach. But they were often 

not totally complete, and you’d end up having so many different 

land titles offices that you weren’t always certain that you had 

checked every place. This will eliminate all of that uncertainty 

and allow for a common province-wide registry and effectively, 

I think, it will provide much more power there for, then, to the 

creditors. And I guess when I use the word creditors, probably 

the most common will be the banks and the credit unions, and 

they will end up having more power to deal with the 

enforcement of getting their money back. 

 

So then you get into a whole next area of, well what happens 

once that you get a judgment? Obviously you have to go to 

court and go through all the procedures. But I’m not sure what 

the exact percentage is now, but I would think way in excess of 

half, maybe 90 per cent of the judgments that would be 

registered under this kind of legislation are what are called 

default judgments or judgments where people have not filed a 

response because they effectively have no defence and they 

don’t want to incur any costs in fighting the claim that’s against 

them. And that ends up also adding an added issue for the 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5123 

people who then enforce it. 

 

But you have a judgment. It can sit there for years on a registry, 

but until the creditor actually initiates or makes an effort to 

enforce it, it will just sit there. And so what the legislation then 

has . . . sets out the new rules about how you get the sheriff 

involved to actually enforce your judgment. And I think that 

one of the values of the new legislation is it will set out very 

clearly what kinds of things need to be done. I’m assuming that 

and . . . well I’m not assuming. I know that in the legislation 

they’ll have the ability under the regulatory powers to set out 

forms that can be used and common procedures, and those will 

obviously be developed over the years to make sure that 

everything is done according to a format that will obviously 

allow for the enforcement of the judgment but more 

importantly, I think, allow for protection and fairness for the 

debtor. 

 

And when you go through the legislation, then you get into a 

whole section on seizure of various types of assets whether 

they’re securities or existing future accounts, and that obviously 

I think includes salaries, payments, those kinds of things. And 

so effectively we get rid of the old words like The Attachment 

of Debts Act, and we get into . . . I think the wording that’s used 

here is seizure of employment remuneration. Well it’s the same 

old thing, but it’s got a new title. And I suspect that they will 

have received quite a bit of advice from the maintenance 

enforcement office about how to make sure that some of these 

procedures work efficiently and effectively because we know 

the success of our Saskatchewan maintenance enforcement 

office has come about because they’ve been very diligent in 

making sure that the rules are effective in collecting money, 

oftentimes from employment remuneration. 

 

And so as you keep going through this, you start then dealing 

with what happens when a business goes into receivership 

where somebody else is managing the assets. That would also 

be the area where you’d end up talking about bankruptcies and 

what happens with judgments in bankruptcies, what happens 

with property that may be in the process of being seized and 

being dealt with. And we know that there have been a number 

of discussions in this legislature and in the public about 

bankruptcy or receiverships and what things have happened 

there. 

 

I think it’s also important to emphasize the fact that section 93 

sets out what kind of property is exempt. And this basically is a 

compilation of the existing legislation, but I think what they’ve 

also done is gone through all the court cases that have happened 

over many, many years and attempted to describe in the 

legislation the kinds of exemptions that judges have allowed 

over the years to allow debtors to continue to live. And I think 

that there will also be some discretion for the court to deal with 

property where it may be unusual and it doesn’t fit into any of 

the items listed here. But when you look at the legislation, I 

mean there’s some very good things that are here, but basically 

it’s about allowing a person to keep one motor vehicle so they 

can get to and from work, and it probably has to be a motor 

vehicle that is of a value that is not out of line with what’s 

necessary. 

 

[16:00] 

 

It allows household furnishings, utensils, equipment, 

appliances, those kinds of things, clothing, some jewellery. And 

effectively they’ve removed some of the certainty in the Act 

itself by saying that the values will be of a prescribed amount. 

Now we’ll give them the benefit of the doubt here and say that 

it’s set up that way so that the prescribed amounts can change 

as the inflation takes place over the decades and so they can be 

adjusted without having to come back into and change this 

particular legislation. 

 

It also talks about which kinds of investments might be exempt, 

and this is an area where this particular legislation will probably 

end up having to mesh with other legislation. We know that 

pension plans have certain kinds of exemptions. Some are set 

out here, but most often they’re dealt with in other places, also 

registered retirement savings plans. And we know also that, for 

example, a major issue in Ontario over the last few years has 

been some of the pensions from some of the big automobile 

manufacturers because in their receivership or bankruptcy 

proceedings quite a number of the pension plans weren’t 

exempt from enforcement and they were actually taken by the 

banks. And people who thought they had very secure retirement 

set out with regular income all of a sudden found that they 

maybe had 10 or 20 or 30 per cent of what had been promised 

to them. 

 

And there’s a very big social policy issue there that I think is 

subject of much discussion right across Canada, and I know in 

the States as well. And it wouldn’t directly be dealt with in this 

particular legislation but it does fit in with this whole question 

of, well what kinds of assets are exempt? And in Saskatchewan 

the issue of a homestead, provided it’s not more than 160 acres, 

has always been exempt property, and that’s a direct result of 

many of the things that happened during the ’30s in 

Saskatchewan. And we brought in legislation in this particular 

legislature in those years which would allow for an extra 

protection against creditors who were trying to take people’s 

homes away from them. 

 

It’s quite interesting that in the last number of years, say in the 

last, you know, 15 years, that whole issue of homestead 

legislation — and this is the word that’s still used in here — has 

been something that’s been examined from other jurisdictions 

looking at Saskatchewan. 

 

And in the United States right now, when they’re having so 

many difficulties with people’s homes being repossessed there, 

this whole issue around what kinds of exemptions, what kind of 

protections are there, is also a factor. And so what we’ve tried 

to do traditionally . . . And it’s my hope that this particular 

legislation does that. It appears to protect a person’s home and 

their ability to get to work and basically to live a fair but 

straitened lifestyle. 

 

But if somebody has borrowed a lot of money and purchased a 

lot of toys or other things, those will all be picked up and sold 

and the money used to pay debts. And this particular legislation 

I think does a good job of making that process more 

straightforward and basically advantageous for the creditor. 

 

It also, in this whole exemptions area, pulls in the exemptions 

as it relates to employment remuneration — in other words, the 

whole area of the attachment of debt. And that’s appropriate 



5124 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

because then what can happen, you can see what kind of 

exemptions there are on the assets, whether it’s real estate or the 

personal assets of the debtor, and also you can see what kinds of 

exemptions there should be on the flow of income that they 

have into that household. And this will allow for the court to set 

some of these amounts. And clearly the previous provisions 

around providing sufficient information to the enforcement 

officers will assist also in dealing with the whole question 

around the exemption for employment remuneration. 

 

So we have legislation that’s very comprehensive and it’s 

dealing with an area where there can be a great deal of 

difficulty. I know once again I’ll mention the Globe Theatre this 

week has the production of Henrik Ibsen’s A Doll’s House. And 

at the heart of that whole play are a couple of situations around 

debt and the enforcement of the repayment of the debt and what 

kinds of personal hardships it puts on the people who owe the 

money and also the psychological hardships that are there. 

 

And I encourage people to go to the Globe now and over the 

next two weeks and see this play because it’s amazing how a 

play written, I think, in 1882 and modernized in its language 

can reflect what’s happening in the year 2010. And I’m 

reminded of that when we’re presented with this particular 

legislation. 

 

Now the legislation is quite broad-ranging and as a result the 

consequential amendments to other pieces of legislation are 

fairly dramatic. And I’m not sure how many different pieces 

there are listed here, but it looks like it’s probably about 43 

other pieces of legislation that have been amended. And they’re 

not amended in little ways. They’re amended quite broadly to 

make sure that this legislation becomes the governing 

legislation in dealing with the enforcement of money 

judgments. 

 

And that’s the purpose for consolidating legislation, no matter 

when you do it, but a task like this one is, I think, a positive for 

everybody. And it’s not just positive for the creditors who are 

trying to collect money. It’s also, I think, helpful for the debtors 

who are in financial difficulty, many of the things that they look 

for to try to find an answer to. Before it was quite hard to go 

through all of the pieces of legislation, and so I’m assuming 

once this legislation is in place, there will be a rewriting of all 

of the educational materials that are provided to people who are 

in debt and also the various counselling services that assist 

people in debt so that they can make sure that they have the full 

benefit of all of the protections that are in this legislation, but 

also where they can fully understand that their duty is to 

provide information and clearly to repay their debts so that 

businesses or individuals who have lent them money will get 

their money returned to them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this legislation has some questions in some 

aspects of it that we will want to look at as we move forward 

here but I think it’s probably more conducive to look at these 

questions in committee where we can ask the officials about 

why they made certain choices on certain aspects of the 

legislation and what were the compromises that they made to 

get to that point, because that’s always what happens when 

legislation is written. 

 

But I would have to say thank you to all of those people in the 

Ministry of Justice and in the legislative area who have been 

working on this legislation. I think they’ve done an admirable 

job but we will continue to do the job as opposition and ask 

questions. So at this time I think it’s appropriate to move it on 

to the committee. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 129, The 

Enforcement of Money Judgments Act be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 129, The 

Enforcement of Money Judgments Act be referred to the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the committee 

responsible for intergovernmental affairs and justice. 

 

Bill No. 130 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 130 — The 

Enforcement of Money Judgments Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 portant modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Enforcement of Money 

Judgments Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A pleasure this 

afternoon to join into the debate on Bill 130. Bill 130 is An Act 

respecting consequential amendments resulting from the 

enactment of The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to follow immediately after the 

member from Lakeview because, Mr. Speaker, I’m not a lawyer 

and I’m pleased that the member from Lakeview, who is a 

lawyer, who has served as Justice minister and who has 

practised law for a considerable amount of time over the span of 

his working career, was able to provide some information on 

Bill 129, the piece of legislation that he just spoke to and 

provided an explanation. And I say that, Mr. Speaker, that I’m 

pleased that he is able to provide some of the background 

because Bill 129 and Bill 130, the Bill that we are currently 

debating, are certainly linked together. 

 

Bill 130, as the minister’s statement in the House earlier 

suggests, he stated that it provides for the consequential 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5125 

amendments to bilingual Acts affected by the introduction of 

this major law reform Bill. And the law reform Bill that he was 

speaking of when he provided his explanation is The 

Enforcement of Money Judgments Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2009. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as the member from Lakeview stated, there 

were a number of changes that occurred with modernizing or 

updating legislation that had been in place for a significant 

amount of time; updating with some of the language and how 

the different pieces of legislation are assembled into one 

package, and then how they are therefore applied to individuals 

being affected by the legislation. 

 

So with those changes that came forward in 129, there were, as 

it was stated, a number of consequential amendments to 

bilingual Acts. So the piece of legislation, No. 130, is a piece of 

legislation that addresses a number of Acts that are affected by 

the legislation that I was speaking of. 

 

And I will state, Mr. Speaker, that the minister’s remarks on 

Bill 129 are rather brief and he touches a bit more on one area, 

The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997, one of the 

Acts that amends that piece of legislation. 

 

[16:15] 

 

But there certainly could have been a bit more of an explanation 

for the other pieces of legislation that are affected by Bill 130 

and 129. And I say that not for the benefit of the opposition. But 

I say that for the benefit of people in the public who may be 

taking the time to go through a piece of legislation, individuals 

in the future who in a historical perspective look back and see 

what this piece of legislation was doing. 

 

I think if there was a bit more of an explanation provided by the 

minister when he had the opportunity to speak to this piece of 

legislation in the House, I think it could have been expanded a 

bit more because it was only three or four very brief paragraphs 

on this piece of legislation. 

 

So I won’t go into great detail with respect to the changes that 

are suggested in Bill 130. But I would like to state for the 

record a number of Acts and pieces of legislation that are 

affected by Bill 130 with some of the changes that are put into 

place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is The Commercial Liens Act which is 

affected. There is also The Education Act, 1995 is amended by 

this piece of legislation. There is also sections 44 and 45 of The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997. There are some 

sections there that are repealed and substituted with new 

wording, Mr. Speaker. Also affected, amended is The Family 

Property Act. There are changes to The Family Property Act 

that are detailed in this piece of legislation, Bill 130. Another 

piece of legislation that is amended is The Queen’s Bench Act, 

1998, and the changes that are made to The Queen’s Bench Act 

are detailed as well in this piece of legislation. Also affected, 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a new section 5 as stated in this piece of 

legislation. It’s section 5 of The Registered Plan (Retirement 

Income) Exemption Act that is repealed, and there is new 

language that is substituted for the repealed section of that Act. 

 

So as you can see, Mr. Speaker, in the process of updating and 

changing the one piece of legislation, there are additional 

amendments that are required to be brought forward to the 

House, examined, and passed in order to make sure that the one 

piece of legislation is consistent with the other pieces of 

legislation that it affects. And that is essentially what is 

occurring here with Bill No. 130. 

 

I will also state, Mr. Speaker, as it was stated in the minister’s 

remarks on this piece of legislation, that it’s for a number of 

bilingual Acts. So in this piece of legislation, as it is 

appropriate, the one page is English and that is mirrored by a 

page of French text, I assume holding the same information, 

Mr. Speaker. Being not fluent in French, I will trust the officials 

that it was all done properly as the work in this Assembly most 

often is done. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker . . . Well I would comment on one area 

that is perhaps the more lengthy change. And the member from 

Lakeview was able to speak to this for some time, and that’s 

The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act. 

 

I know, as an MLA who has been elected only for a bit over 

two years, I can speak to the fact that over the course of time 

that I have been elected, there have been a number of 

individuals that have come into my office with a question about 

the enforcement of maintenance orders. 

 

It’s clear that life is sometimes complicated, and that certainly 

is the case with financial matters. When there are situations 

through breakdown in business arrangements or issues with a 

breakdown of a family arrangement, Mr. Speaker, there are 

situations where an order for enforcement needs to be in place, 

and this legislation does speak to that. 

 

So I would state, as that is one of the more lengthy portions of 

the legislation, Bill No. 130, and it was one of the couple of 

short paragraphs that was provided by the minister, I would like 

to identify that that is one of the more significant parts of the 

change. 

 

And as the member from Lakeview talked about the role of the 

sheriff and the ability of an individual to enforce the laws in a 

particular jurisdiction, it is good that that aspect of the 

legislative process and that aspect of the administration of law 

is in fact up to date and will help our constituents out, the 

people in Saskatchewan here, to the full extent that it ought to. 

 

Because whenever someone is put into a situation where there 

is a dispute, and they follow the proper channels and the proper 

mechanism through the courts to receive an enforcement order, 

when they’ve played by the rulebook so to speak and that a 

enforcement order is in place, it’s only appropriate that the 

process works for them right till the very end, and that means 

receiving the funds that are owed to them. 

 

So speaking to that one issue in Bill 130, I’m happy to see the 

changes have been made there. But as I stated earlier on, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m not a lawyer and an expert on this type of 

legislation and many of the changes that are put forward in this 

legislation. 

 

So echoing the comments from the member from Lakeview 



5126 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

with respect to some of the detailed questioning that needs to 

occur with this piece of legislation, how different Acts and 

different pieces of legislation interact with one another, and 

some of the implications when changing one piece of 

legislation, the implications of how another piece of legislation 

can be affected — as the member from Lakeview said — many 

of those questions, the most appropriate venue to discuss those 

questions will be in committee with officials from Justice who 

are able to provide background and answer some of the 

questions that members of the opposition may have on this 

particular piece of legislation. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks on Bill 

130, An Act respecting consequential amendments resulting 

from the enactment of The Enforcement of Money Judgments 

Act, Bill No. 130. And at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move 

this piece of legislation to committee. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? The 

question before the Assembly is the motion put forward by the 

Minister of Justice that Bill No. 130, The Enforcement of 

Money Judgments Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 be 

now read the second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill stand referred? I 

recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 130, The 

Enforcement of Money Judgments Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2009 be referred to the Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the committee 

responsible for intergovernmental affairs and justice. 

 

Bill No. 117 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 117 — The 

Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it’s my pleasure 

to rise and speak to Bill 117, An Act Respecting Hunting, 

Fishing and Trapping. And I want to say that that’s where 

there’s a huge history of hunting, fishing, and trapping in 

Saskatchewan that dates back even pre-European settlers. 

There’s just a tremendous people that have a history and have a 

tradition and they just know hunting and they know trapping 

and they know fishing like many of us know the back of our 

hands, and it’s just incredibly important to those people. So for 

this reason alone, designating a hunting, fishing, and trapping 

heritage day is a worthwhile endeavour. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it should go further. It should go further 

because this is really amongst the very first things that was done 

in Saskatchewan. What we should really have is a statutory 

holiday on November 15th, and that would suitably recognize 

the Métis and First Nation hunting, fishing, and trapping that 

goes on in Saskatchewan and has for well over 100 years. 

 

It also has the added advantage, you know, we’re heading into a 

long winter, and you get into November, and November 11th is 

a statutory holiday, Remembrance Day. And that’s a very, very 

important day in the lives of many people. I wish it was in all 

people. I wish we would all remember and commemorate and 

remember soldiers and, you know, war heroes and commit 

ourselves to never again. But we have November 11th as a 

statutory holiday, and if we had November 15th as a statutory 

holiday, we’d have back-to-back weeks bookcased with a 

statutory holiday, and we would be all geared up and set and 

ready for the long, cold winter. We could make it all the way to, 

we could make it all the way certainly to Christmas and New 

Year’s as we waited for Saskatchewan Day in February. 

 

There is one thing seriously this Bill misses. This Bill, if they 

really, if the government was serious, if the Minister of 

Environment and the government, the Sask Party government 

was serious about hunting, fishing, and wildlife, they would be 

designating more protected land. They would be designating 

more protected land, more protected rivers, they would be doing 

all of that. And that would truly honour trappers, fishers, and 

hunters, and it would help in so many ways with wildlife 

habitat, with making sure that the things that many of us take 

for granted today would be around in the future for our 

children, our grandchildren, and future generations. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that’s a very important thing. 

 

This Bill comes out of the Ministry of Environment. In some 

ways, it reminds me of the federal Liberal gun control 

legislation, and here’s how, Mr. Speaker. The federal Liberals 

said, my goodness we have a problem with service stations 

being held up. There’s a problem. We must do something about 

guns and violence. So they did something. It’s ineffective what 

they did, but they did something. They introduced gun control. 

 

This is a do-something Bill from a ministry that is not doing 

anything with respect to CO2 emissions, carbon dioxide 

emissions, which I argue is the biggest concern facing 

Saskatchewan people and the world out of the Ministry of 

Environment. It’s the biggest issue, or should be today, but yet 

we see inaction, and even worse, we see talk that is just 

perpetually watering down the CO2 emissions. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Bill 117, An Act respecting Hunting, Fishing 

and Trapping, we have some questions around it. We’ll be 

clearly having an opportunity in the committee of 

intergovernmental affairs, the committee that I sit on that’s 

getting all of the work — it seems we’re doing all of the heavy 

lifting these days — anyway we’ll get the opportunity to be 

asking these questions. 

 

This Act, before I take my seat, this Act really does deserve 

better out of the government and out of the opposition. This Act 

deserves public scrutiny. There are some parts of this Act that 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5127 

are laudable, that are worthy of praise. There are some other 

things that could and should be improved but instead, Mr. 

Speaker, what we’ve got is a government that’s determined to 

jam things at us. 

 

And I know we’ve had, we’ve had some opportunity, I know 

that the member for Cumberland gave a very fine speech on this 

very Bill, a very impassioned speech about Métis and 

consultation, or actually the speech was about the lack of Sask 

Party consultation around this particular Bill with the very 

people that ostensibly the Bill is designed to recognize. And it 

seems to me that if you want to recognize Métis hunting, 

fishing, and trapping, you would want to consult with them. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard those speeches, and so I 

think it’s time that this Bill goes on to committee. Thank you 

for the opportunity to speak to An Act respecting Hunting, 

Fishing and Trapping. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment that Bill No. 117, The Hunting, Fishing and 

Trapping Heritage Act be now read the second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 117, The 

Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act be referred to the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Bill No. 106 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 106 — The 

Labour Market Commission Repeal Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m quite 

interested to participate in this debate at this time before we 

move the Bill No. 106 on to committee. This of course is An Act 

to repeal The Labour Market Commission Act and respecting 

certain matters associated with that repeal. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know if it was the fact that 

the word labour was in the title of the Act which is what had it 

marked for death with the members opposite or what. But 

having been around and had some experience with the 

Saskatchewan Labour Force Development Board and the efforts 

that were undertaken to bring a higher profile and higher 

attention to the issues around labour force development and the 

way that that fed into the launching of the Sask Labour Market 

Commission, in different meetings I’d had a chance to 

participation in, as Minister for Advanced Education and 

Employment, not long after this Act had gotten off the ground 

and the commission had gotten off the ground . . . It’s with a 

certain sense of sadness but certainly not disbelief, Mr. Speaker, 

that I speak to this Act of repeal. 

 

Saskatchewan works best when we bring people together, when 

we bring people from all different sectors together — be it 

labour and business, be it First Nations and Métis, be it from 

folks in the social economy. And if you can’t bring those people 

together in an effective, meaningful way, it’s always sort of 

telling what happens in terms of the way an agenda plays out, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And certainly the way that we’ve seen the members opposite 

proceed with the Enterprise Saskatchewan debacle . . . They’ve 

got some really great people involved at different levels 

throughout that, but it seems that the irony there is apparent, 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the work that they’ve done to stack 

committees upon sector teams upon, you know, intelligent 

groups upon task forces. 

 

You know, for people that decry bureaucracy so much, it’s most 

ironic to see the kind of galaxy of bureaucratic snarl that 

they’ve created with the formation of Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

And when Enterprise Saskatchewan comes forward with 

recommendations, they’re not even heeded by the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. So I guess this is one of the single 

accomplishments of the whole thrust around Enterprise 

Saskatchewan is to kill the Labour Market Commission. 

 

Now again in terms of revamping the Saskatchewan Labour 

Force Development Board, an institution that has had a long 

history, certainly throughout the ’90s, in terms of trying to bring 

together the different sectors to do labour force development, 

there had come a time, Mr. Speaker, where there’s a need for a 

relaunch, for a reboot, and the goal of the Labour Force 

Development Board certainly the validity of that remained but 

the means had come into some question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there was a great deal of work undertaken to renew and to 

rebuild and to launch the Labour Market Commission, and a 

great deal of intelligence gathering done to gather from the best 

experiences in other jurisdictions how you can bring these 

different sectors together to recognize that common ground of 

developing a better labour force, of attracting and retaining 

young people, of better engagement of diverse sectors of the 

economy, and in Saskatchewan that particularly means First 

Nations and Métis people and all kinds of different people in 

the economy. 

 

So what we’ve seen take place with the Labour Force 

Development Board, there was some good experiences there but 

we really wanted to get something that did a better job, that had 



5128 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

a higher profile, that had that buy-in from across the sector. 

 

And I think it was a good comment on the work that had been 

done that this was an institution that was co-chaired by the 

president of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and still, of 

course, Larry Hubich, and the president of the Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce, Holly Hetherington. And they’re, you 

know, two individuals that did a tremendous amount of work in 

getting this institution off the ground and do a lot of good work 

for the province in different areas certainly. But that they 

brought their prestige and their different skill sets and their 

different networks to the table, I think, spoke to the job that was 

being done with the Labour Market Commission. 

 

And again as recently as this weekend, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen 

in The Globe and Mail a story about how the economy turned in 

Saskatchewan. And certainly there is a great front of initiatives 

deployed over the years by the previous government and 

certainly someone like Eric Cline is well equipped and certainly 

well credentialed to speak to those changes, was featured in that 

article fairly prominently this past weekend in The Globe and 

Mail and, you know, the boom and the good things happening 

in Saskatchewan’s economy. 

 

But perhaps something that didn’t get as much attention but 

certainly deserves a lot of credit in terms of setting that table for 

a better uptake of the economic opportunity and expansion of 

economic opportunity in Saskatchewan and better engagement 

of all kinds of different people in the economy, Mr. Speaker, is 

the work that was done, that was very much encapsulated by the 

Saskatchewan Labour Market Commission. And again, you 

know, bringing together labour, business, First Nations and 

Métis, social economy, the training system in government, 

providing strategic advice on labour market trends, issues, and 

strategies. 

 

From time to time in this House, Mr. Speaker, we hear the 

members opposite talk about what’s happening on saskjobs.ca. 

Well this was certainly an initiative that worked in very good 

alignment with the efforts of the Saskatchewan Labour Market 

Commission, the investments that were made in trades training, 

Mr. Speaker, the monies that were put forward into 

apprenticeship to bolster that sector of the economy, the 

increases that had been made at that time in terms of health care 

professionals, and the then graduate tax exemption which at the 

time allowed new grads to earn $100,000 free of Saskatchewan 

income tax over five years, a which I might point out, Mr. 

Speaker, included graduate students in its purview. 

 

Now of course we’ve seen the government claw back the, you 

know . . . On the one hand it’s a bit richer for undergrads than 

when they first brought it in. It wasn’t that welcome mat home 

for students that were coming back to Saskatchewan or coming 

to Saskatchewan, you know, fresh out of their first degree or 

technical certificates. It was for students that were studying in 

Saskatchewan and graduated in Saskatchewan. Certainly an 

important sector, Mr. Speaker, but why you would limit it to 

just that instead of swinging those doors wide open to students 

from across the country and indeed around the world, 

particularly Saskatchewan students that had gone out to get 

their educations and were looking to come back home and 

looking for that edge to make that decision. That of course was 

not part of their program when they first brought it in, but 

eventually they saw the error of their ways and they brought 

that in. 

 

Now it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. One of the other aspects of 

course is the . . . We heard different things about the innovation 

economy and the knowledge economy from members opposite. 

But where we’ve last heard about that is from Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, the entity that was in many ways put in to 

replace different of the work of a body like the Labour Market 

Commission, and the fact that the Enterprise Saskatchewan is 

recommending that the graduate tax exemption, or the graduate 

tax credit program that the members opposite brought in be 

expanded to include, guess what? Graduate students. Just like 

the old NDP program used to include, Mr. Speaker. Not as 

lucrative as the program for, you know, initially just for 

undergraduates and then expand it after much urging to students 

coming back to the province. 

 

But Enterprise Saskatchewan — what they chopped down 

something like the Labour Market Commission for, and which 

they sought out labour market advice from — they 

recommended that we should expand the graduate tax credit 

program to include graduate students. And again, Mr. Speaker, 

this would seem to be a fairly reasonable proposition. But of 

course what do they do? They ignore it. 

 

So they chop down the Labour Market Commission and we’re 

here talking about the final legislation to ultimately repeal that 

body and to wind it up completely. They replace it with 

Enterprise Saskatchewan which turns out to be sort of a death 

star of bureaucracy, you know, and a waste of a lot of highly 

talented people’s time. And what do they do with the advice 

that it actually does come forward with in terms of something 

like expanding the graduate tax credit? Well they ignore it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So again it’s always a privilege to rise in this House to take my 

place to have my say on behalf of the issues that interest me on 

behalf of the constituents that send me here, to say a bit on their 

behalf and to work on their behalf and work with them. But 

again you look at something like the Act to repeal The Labour 

Market Commission Act, and you can’t help but shake your 

head, Mr. Speaker. In terms of the way that the members 

opposite like to just chase their tail it seems on some files ad 

infinitum to no great effect, to disservice of the people of 

Saskatchewan and the needs of our economy and of our labour 

market. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would conclude my remarks and 

move this Bill on to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister Responsible for Enterprise 

that Bill No. 106, The Labour Market Commission Repeal Act 

be now read the second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5129 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 106, The 

Labour Market Commission Repeal Act be referred to the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 98 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that Bill No. 98 — The 

Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2009 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak 

briefly on The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment 

Act, 2009, Bill No. 98. Mr. Speaker, I was a little concerned 

when the Clerk read out a different Bill. I am relatively proud of 

being able to think on my feet but I was quickly trying to catch 

the name of the Bill that he was, that he had called out. 

 

The Bill that we are actually continuing to debate on this 

afternoon is a Bill to amend legislation in respect to the 

Municipal Financing Corporation. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Finance in his second reading speech held out the 

need for the Bill as . . . the need for the legislation to arise and 

he seemed to imply from the Municipal Financing 

Corporation’s infrastructure growth initiative, or the 

government’s infrastructure growth initiative being a victim of 

its own success and there being insufficient funds within the 

Municipal Financing Corporation to allow for the $160 million 

in financing still eligible to be accessed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s I suppose one way of looking at it. That might be a 

fair way of looking at it. Another way might be to suggest that 

the government either underestimated the uptake on its program 

or underfinanced the Municipal Financing Corporation with the 

initiative in its 2008-2009 budget, their last — perhaps last 

ever, Mr. Speaker — balanced budget, and of course a budget 

that was largely written prior to the 2007 election. And so in 

some sense it’s the last NDP balanced budget, Mr. Speaker, to 

be followed by the first deficit budget of the Saskatchewan 

Party last year and then, of course, another one this year, Mr. 

Speaker. So perhaps it’s a good thing that they underestimated 

the funds that they would need for the program in that last of 

balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:45] 

 

We acknowledge, as an opposition, the cost of building and 

maintaining our local infrastructure, and we understand that 

those costs have risen and understand that that is the primary 

driver behind, first of all, the initiative that the Minister of 

Finance discussed in his second reading remarks and, secondly, 

the driver behind the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As everyone in the Assembly knows, that strictly 

constitutionally speaking, municipalities in our constitution, 

which was drafted before there were hardly any cities in the 

Dominion of Canada, are creatures of the province and depend 

on the province for legislation enabling them to proceed in 

matters like this and, quite frankly, for funding, Mr. Speaker, 

because municipalities don’t have a lot of options on revenue 

sharing and receiving income or revenue from any kind of tax, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you would think that, in all probability, if a constitution 

was being written, a much more urban Canada or much more 

urban United States — that contemporary Canada or 

contemporary United States of America — that such a 

constitution would have a constitutional level of government for 

municipalities with the powers to raise revenues and provide 

services because of the large number of services that 

municipalities do provide, but given the constitutional realities 

and legal realities, provide as agents for, practically, for the 

province. 

 

That’s the constitutional reality. The practical reality is that this 

is an increasingly urbanized country, Saskatchewan perhaps 

less so than say our sister province Alberta, but still 

increasingly urbanized country, and a city government and town 

government is increasingly important in peoples’ lives.  

 

And those of us who knock on doors in cities and large towns 

between elections, often end up referring almost every concern 

we hear to the city councillor because between elections it 

seems that people are concerned about their boulevards, they’re 

concerned about their streets, they’re concerned about drainage. 

And I’m quite happy to have a city councillor to pass those 

issues on to, but those are the issues that come to mind when a 

person is suddenly confronted with a politician on their 

doorstep and in a context in which they don’t expect it, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s those issues of crumbling boulevards and 

potholed streets and bridges within municipalities and other 

municipal infrastructure that this Bill is intended to address, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And as I think it will become clear very soon in my remarks, 

I’ve no wish to impede this Bill’s progress through the House or 

to prevent the Municipal Financing Corporation to be able to 

access the funding and then provide that funding at subsidized 

interest to municipalities for important infrastructure work that 

has to be done by them for the citizens of those municipalities. 

So as I said, we acknowledge that these costs are there. We 

acknowledge that they rise. And we acknowledge that that is the 

purpose this legislation. 

 

We do however remain concerned, and this concern has been 

expressed in respect to a number of Bills that deal with 

municipal government, municipal financing in the province of 

Saskatchewan that have come before this Legislative Assembly. 

That concern is about the government’s commitment to 

municipalities as it relates to revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The ability to borrow at a subsidized interest rate from the 



5130 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2010 

Municipal Financing Corporation is no substitute. It is a 

complement to, but no substitute to regular, dependable, and 

entrenched revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker. And the government 

made a commitment to the people of Saskatchewan in the last 

election, which I think was welcomed and relied upon, Mr. 

Speaker, and that commitment was to provide one percentage 

point of the provincial sales tax to municipalities. The 

government has not done that. The government has provided a 

portion of that and again promised that in next year — in what 

was not any longer supposed to be next year country, according 

to this government — next year they might get to the full 1 per 

cent that was promised. 

 

And the excuse for that, Mr. Speaker, was that potash revenues 

were not the wild expectations or they’re not anywhere close to 

the wild expectations and predictions of the Minister of Energy 

and Resources. But of course, as many municipal leaders have 

pointed out, completely irrelevant. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party did not promise a percentage of potash 

revenues to the municipalities. The Saskatchewan Party 

promised a percentage of the provincial sales tax to the 

municipalities. And again, Mr. Speaker, as I said in my remarks 

on the budget, a little bit of shell game about, oh where’s the 

debt, Mr. Speaker? Where’s the deficit, Mr. Speaker? Where is 

the revenue, Mr. Speaker? Where are these things? And the 

Government House Leader’s obviously lost somebody else, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And this, our second concern — and it does relate to where is 

the debt — is that as well as by increasing this borrowing limit 

by $350 million, the government will be less inclined, will feel 

less pressure to fulfill its commitment of revenue sharing to the 

full 1 per cent that it has currently committed to, that it was 

committed to do long before now and has deferred, to use the 

government’s term for things that haven’t happened and may 

not happen, Mr. Speaker. The children’s hospital in my home 

city of Saskatoon comes to mind. 

 

But as well as being concerned about the revenue sharing, we 

are concerned about public debt. We have a Minister 

Responsible for Crown Investments Corporation who does not 

seem to appreciate that Crown debt is public debt. As a matter 

of fact, she doesn’t seem to appreciate that Crown debt is debt. 

Today it seemed in question period that she was arguing that it 

was increased value to the Crown corporations to have equity 

stripped by this government away from them and to borrow 

more money. And that was what I would call, Mr. Speaker, 

Enron accounting, and it is not the type of accounting that looks 

very good for very long. 

 

So we remained concerned about the debt as well, Mr. Speaker, 

because municipal debt is also public debt. It is also debt borne 

by the people of Saskatchewan — the debt of the health 

regions, the debt of municipalities, the debt of the Crown 

corporations, the debt of the government itself in a country and 

in a province where the governor of the Bank of Canada and 

others are concerned about the personal debt borne by 

Canadians. But you add on top of that the debt that is borne by 

Canadians, and people in Saskatchewan are our major concern, 

through their governments and really through no fault of their 

own but because of the inability of their governments to 

manage, Mr. Speaker. 

And we saw during the last recession how a good financial 

ledger for a country or a province can sustain a jurisdiction 

through a very rocky time, Mr. Speaker. We would not want to 

confront the off-loading, well, but we have no choice, Mr. 

Speaker. We will not want to confront but we will have to, the 

off-loading that the federal government is going to have to do to 

deal with its deficit when we do not enter that circumstance 

with balanced books ourselves. 

 

And that’s a situation that this province was in in ’95 when 

there was an enormous public debt, both the government and 

Crown corporation debt leftover from the Devine years. And 

the federal government dealt with its deficit situation by 

off-loading onto the provinces, Mr. Speaker. And the 

municipalities in the province of Saskatchewan of course 

suffered greatly at that time as well. And so we do not need 

deficits at the federal level, deficits at the provincial level, and 

greater debt at the municipal level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the day of reckoning comes, as it’s going to 

come in Ottawa at some point, these matters will have to be 

dealt with, either by the government that’s incurred this debt or 

a successive government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So those are our concerns about the Bills. We may have some 

questions about more technical matters and about the 

sustainability of the corporation that can be best asked in 

committee. I don’t believe that any of my colleagues have any 

further remarks on second reading, Mr. Speaker, so we would 

agree with this matter being referred to committee at this point. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 98, The 

Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2009 be 

now read the second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 98, The 

Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2009 be 

referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Order. I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that the 

House do now adjourn to 8 o’clock this evening for committees. 



April 27, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5131 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the Assembly do adjourn to facilitate the working of 

committees. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. This Assembly by orders . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. This Assembly, by order of the 

Assembly, stands adjourned until tomorrow morning at 8 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:58.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5099 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5099 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5099 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5099 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5099 

  Bjornerud ...................................................................................................................................................................... 5100, 5106 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5100 

  Norris ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5100, 5105 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5100 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5100 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5105 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5105 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5100 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5101 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5101 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5101 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5101 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5101 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5101 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5102 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5102 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5102 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5102 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5102 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5103 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Fellowship for Reconciliation and Peace 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5103 

 Swift Current Fire Department’s 100th Anniversary 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5103 

 Festival of Words Launches Program and Honours Moose Jaw Couple 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5103 

 Spring Fling Supports Persons with Intellectual Disabilities 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5104 

 Prince Albert Resident to Head Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5104 

 Saskatchewan Party Nomination in The Battlefords 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5104 

 Coyotes in Saskatchewan 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5105 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Interprovincial Agreements 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5106 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5106 

 Conflict of Interest and Changes to Legislation 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5107 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5107 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5107 

 Habitat Protection and Sale of Crown Land 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5107 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5107 

 Financial Management of Crown Corporations 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5109 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5109 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5111 

POINT OF ORDER 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5111 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5111 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5111 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5111 

 Bill No. 125 — The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2009 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5114 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5117 

 Bill No. 135 — The Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5117 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5119 

 Bill No. 107 — The Weed Control Act 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5119 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5121 

 Bill No. 129 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5121 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5124 

 Bill No. 130 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5124 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5126 

 Bill No. 117 — The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5126 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5127 

 Bill No. 106 — The Labour Market Commission Repeal Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5127 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5129 

 Bill No. 98 — The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2009 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5129 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5130 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


