




















































Hansard: March 22, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 34B  MONDAY, MARCH 22, 2010, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4373 

 March 22, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 112 — The Justices of the Peace 

Amendment Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 modifiant 

la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 

(continued) 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. The debate 

continues on Bill No. 112, The Justices of the Peace 

Amendment Act, 2009. The floor belongs to the member from 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Why thank you for the floor, Mr. Chair. It’s 

good to be back to debate on Bill No. 112, An Act to amend The 

Justices of the Peace Act, 1988 and to make consequential 

amendments to certain Acts. 

 

Again the Bill as we see it seeks to change the mandatory age of 

retirement from 65 to 70. We would be interested to get further 

detail on the constitutionality of that. If 65 is deemed to be 

something of an arbitrary retirement date in the context of 

broader moves around removal of mandatory retirement ages, if 

that is true for the age 65, we would be interested to see if there 

are any arguments applicable to the age of 70. 

 

In terms of broadening the pool otherwise in terms of people 

that are not in a conflict of interest but are practising lawyers, 

we’ll be interested to see how that actually impacts the pool of 

available candidates coming online for the eligibility for Justice 

of the Peace positions. The other changes subsequent to the 

clarifying the different categories, clarifying authority, 

clarifying the legal authority under which the justices of the 

peace derive their ability to pursue their job, the subsequent 

housekeeping amendments that are necessary in the train of this 

Bill, we think those are relatively straightforward. 

 

Finally of course the question of changing language to make it 

more gender inclusive, we think that’s only as it should be in 

terms of individuals being able to look into the legislation. I’m 

certain we’ve had a number of very able female justices of the 

peace over the years. They should be able to look into this 

legislation and see themselves reflected back in terms of a more 

inclusive language, not exclusive, gender-exclusive language. 

 

So there are a number of things that we find to be of interest in 

this Bill, Mr. Chair. There’s some things that we hope are 

clarified as this debate proceeds. And I know that other of my 

colleagues would like to participate in this debate, so at this 

time I would move adjournment of debates on Bill 112. Thank 

you, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved adjournment of debate on Bill 

No. 112, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 113 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 113 — The 

Justices of the Peace Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 be 

now read a second time]. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This Bill 

tonight, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act or 

consequential amendment Act, relates to a number of changes 

that are required in other pieces of legislation as we move 

forward with the Bill that my colleague was just talking about at 

length. And it’s important to know that when a piece of 

legislation is passed, it often has effects in quite a few places 

that are not entirely obvious, and I think that that’s what this 

particular Bill is about. It relates to some of the proposals that 

have been put forward around the description of the role of the 

justices of the peace and then also the supervising or presiding 

Justice of the Peace who was, in effect, the manager of the 

justices of the peace. And when that particular administrative 

organization was adjusted to have this whole role of the Justice 

of the Peace more closely integrated with the Provincial Court, 

then a number of changes have been proposed. 

 

And it’s those particular changes that we’re looking at tonight 

to see where there will be effects in other pieces of legislation. 

And I would say, based on my experience, that it’s always the 

best effort. People try to figure out all the places where the 

changes should take place, but probably next year or the year 

after we’ll be seeing some subsequent consequential 

amendments that relate to the particular administrative change 

for the justices of the peace. 

 

So what is this administrative change? Well basically it’s a 

change of getting rid of the presiding Justice of the Peace and to 

turn that role over to a judge of the Provincial Court. And it’s 

something that makes sense in one way as it relates to the status 

of the justices of the peace and the important role that they play 

within the whole, especially criminal, justice system. And what 

we’re effectively saying is that, as a community, we want to 

make sure that the justices of the peace have an appropriate role 

in the community, that it’s properly supervised, and that it’s 

integrated within the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we all know in Saskatchewan we have a number of court 

systems, but our basic people’s court is the Provincial Court. 

And they end up sitting in various communities across the 

province. Sometimes it’s in school gymnasiums, or other times 

it’s in the town hall. But most of the places in the province, we 

do actually have a provincial courthouse. We know that they’re 

working on a new building, for example, in Meadow Lake right 

now. But it’s continually a question of making sure that we 

have the right structure, right place for the Provincial Court. 



4374 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

With that broad people’s court, we then also have . . . And those 

judges are all appointed by the provincial government on the 

recommendation of the Minister of Justice to the cabinet. And 

so those people have ended up being some very capable lawyers 

from across the province that are serving in that role. 

 

At the same time we also have the Court of Queen’s Bench of 

Saskatchewan, which is a court that has original jurisdiction or 

it has jurisdiction across the province. But those judges are 

appointed federally, and those salaries are paid for federally 

even though once again it’s administered within the provincial 

system. 

 

And then finally we have above that the Saskatchewan Court of 

Appeal, which are justices that are located in Saskatoon and 

Regina primarily who then deal with cases that come from 

Provincial Court or the Court of Queen’s Bench. 

 

The ultimate court of appeal in Canada now, and has been since 

the early ’50s, is the Supreme Court of Canada. Before that, 

matters would go to the Supreme Court and then from there on 

to the Privy Council in London. That’s no longer the case. It’s 

also interesting to observe the judicial history taking place in 

Great Britain right now as they have ended up changing the 

Privy Council or the group of people, the justices that were 

located in the House of Lords, and have slowly evolved into a 

system of appeal courts which is much more similar to what we 

have in Canada. And they actually, I know, have observed what 

we’ve done here, what’s happened in the United States, what’s 

happened in Australia, as they move forward with their judicial 

system. 

 

But it’s important to understand this particular legislation in 

light of all of that because what is being done, as I understand it 

here, is that the justices of the peace and their supervision are 

now being directly incorporated by legislation into the 

Provincial Court structure. And this allows for more 

accountability, but also it allows for better education of the 

people who do this work and it allows for greater confidence of 

the public in the process that takes place. 

 

So what do these justices of the peace do? Well an ordinary 

person most often would have contact with a Justice of the 

Peace if they’re picked up on a Friday night and taken to jail 

and there’s a debate about whether they should actually spend 

the whole weekend there or whether they should be released 

with a promise that they would appear in court on Monday. And 

that role of deciding whether a person was a risk to the 

community or if they had somebody to take care of them, if 

there was problem with their sense of basically being probably 

sober, that job is given to the justices of the peace. 

 

Justices of the peace, then, end up being a face of the justice 

system that’s often there in the middle of the night or in a 

situation where people who aren’t used to being in contact with 

the criminal justice system are having to deal with these people. 

So it’s important that they are well-trained people, 

well-respected people. And I know that the task in the justice 

system has been to make sure that we can get the right people to 

do that role. Sometimes they’re retired schoolteachers or 

sometimes retired lawyers — I think some of the rules have 

been changed to allow for that — but also local people that are 

respected in the community. 

So you end up having this legislation that makes some of these 

adjustments. And this particular piece then deals with the 

consequential amendments to other pieces of legislation where 

a presiding Justice of the Peace was designated as a person to 

do a particular job. 

 

And so if we look at the Bill itself, the section no. 2 talks about 

amending another piece of legislation called The Emergency 

Protection for Victims of Child Sexual Abuse and Exploitation 

Act. And it’s amended by taking out this word presiding but 

then saying that the role that had previously been held by the 

presiding Justice of the Peace would be held by the chief judge 

and basically allows for this legislation to continue. 

 

I think we all know this legislation came out of the all-party 

committee that looked at the whole issue of victims of child 

sexual abuse and exploitation, and it’s clear that everybody 

wants to make sure that this legislation is in place and is in a 

situation where it can be used appropriately. And once again, 

this is a good example of a place where a Justice of the Peace 

should be somebody who is highly respected in the local 

community and is somebody who has sufficient training to be 

able to deal with some very difficult issues, some very tough 

issues. And so this kind of amendment fits with this concept of 

making an accountable system, making a respected system for 

the justices of the peace. Now as we look at that particular 

legislation, there are some remedies that can be quite traumatic, 

and once again that fact of having a respected local person able 

to operate very quickly. 

 

One of the issues that comes up across Saskatchewan is the 

recruitment of the people to serve as justices of the peace. Many 

of us have seen the advertisements in newspapers and other 

places, advertising for the job, and people do apply. People are 

suggested to apply. And part of the reason to keep doing that is 

to get the best people possible to do the work. In some 

communities, this is not as simple because they’re not, the 

communities aren’t that large, but they may be many kilometres 

away from other larger centres of population. And so we know 

that some of the challenges of finding people in some of these 

smaller communities means that there’s continually advertising, 

but also there’ll be some method of local recruitment to find 

people who can serve this particular role. 

 

[19:15] 

 

But once again, the goal is to get justices of the peace who are 

well respected in the local community, give them the 

appropriate training, and then make sure that they will be able 

to fulfill the role in the community. 

 

A further factor that’s arisen over the years relates to the 

appropriate compensation of these people who are effectively 

on call when they’re on . . . You know, they end up being on 

call, but they’re often subject to being awoken in the middle of 

the night to go out and do some of this work. And some of the 

traditional methods of remuneration have not been sufficient to 

keep people doing this work. And I know that that’s a problem 

that is being looked at on an ongoing basis. 

 

I hope that some of these legislative changes and some of the 

administrative things that are happening here with having the 

Chief Justice of the Provincial Court being involved in the 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4375 

administration may allow for some of those remuneration issues 

to be addressed as well. And I’m concerned that some of those 

issues will be dealt with even though there’s a general sense 

that we’re feeling this week that there’s not much money to do 

anything. This is an area where appropriate compensation needs 

to be paid to make sure that people are available to do this 

important work. 

 

Now the next clause in this Bill is a clause related to The 

Homesteads Act. And basically in that legislation it’s obvious 

that there needed to be . . . It was something that was picked up 

by some of the legislative draftspeople, and they needed to 

make sure that the legislation from 1988 was actually 

incorporated into this particular legislation, but to make sure 

that a Justice of the Peace appointed properly under The 

Justices of the Peace Act is got a role within The Homesteads 

Act. 

 

And as we know, the particular home protection legislation we 

have in Saskatchewan is actually known quite widely around 

the world because it was brought in in the ’30s when many 

primarily Eastern Canadian banks tried to take away people’s 

homes and they were . . . People sought a 

made-in-Saskatchewan solution to protect homes. 

 

Now it’s interesting that with the financial crisis in the United 

States over the last two or three years there has been some 

discussion about looking at the kind of legislation we have in 

Saskatchewan and the development of that legislation as a 

method of responding to the loss of homes by people in the 

United States in the financial crisis. And it’s always interesting 

what kinds of things other jurisdictions can learn from our 

jurisdiction here in Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s pretty clear that the solution that we came up with in the 

’30s to deal with the clear unfairness that we saw in many of 

our local communities has meant that this kind of legislation 

stays in Saskatchewan and is continued to be enhanced and 

developed. And I think this particular amendment under this 

legislation deals with making sure that those protections that 

we’ve held to be part of our law for many, many years will not 

be abrogated in any way. 

 

So then we go on to the next section, which is section 4, and 

basically this deals with The Local Government Election Act, 

and it puts in a clause that allows for a matter to be dealt with 

by a Justice of the Peace, notary public, or Commissioner for 

Oaths. And once again, it’s to make sure the language in this 

legislation fits with the language in The Justices of the Peace 

Amendment Act and The Justices of the Peace Consequential 

Amendment Act — the one we’re talking about right now. 

 

It also allows for the fact that affidavits under that particular 

legislation as it relates to local government elections can be 

sworn in front of a Justice of the Peace and, once again, making 

it clear about the role that a Justice of the Peace has. 

 

So here we’re talking about something that’s completely 

outside the criminal justice system, where most citizens run into 

justices of the peace, that’s talking about making sure there are 

fair elections or if there are particular problems, that the matters 

can be dealt with through the affidavits which may be 

developed or taken before a Justice of the Peace. So once again, 

it’s making sure that this important rule or this important role 

with in a local community is supported and is basically done in 

a way that will garner respect from the people in the community 

and also that allows for an accountability as these matters are 

being dealt with. 

 

So then you go on into the next Bill that’s being changed, and 

that’s in clause 5, and that’s The Summary Offences Procedure 

Act, 1990. And once again, we’re taking out the word presiding 

because that role no longer exists within the Act. It’s been taken 

over by Chief Justice of the Provincial Court and basically 

saying that justices of the peace can handle many of the steps 

under The Summary Offences Procedure Act. 

 

Now The Summary Offences Procedure Act is that place where 

most of the provincial-penalty-type or criminal-type legislation 

is located, and it’s everything from environmental issues to 

parking kinds of issues or speeding and other areas like that. 

And so we want to make sure that that legislation is absolutely 

clear and so there will be changes there. 

 

Then it’s kind of interesting that the next changes are in clause 

6 and 7 and they relate to . . . clause 6, The University of Regina 

Act where there was a role for a presiding Justice of the Peace. 

Now we’re going to remove that word and just have Justice of 

the Peace, same way in The University of Saskatchewan Act. 

And so basically there’s a role there once again for a Justice of 

the Peace who is administered through the Provincial Court 

system with the Chief Justice of the Provincial Court, but 

there’s a role in both the University of Saskatchewan and the 

University of Regina where a Justice of the Peace can be 

somebody who does particular tasks that are designated to them 

under the legislation. 

 

So once again, it’s sort of a broad-ranging change that is taking 

place in legislation, and so we have what seems to be a 

relatively inconsequential Act or a small Act which is affecting 

a broad number of places in the legislation. 

 

Now the final area or the final Bill that’s affected by this 

particular legislation is The Victims of Domestic Violence Act, 

and once again the word presiding is taken out as it relates to 

Justice of the Peace because that role no longer exists, and it 

then says that a Justice of the Peace can do this. But the key part 

here is that the chief judge of the Provincial Court will be the 

one that’s assigning people to deal with applications under the 

domestic violence Act. 

 

And we know that this particular legislation which was 

developed over a number of years has been of great assistance 

in dealing with some very difficult cases within the community. 

And so once again, it affirms the fact that justices of the peace 

are respected people who have key roles in what happens in a 

local community, and therefore it’s absolutely necessary that we 

get the right people doing the job, that we get them the 

appropriate training and that we make sure that the legislation 

that relates to them and to their roles is entirely accurate. 

 

Now it’s interesting to look at this change that we’re doing here 

and put it in a context of what’s happened here on the Prairies 

over the last 140 years because one of the things that my 

colleague was talking about in the legislation which was the 

Bill just prior to this one, related to The Justices of the Peace 



4376 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

Act . . . it relates to, you know, how the case was or how the 

system was developed. And we also have, in this particular 

session of the legislature, amendments to The Queen’s Bench 

Act that relate to when the law of England was brought into 

Saskatchewan, and that’s fairly crucial. 

 

Last year I was given a book by the University of Alberta Press, 

their publisher, called The Alberta Supreme Court at 100: 

History and Authority. And it’s interesting to look at this 

particular book because it talks about the formative years of the 

courts and justices and justices of the peace in Saskatchewan 

and Alberta prior to 1905. And so basically our Court of 

Queen’s Bench in Saskatchewan, Court of Appeal, the Supreme 

Court in Alberta, and Court of Queen’s Bench in Alberta all had 

its origins in the North-West Territories when judges were first 

appointed in 1876. And this was following the surrender of the 

Royal Charter of 1670 of the Hudson’s Bay Company to the 

British Crown in 1869, and then the subsequent transfer of all 

that Hudson Bay land to the Dominion of Canada in 1870. And 

we all know those dates and the things that happened around 

there because they’re crucial in the history of Saskatchewan. 

They’re crucial in the history of Manitoba, crucial in the history 

of Alberta. 

 

We know that 1870 and the time of this transfer, that’s when 

Louis Riel started talking about a nation in the West. And we 

know the things that happened there. But effectively the first 

judges that were appointed by the Lieutenant Governor of the 

Territories in that time were stipendiary magistrates. In other 

words, they were paid a fee for doing the job each time a case 

came up. In other words, there probably weren’t that many 

cases, so they weren’t on a full-time salary. But the interesting 

thing is that they applied the law of England as of July 15th, 

1870, according to the English Judicature Act, 1873. And so 

this law basically fell on some of the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] because you can see the years — 1874. That’s 

an important time obviously for the establishment of the Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police or North West Mounted Police as 

they were at that point. 

 

So basically Colonel Macleod, who is the founder of Fort 

Macleod, ended up being the first judge in the southern part of 

Alberta, the district of Bow River, and he eventually then 

became a judge, southern Alberta, and then eventually a 

member of the territorial Supreme Court. So it meant that these 

judges that were appointed in Alberta and Saskatchewan, the 

North-West Territories, and if you look on the maps you can 

see that it included the northern part of Manitoba, the northern 

part of Ontario, all the way up to the Arctic Ocean. These 

people were appointed, and their job was to preside over the 

most modern law in the world at that point, which was the 

British law under the English judicature Act of 1973 . And so 

effectively they then came into a role of administering law and 

equity according to this British law in North America, which 

ended up then being the most modern law around. 

 

And so what happened was that they tried to copy what was 

going on in the High Court of Justice, in the new English High 

Court. And so effectively what happened was that they used the 

English law that was there prior to 1870 but which was 

effectively the law here, but they also looked at the law that was 

developed since 1870. But because they were here in the West 

and on the prairies they were able to say, let’s take the best 

ideas from other parts of Canada, from the United States. And 

then also we end up . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I think if the 

members opposite would listen, they would understand how 

important this is to the history of why the kind of changes we’re 

making in this particular legislation, following a long tradition 

of making sure that the Justice officials that we have — whether 

they’re judges or justices of the peace — are respected by the 

community, that they are trained, that they know what they are 

doing, and that they are appropriately remunerated. 

 

[19:30] 

 

But the interesting thing is that we have a long history now, 140 

years of our local people being appointed to be judges, justices 

of the peace and applying the law, the best law in the world at 

that time which was the English law under the British judicature 

Act, but then also taking precedents from other places. And the 

real important part is that they had a strong sense of the local 

custom that was here on the Prairies. 

 

And this, this is one of the areas where our law has developed, 

but it has a lot more development to go because what was I 

think forgotten originally when these people were appointed to 

do these various roles is that at the same time we were also 

treaty people. We were also people who were subject to the 

treaties, to the agreements between the Crown and the First 

Nations that were located here. We also had issues around how 

to deal with the Métis Nation and the customs and the ways that 

they had developed things. And so, what has happened with our 

law here on the Prairies — Manitoba, Saskatchewan and 

Alberta especially — is that our legislation has attempted to 

adopt and deal with issues in a way that reflects how we live 

here. But we have a long way to go. 

 

This particular amendment tonight to this legislation actually 

relates to this long process of keeping up with changing the 

administration of how we deal with people through the justice 

system, especially through the criminal justice system, in a way 

that reflects this long history of how our courts work. And so 

basically the goal in the 1870s was to seek out and apply “the 

customs of the country” in a diverse pioneer society. The goal 

in 2010 is the same goal: to make sure that our law and our 

legislation reflects the kinds of issues that are there in the 

community and continues with the respect for the individuals 

who are going to do the job that we have in this particular 

legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a fascinating lesson in history to think 

about. In Saskatchewan, the place where at first were the most 

lawyers — and it’s unfortunate that the member from 

Moosomin isn’t hearing this directly — but basically in 

Moosomin was the place where the territorial court was first set 

up, and it was a man named Wetmore. So we know there’s a 

street in town called Wetmore Street. Well that’s named after 

Eugene Ludlow Wetmore, who was this justice. And at a 

certain point in Saskatchewan, there weren’t lawyers anywhere 

except in Moosomin, and there were quite a number of law 

offices there because that was where the railway had come that 

far. And as the railway moved further across, more lawyers and 

more law offices were set up across the province. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s important when we look at 

legislative changes that we try to make sure we understand why 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4377 

we’re doing particular things and why suggestions will come 

forward from our legislative draftspeople and our advisers 

within government to make changes that seem relatively simple 

and obvious. But they come out of a long tradition of making 

sure that our rules will work, that our rules will mesh with what 

the local community thinks as it relates to how they’re being 

treated by the justice system, but especially the criminal justice 

system — that system which can take away one’s liberty. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this particular consequential amendment Act 

affects quite a few important areas. But it does, I think, in a way 

that is understandable, and once again is in a way that follows 

the long tradition of making appropriate adjustments in 

legislation so that it does in fact serve people in the best way 

possible. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think I will close my 

remarks. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The question before the 

Assembly is the motion by the minister that Bill No. 113, The 

Justices of the Peace Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

now be read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — To which committee 

shall this Bill be referred? I recognize the Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 113, The Justices of the Peace Consequential 

Amendments Act be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — This Bill stands 

referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 104 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 104 — The 

Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 
be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to 

make a few comments on An Act to amend The Summary 

Offences Procedure Act, 1990. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would first like to begin my comments in 

going over the Bill so that we can have an understanding of the 

amendments that are taking place, the importance of those 

amendments, and the necessity. I will also have questions in 

terms of people consulted and how thorough we have gone over 

this legislation, whether any amendments are further needed or 

if in fact the Bill can stand as it is. 

 

Now the short title of the Bill is the summary offences 

procedure amendment Act, 2009. And then it goes on to section 

2: “The Summary Offences Procedure Act is amended in the 

manner set forth in this Act.” Now the amendment: 

 

Section 8 amended 

3(1) Subsection 8(1) is amended in the portion 

preceding clause (a) by striking out “subsection (2)” 

and substituting “subsections (2) and (3)”. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Act goes to discussing in terms 

of the summons and how they are served. So the first 

amendment there of substance is (2), that’s under section 8 is 

amended. And (2) is replacing, (2) and (3) are substituting for 

(2). And so: 

 

(2) The following subsections are added after 

subsection 8(2): 

 

“(3) Subject to the regulation, when a summons or 

offence notice issued pursuant to this Act cannot 

reasonably be served in accordance with subsection 

(1) at the time of the offence on a defendant who is 

an individual, the summons or offence notice may be 

served on that individual by mail, in the manner 

prescribed in the regulations, addressed to the last 

known address of that person. 

 

And then: 

 

“(4) A summons or offence notice sent by mail in 

accordance with subsection (3) is deemed to have 

been served at the time prescribed in the 

regulations”. 

 

Now in an attempt of this Act to deal with the serving of 

summons and changing to service by mail, perhaps before 

under law where it was very important to have individuals 

served individually, we are shifting to service by mail. And 

again so the first section deals with that as it will be outlined 

that we are going to be dealing with in “Section 55 is amended 

by adding the following clause . . .” lists out further how this 

is to be done, and that this can now be done under regulations is 

a departure from what has existed, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

 

Now there is a new section 15.1 is added after section 15, and 

that is an application for a hearing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

that is speaking directly about, for example, since where 

convictions come to the attention of the offender and where 

they can appear by themselves, where the offender has perhaps 

not . . . can say has not heard of the summons. So section 15.1: 

 

(1) If not more than 15 days have elapsed since the 

conviction first came to the attention of the offender, the 

offender may appear in person or by agent before a justice 

to request a hearing on the grounds that the offender did 

not have an opportunity: 

 

(a) to dispute the charge; [not having that in our system to 

be heard] or 

 



4378 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

(b) to appear in person or by agent at the trial. 

 

Now again, here then, part 2 of that is: 

 

If an offender makes an appearance . . . the justice shall, if 

the justice is satisfied after hearing any evidence of the 

offender that the offender did not have the opportunity to 

dispute the charge or appear in person or by agent of the 

trial and that would be equitable to do so. 

 

Now again, here, and I’ll be getting into all these in a bit more 

detail, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but just to go over quickly. Then it 

outlines in terms of what the justice may do: 

 

set aside the conviction; and 

 

either: 

 

[the justice in these cases has an option] give the 

defendant a notice of trial; or 

enter a conviction and permit the defendant to make 

submissions respecting the penalty” 

 

The final section in this Bill and perhaps the important section 

is amended, and that is: 

 

Section 55 is amended by adding the following clause 

after clause (p): 

 

“(p.01) for the purposes of subsections 8(3) and (4), 

respecting the service of a summons or offence notice 

issued pursuant to this Act including: 

 

Again here, outlining the manner in which the service will be 

made, and that’s: 

 

prescribing the manner of service by mail; 

 

prescribing the circumstances in which service may be 

made on an individual by mail; 

 

prescribing the manner of proving service; and 

 

prescribing the time at which a summons or offence 

notice is deemed . . . ” 

 

Now again here, what we are going into, we’re going into an 

area where this will have to be spelt out clearly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And the intent that if we have arrived, if in fact that 

this is what we are going to be doing, then we need some clarity 

in terms of what this is going to mean for service. The section 

55 brings forward a number of questions that we will have to 

deal with — prescribing the manner of service by mail, the 

circumstances in which service may be made on an individual, 

further prescribing the manner of proving service, and a very 

important issue in prescribing the time in which a summons or 

offence notice is deemed to have been served. So all very 

important questions on what we will be doing. 

 

And I’ll be returning to the sections a bit later, but I thought it 

would be of some value to get a feel for what offences that we 

will be now mailing to offenders, and the summons in terms of 

the summary offences Act, and what that might include. And 

I’d like to read that as well into the record, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Now again the summary offences Act, 1990 deals with 

procedures for charging individuals with provincial offences 

and offences against . . . For example, municipal bylaws 

including bylaws of the Wascana Centre Authority, the 

Meewasin Valley Authority in my own Saskatoon, and the 

Wakamow Valley Authority, the University of Regina, and the 

University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now this Act also prescribes the course of powers, the duties 

respecting provincial offences which generally follow the 

summary convictions, provisions of the Criminal Code, and the 

enforcement of fines resulting from these convictions, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Now the most common offences that we’re going to run into 

under this Act relate to driving. And now, however, many 

Saskatchewan statutes of summary offences provisions, again 

statutes dealing with the sale and use of alcohol, fishing, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, hunting, and the use of provincial park 

facilities, and environmental safety again fall under these 

offences. So we have to get a good understanding of what 

offences we would be dealing with here to see if in fact the 

concerns we’re attempting to address or the solutions we’re 

putting forward meet the level of what the offences are, and to 

better understand the area in which we are dealing with. 

 

Now again, here our proceedings under the Act may begin by 

issuing the alleged offender a summary offence ticket. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we . . . [inaudible] . . . to send either a 

summons ticket or an offence notice ticket. Now instead of the 

normal court process, a defendant who has been served with a 

summons or an offence notice and who wishes to plead guilty 

may deliver the summons or offence notice and the amount of 

the fine specified before the date and place specified. So for 

these individuals obviously, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re not 

going to need to mail anything here. 

 

But offences that go to trial are under the jurisdiction of the 

judge of the Provincial Court or the presiding Justice of the 

Peace. Now again here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where the penalty 

on conviction of a summary offence is a fine, the person is 

given the option of choosing to participate in the fine option 

program — a program that was put into place, perhaps a good 

program where individuals are allowed to work off their fines. 

Now again under this program, an offender who is convicted 

and sentenced to a fine may work off any part of the fine. So we 

have a number of programs where people find themselves doing 

things to improve our communities and we have accepted this 

as a way of treating these offences, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

for the most part the feedback has been good and we continue 

with that. 

 

Now for example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a person convicted of a 

driving offence who has defaulted on paying the fine imposed 

will be unable to renew his or her driver’s licence until the fine 

is paid. And now the Minister of Justice may file the conviction 

with the Court of Queen’s Bench to make a judgment enforcing 

an order such as that. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where the default is against a 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4379 

corporation, now the justice there may issue a warrant of 

distress to any sheriff, bailiff, or peace officer to seize items 

belonging to the corporation to satisfy the outstanding fines. 

 

Now just going on in terms of what justices are also permitted 

to do to order restitution as a sentence for provincial fines, now 

at the sentencing of an offender, “. . . the justice may order the 

offender to pay as restitution all or part of the cost of restoring 

or replacing property damaged, lost or destroyed as a result of 

the . . . offence.” And now the restitution order may be ordered 

in addition to any other penalty imposed on the offender. 

 

Now again as I was talking about amendments, this Act . . . 

[inaudible] . . . to enforce parking law bylaws. Again these were 

some other changes that were done and that was done in 

January 1, 2006. And these amendments, and this again is what 

happened in 2006 to parking bylaw fines, allow parking 

summons to be served by mail. So in 2006 we opened up to do 

that, provided a default conviction can occur where a person 

does not respond in any way to a summons and provided that a 

lien can be registered against a vehicle owned by a person with 

an outstanding parking fine and set out the procedure to be 

followed before a person can be incarcerated for an outstanding 

parking fine. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in some ways we have gone into the 

area of sending out parking summons to be served by mail and 

we are moving now into other summary offences and having to 

deal with the entire issue of how we are to serve people, in 

terms of how will we know that they are served, working out 

details on that, what will be the proper forms of service on 

individuals. And hopefully at the end of the day, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we can free up, free up our law enforcement officers to 

be doing more of the work that we find of priority in terms of 

. . . as opposed to chasing down people to serve them summons. 

 

Now the minister went on to say — and if I may as well — that 

this was about service of tickets by mail where they cannot be 

reasonably served. So the minister added a further thing where 

you could not perhaps in some cases serve a summons 

immediately, perhaps things had not come to that where 

decisions could be made. There were issues around where 

tickets, where mistakes were made and tickets would have to be 

. . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Ask leave to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To you 

and through you to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce two people we’ve met a number of times from the 

Discovery Learning Foundation, Mr. Jamie Hopkins from 

Regina — just give us a wave, Jamie — and Mr. Greg Hodgson 

from Oxbow. I’d ask all members to welcome them to their 

Assembly. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Thank you. And I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 104 — The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 

welcome the two individuals as well to our Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we are then looking at and what our 

concerns would be, would be that in fact the things that are 

outlined by the minister are in fact addressed in this Bill. So in 

terms of the minister talking about, where the minister gave 

some examples of: 

 

. . . where charges cannot be laid for a moving traffic 

offence until accident reconstruction has been done; 

where a citizen complains that an offence has occurred 

and the police investigate the matter before issuing a 

ticket; where a mistake on a ticket [which I spoke of 

earlier] means it must be withdrawn and reissued; and 

also for abandoned vehicle[s] . . . 

 

And then the minister also goes on to talk about that this would 

be addressing areas of: 

 

Many hunting, fishing, and parks offences require 

additional investigation after initial observation of the 

situation by a peace officer or complaint from a member 

of the public. 

 

Our role then here is to look at and look at the Act and find out 

whether in fact these concerns are being addressed, not only as 

section 55 as outlined in the method, but whether we can in 

each of these . . . whether it makes sense that, whether it makes 

sense in the way that the changes have been made, that they will 

address those issues that the minister has said. 

 

Now the minister, also perhaps if I could at this time add in that 

what his thoughts were in terms of some of the other rationale 

for the Bill, and that is the on the spot service will continue to 

be used in most cases, which we are accustomed to and which is 

the practice. 

 

But now again here he said: 

 

But in situations where a ticket cannot reasonably be 

served at time of the offence, peace officers must find and 

serve the ticket on the person charged who may live in 

another part of the province or, in fact, another province 

or country. 

 

He talks about police officers sending people: 

 

. . . where the offence occurred must send the ticket to 



4380 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

enforcement personnel in the place where the person 

being charged with the offence resides so the person can 

be found and, in fact, personally served . . . 

 

And again, the issue here was time-consuming and can be 

expensive in the case of hunting and fishing, where in a lot of 

cases, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people come to our province to 

enjoy what we have here are out-of-province and out-of-country 

offenders. 

 

The issue that the minister raises are points that we are all aware 

of and we should . . . The issue becomes as to whether the 

amendments and whether the things that we are requesting in 

the Bill do that. And secondly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the issue 

is, are we — because as is important in terms of due process — 

will these be addressed in an appropriate manner so in fact we 

are not creating other problems? 

 

We have reason to believe that, as I spoke earlier, that 

amendments made to parking bylaws, for example, which came 

into force in 2006 allowing parking summons to be served by 

mail whether we have . . . We can learn from those. 

 

And I guess what is missing here a bit is the background 

material for any of the studies to say that in fact we will be 

protecting because in our system it is important in all instances 

that due process before the law be carried forward. But I think, 

as legislators, it is also our duty to make sure that that happens 

in a way that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it’s done in an objective 

manner and that it is perhaps done not in the heat of the moment 

when we have some particular individual case before us, but in 

a time where we can sit back, contemplate this, and have good 

debate on it so that we know we do the best for the residents of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So the concerns raised, we have . . . The minister also pointed 

out that this is a request from the Saskatchewan Association of 

Chiefs of Police and that there be consideration for this. And, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is an important group and obviously 

we have started this process and then it is up to us to make sure 

that it does address all of those things. 

 

We have as a responsibility, as I’ve said, under section 55, we 

have to be careful that we do get these things right, that we get 

prescribed the manner of service by mail, that we get that right, 

prescribing the circumstances in which service must be made. 

And again we’re moving here into an area of regulations which, 

as we know, regulations that we don’t have those before us to 

outline as to how these will be done, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is 

important that we understand those, that we understand what is 

being done because the law is a delicate balance at times and we 

always . . . It is important that we protect the rights of our 

citizens of this province and that we get it right, and that we get 

it right because again it is very easy for us to say that it will 

save us time. It does all the right things for the . . . as requested 

by the police chiefs. It saves us some money and if we can 

direct our resources in a better way, I think we should all be in 

favour of that. 

 

The issues then, once having said that, which we can all agree, 

then the hard work begins, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of going 

through the Act or through new legislation which addresses this 

because we have a long history of proper service, people being 

told in a certain manner, and we hold those kind of rights dear 

and near to us. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, change, change is what in fact this 

legislature is about. We are always, we’re always here about 

change. We’re always here to make life better for the people of 

Saskatchewan. That is our role which each one of us comes 

here to do, to serve the people of Saskatchewan. And we must 

look at being ever watchful. And we meet with the people of 

Saskatchewan and when we hear of issues like this, it is our 

right, in fact it is our duty to address these issues and take them 

forward. 

 

And so the minister has outlined in some of his statements what 

he is doing. I wish there would’ve been a bit more in the 

background information in terms of what his thoughts might 

have been in terms of section 55 — very important because we 

are moving into new areas. But I guess if all that we have is 

what he has said, we have to take him at his word. But it is a 

concern for me to simply say that we should accept section 55, 

you know, without a little more background description. 

Perhaps he could have gone on in his speech to outline those 

areas for us. 

 

Because it is important when we deal with the law and that 

balancing act which I spoke of which is so important for us, so 

important for us to understand that our rights . . . Because even 

if two people are done injury by this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

is what our system is based on. It is based not on that we are 

running in some way perhaps as a poll or, as that government is 

so wont, to go on polls and govern that way. 

 

[20:00] 

 

What is important here is we’re talking about individual rights. 

And by it’s very nature individual rights lead us to that it’s 

usually one or two people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that are 

impacted by laws, particularly laws and rights in the courts — 

one or two people that are impacted by that. And it’s left to us, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to do the due diligence on the Bills so that 

in fact the appropriate considerations have been given to the 

Bills. 

 

This is not as simple as trying to see what the flavour of the day 

is. It’s not as simple as trying to see in fact, even, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, where the majority is on these issues. What is 

important here is that we get the rights right. That we get it right 

because we live in . . . And that is why, perhaps, why our 

country, our democracy is held up as a model around the world, 

because we have taken the time exactly on these issues that 

other people would simply ram through and just go and write 

those up. We in fact take the time to look at these. 

 

And these are not allowed to simply go by because it is the 

flavour of the day or flavour of the month or it seems to be that 

the majority of people today are in favour of this because this 

makes some sense. We have a higher calling, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. That calling is to look at each individual piece of 

legislation, to go through it thoroughly, to understand that ours 

is the job, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of protecting the individual 

rights. That is our duty, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we take that 

role seriously when we address this. 

 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4381 

Now I said I was going to, and perhaps now to go through each 

clause of the Bill, the Bill 104, An Act to amend the Summary 

Offences Procedure Act. Again, I put into the record the 

amendments under Section 8 as amended: “3(1) Subsection 

8(1) . . . in the portion preceding clause (a) by striking out 

“subsection (2)”. And so we’re replacing two sections where 

there was one. 

 

Now again where they talk: 

 

Subject to the regulations, when a summons or offence 

notice issued pursuant to this Act cannot reasonably be 

served in accordance with subsection (1) at the time of the 

offence on a defendant who is an individual, the summons 

or offence notice may be served on that individual by 

mail, in the manner prescribed in the regulations, 

addressed to the last known address of that person. 

 

It is exactly in this part that we perhaps could have gotten, 

perhaps the minister could have shone some light on the 

regulations that he was intending: the manner in which the 

service would be done, how it would be done, the issues of how 

would you prove service, in fact so that we do not . . . Further 

what we’re trying to in fact make, ease up, service. In one part, 

we in fact find ourselves into difficulties in the court system 

because in fact there’s issues around rights and service, and 

where people are aware that they are being charged. And these 

are important issues because in our society we should be very 

concerned about when we are charged, how we are charged, and 

that we thoroughly understand it. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the important things is that 

we have the right to be heard in court. And I notice the Bill 

attempts to do those things. It attempts to address them. Does it 

do a sufficient job? Does it address those issues? Those are 

things that we will have to continue to talk about and look at. 

And again, I say it was unfortunate that the minister didn’t 

provide a bit more insight into what the thinking was here, that 

we can simply either negatively imply that the regulations will 

in some way not address those or that we would have to accept 

simply, particularly that minister’s say-so that all will be well 

because there would be regulations passed to address these 

concerns. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this section is very important. And 

then again for just the other section that’s there: 

 

“(4) A summons or offence . . . sent by mail in 

accordance with subsection (3) is deemed to have been 

served at the time prescribed in the regulations”. 

 

And I can only say again the regulations that this attempts to 

address, we have not seen those regulations. Regulations we 

know can be changed without being brought into this legislature 

where we have the right to debate the Bills. 

 

So we can talk about in terms of beliefs that we have that we 

share, in terms of rights of individuals, in terms of due process, 

but to get down to the . . . As they say, the devil is in the details, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. We need to understand what the details 

are so that we can properly debate and discuss this with all 

people in the province. 

 

Again the issue around this Bill, the issue that it’ll be less time 

consuming, that we will be able to make better use of valuable 

resources, I think we all here can agree on that, that that is our 

role — that we continually look for how to best avail ourselves 

of the valuable resources that we use. And I know whether that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, whether that be whichever party goes to 

the doorstep when we talk to our constituents, we probably all 

are here to try and do our best job. 

 

Where the difference is, is how we use the valuable resources 

and how we talk to our constituents, talk to the people of 

Saskatchewan as to how we can improve this province, how we 

make it better for all the citizens in this province — and those 

are lofty goals that we all aspire to. Oftentimes the difference is 

in how we deliver the services, how we priorize the services. 

But that is for the electorate to decide at the time of election, 

when we put forward our positions, when we put forward our 

beliefs and our policies before the electorate to do that. 

 

And one of the, one of the very important policies is always 

around laws and around rights and perhaps even more so . . . 

Even though sometimes political parties take advantage of that 

and might use that and come off in terms of talking about being 

tough on crime or all of that — and those are popular, popular 

things; at times they have their popularity; they come and go as 

perhaps waves come and go — but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

important part is, at the end of the day, at the end of the day, 

what wins is that we develop a system that we can be proud of 

and that supports our democratic ideals that we have. 

 

And that is why, as I said previously, why our country is held as 

a model around the world in terms of that because we take the 

time to work on those rights. And it is often to our detriment 

when we do go and follow perhaps what, as I talked before, 

perhaps you know, it’s popular to in some instances to be tough 

on crime or that without . . . But a thorough examination of the 

issues. What we need to do is to understand what we are doing 

and to balance those rights. And that takes, that takes courage, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, sometimes to say, that that is the right way 

we should go because the future is there. Because it is always 

popular to use our resources right and to save money and time. 

And I agree with that as well. The issue though is, sometimes 

where we save money, it ends up being to our own detriment 

and to the detriment of the people of this province. 

 

So the issue here around section . . . The amendments in section 

8 is a reference to regulations. And in terms of service, and if 

we can feel, if I may say so, if we can feel comforted in some 

way or be convinced in some way that in fact the service and 

people’s rights at the end of the day will be protected because 

we can serve them through the mail and those are . . . And 

there’s enough in there where people are not going to be 

coming back to us and saying, well you’re saving some time 

here, but here’s what the impact is on me. And we cannot 

foresee some of those things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of what may 

happen to people once we embark on this little adventure in 

terms of service. 

 

And it would be good to see what is meant by approving 

service, what would that mean. Here’s how you would prove 

service; here’s what you would have to do to have been served. 

Those are important issues and I think perhaps maybe should 

have been included in here as opposed to leaving it to 



4382 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

regulations because it sure would have put us at rest, at least for 

myself, put me not to have to raise a lot of the questions that 

I’m here raising tonight, if I could understand what the meaning 

was. Because I can read into those, whether I do it negatively or 

positively, I can read in and satisfy myself, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in the language that’s here. 

 

But we are all different, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We are all 

different and it would take some less and some more to satisfy 

people. We know that that cuts across party lines because in 

fact issues like these are about rights. And we want to have that 

because we want to have a court system that is fair, and it’s not 

only perceived as fair, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but in fact it is fair. 

And that is important to us and should be of utmost importance 

to us as legislators and is important to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the second is a new section in the Bill 

and that is section 15.1. The following section is added after 

section 15. And this is application for a hearing so the issue 

then came through obviously when the people drafting the 

legislation thought about people not receiving a summons. 

What would happen if a person was not to receive that, even 

though after all the times we have attempted to do it right under 

regulations, there was still recognition. And I think this goes to 

my point in my argument that even after we have tried, even the 

people who drafted the Bill recognized that not all may go as it 

should. 

 

So they put in section 15.1, if I can read this: 

 

If not more that 15 days have elapsed since the conviction 

first came to the attention of the offender, the offender 

may appear in person or by agent before a justice to 

request a hearing on the grounds that the offender did not 

have an opportunity: 

 

to dispute the charge; or 

 

to appear in person or by agent at the trial. 

 

[Now] If an offender makes an appearance pursuant to 

subsection (1), the justice shall, if the justice is satisfied 

after hearing any evidence of the offender that the 

offender did not have an opportunity to dispute the charge 

or appear in person or by agent at the trial and that it 

would be equitable to do so: 

 

set aside the conviction; and 

 

either: 

 

give the defendant a notice of trial; or 

 

enter a conviction and permit the offender to make 

submissions 

respecting the penalty”. 

 

A number of issues that arise here. Again, is that section, how 

open is that to interpretation? How open is that to abuse? And 

how much protection is there for both us and for the people who 

are charged, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

So we have in section 8 amended, we have the issue about 

where people can’t be reasonably served at the time of the 

offence, and there’s regulations about how they can be served 

by mail. We have concerns that people are not served and then 

what justices would have the right to do. So again we are now, 

as this Act by its very nature, expanding and in fact opening up 

different clauses, how we see how changes impact different 

sections of the Act and other things that we perhaps today might 

not be aware of, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So we come to section 55 is amended here again by adding the 

following clause after (p): 

 

“(p.01) for the purposes of subsections 8(3) and (4), 

respecting the service of a summons or offence notice 

issued pursuant to this Act . . .” 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve gone over the section 8 

amendments and what those in fact would mean: “for the 

purposes of subsections 8(3) and (4), respecting the service of a 

summons or offence notice issued pursuant to this Act . . .” 

 

And then again what they are including, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

(i) prescribing the manner of service by mail; 

 

(ii) prescribing the circumstances in which service may 

be made on an individual by mail. 

 

For example, if you were charged with an offence, how would 

that work? How would that work? So if I could just . . . So we 

could all understand this, this is “. . . respecting the service of a 

summons or offence notice issued pursuant to the Act including 

. . .” So this would be very important in terms of outlining the 

ways in which the service would be done, the circumstances, 

and providing the manner of approving service. Now this is 

very important because not only are we talking about service by 

mail, but we’re talking about what circumstances would lead to 

this. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Again, so if we had arguments outside of . . . if some service 

was done outside of those circumstances, what would that mean 

and what are those? And perhaps the minister could have 

provided a bit more briefing, more detail what those actually 

would be. What would they include and how would, in fact, 

some of these work or not work? And if that work was done, it 

would be appropriate for them to do that because I think we all 

would like to know, if we were served with a summons and it 

came in mail, and we would like to know why and was it done 

properly and what are our actions. And this leads to all sorts of 

questions, if you’re in fact served with a summons, that we 

would want to know what has occurred, what is happening, 

what do we do after we’re served with a summons. Is it clear to 

everyone what you would do? 

 

And then prescribing the circumstances, now the circumstances 

under which this would be allowed, would you simply . . . If it 

was an error that you got served the summons, would you 

understand what the circumstances under which you could not 

be served by a summons? To the average individual in 

Saskatchewan, what does that mean? Does that mean that on 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4383 

any given case that this is what would be happening, or how 

would it work? 

 

Again one of the important issues of approving service, again 

there was issues here around the last known address of the 

person. People are quite mobile; addresses are difficult. What 

particular concerns will these raise? And then again prescribing 

the time in which a summons or offence notice is deemed to 

have been served . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. I notice there was some agreement to you 

being in the Chair there. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, so in total I think, if I could summarize 

this Act and our concerns would be . . . And I have gone over 

the summary offences. And it’s of interest because I think the 

summary . . . and how would the service be made because there 

are very . . . summary offences cover very interesting places, 

offences against municipal by-laws. Now we’re going to, I 

understand we’re including the Wascana Centre Authority and 

all the different violations that might occur out there, the 

Meewasin Valley Authority, the Wakamow Valley Authority, 

University of Regina, University of Saskatchewan — a broad 

range of institutions with by-laws under municipal laws that we 

now will be bringing on to this, individuals charged. We’ll 

again be receiving mail on this. 

 

And so it is important when we do this because we don’t want 

to again send . . . if in fact this does not work, that we shouldn’t 

have these authorities feel that in fact now where we’ve gone 

. . . people not receiving notices, legal notices, if we get caught 

up in and entangled in the courts because some of these things 

are not done properly. We will get questions from these various 

authorities as to what is occurring and why did we change. Why 

did we change and allow this to pass when we’re now 

embroiled in all sorts of additional cost and controversy in the 

courts? 

 

So it is important for us to get this right. We should get this 

right because . . . or we must get this right, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because it is important for people to have the confidence in us, 

the confidence in the police forces that they are doing, that they 

are doing this job. So I’ve simply talked about some of the 

regulations and getting them right and protecting the 

individuals’ rights. 

 

I think now I’d like to just talk a bit about how the impact of 

this would be on, in fact, bylaws, municipal bylaws. In fact that 

if we don’t get it right and in fact it creates a problem where 

people are able to, in some way, get out of . . . or perhaps 

maybe that might be the way of saying of in fact committing an 

offence and then not being properly punished, because we’ve 

created some technicalities where in fact people can use and are 

able to in fact get away scot-free. And I don’t think any of us 

want that, but I think it’s important that just as much as we want 

to protect individual rights, we now also want to protect the 

rights of people, such as . . . and people, not only people but 

bylaws, municipal bylaws, people who might be charged under 

those, and as I said under the Wascana Centre Authority, 

Meewasin Valley Authority, Wakamow Valley, and University 

of Regina or Saskatchewan. 

 

Again we do not want to send the message that in fact by trying 

to have some efficient use of resources, in fact we’ve created 

further problems for these other authorities so that they now are 

having difficulty in feeling safe and that their laws are being 

carried through. 

 

Now again, and we have to also be careful in driving. I mean 

there are many people out there. We have many driving 

offences. And again if we are not to be careful in doing this and 

so that people can . . . We have to be very careful in terms of 

how do we prove that the summons has been served. Those 

have to be addressed. We have to spend the necessary time 

discussing those because again, if we have our system is built 

on the whole premise that if you break a law, you will be 

charged, and then there will be a fine to pay and that acts as a 

deterrent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have a deterrent, a system of 

deterrence so that we pay fines where we are not following the 

law. 

 

Anytime . . . and we’ve had many examples of that in our 

history before the courts where people have been able to find 

loopholes. We call them loopholes where in fact we are finding 

that we have to change laws because people are able to . . . what 

would to the normal, not normal person but the person on the 

street say that that is obviously something that in any common 

sense a person would say people should not be doing. People in 

fact, by the time we get to the courts and the systems, these 

people are able to commit offences. And then in some way, 

what we would like to say, not have to pay the piper or pay the 

penalty for that because they were able to find a loophole. 

 

And I think that it is important, not only when I spoke about 

individual rights but it’s now important that we get it right too 

so that people cannot go to the courts, clog up the courts with 

cases because they are able to find loopholes and try and argue 

that in fact service — which is at the heart — and we must be 

ever vigilant on that issue that we get that right. 

 

So in terms of doing that . . . and again just my overall concern 

with this Bill is that, where are the issues around that we could 

see the regulations? I mean at the heart of the Bill where we 

have regulations, where these things are discussed, where these 

things can be changed by Executive Council and we do not 

have the ability to debate them here. So a bit of a background 

would have been in order here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So we have many times people coming, arguing, demanding 

justice in terms of charges not being properly done. We have to 

be careful that we do not add another layer here of the ability to 

question our justice system because we are now adding the 

ability . . . and with service done in the appropriate manner. So I 

don’t think we want to, in some ways, in terms of to making the 

police officer’s life — where we feel we’re going to make it 

easier — in fact end up making it more difficult or in fact 

transferring a problem to the courts where the courts get 

clogged up because on technicalities of service. 

 

So we have to get this right, and it’s not a question that we can 

simply roll something out and then hope for the best outcome 

because we know in past practice that we have to as legislators 

think this through. We have to think this through right to the 

end, Mr. Deputy Speaker, think it through to the end so that we 

have an understanding of what might be the difficulties with the 

Bill. We have to anticipate the things that can go wrong. 

 



4384 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

And I know there has been some attempt to address that in 

terms of dealing with the justices, and that they have the ability 

to do certain things if people appear before them and say they 

have not been served, and that’s not quite yet clear to me how 

all of that will work, how that will work that, and how proving 

that you were served works, if it’s by mail, even registered 

mail. And how does that mean when we were clear when it was 

service directly, people were identified and then perhaps even 

affidavits signed and people could swear that the service was 

done. We’re now transferring to our mail service, the issue of 

service in these areas. It’ll be interesting to see, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, how this all rolls out and whether we will have created 

problems or whether we will have solved problems. 

 

Each piece of legislation, there has been many good intentions 

at times, Mr. Deputy Speaker, good intentions that didn’t quite 

work out. And I think there’s many examples of that. We can 

just simply see the last budget about people being a little maybe 

over-exuberant and perhaps wanting some good intentions, and 

that hasn’t really worked out all that great for us right now in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But again we are always, we are always wanting to make the 

justice system operate better. We’re always wanting to make the 

justice system efficient. We’re always attempting to . . . those 

very precious resources in our police to be used in the best 

manner possible and I think that, across the province, I would 

say that they are. And in an attempt to do this, we would hope 

that we’re on the right track. I think there probably is a lot to be 

said because the police chiefs are on side and saying that we 

think this can work. 

 

But do we need more debate on it? I would say yes, because as 

a legislator I’m still left with the overall, my overall concerns 

are that we do not know enough details here and what the — 

again probably people have discussed those — the shortfalls, 

the possibility of things that can occur. Will we cover these off? 

Who will be covering them off? And I guess as we roll out the 

new system, let us hope that in fact does not have the opposite 

effect and clog up the system as opposed to streamlining it 

because what sometimes at first glance looks as the solution, 

oftentimes, as we all know here, who have spent some time 

here, some of the best laid plans do not exactly work out as we 

thought they should. 

 

So overall I think in providing an overall view of the summary 

offences as I have in the procedure, in The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act, 1990, understanding what I think it’s . . . We on 

this side understand what the attempts are here, what it’s trying, 

what the government is trying to do. 

 

I think we all, as I said before, are on line where we can use 

valuable resources in the best possible manner. But it is at this 

issue of rights and protection of our citizens on two fronts — 

those that have an offence committed against them and those 

that are being charged with an offence — that we have to look 

at. We have to look at this. And I don’t think anyone would 

argue that in fact when it comes to the use of alcohol, fishing 

and hunting, and the rest of that in the area of how difficult it 

must be when you have an offence under one of those. And 

where we have people who are out-of-country, the cost that we 

must incur, Mr. Deputy Speaker, must be enormous to follow 

through on that. 

So some of the thinking around here sound I would think . . . 

We are also here to listen to people in Saskatchewan and to see 

the problems and, as those concerns are brought forward, to 

deal with them. And this concern has been brought forward. 

The concern is a valid concern and it is brought forward. It is 

the solution. It’s the solution that we are tasked with, making 

sure that we get right, that we get the solution right so that 

people are not returning to this issue time and time again to deal 

with it. And so that is why I think, why I have my concerns in 

terms of what was the actual thinking here. What were the 

consultations that were done around here? 

 

[20:30] 

 

And I must say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have seen on 

many occasions this government, a lack . . . not be really keen 

on due process. And lack, there’s been a lack of consultation on 

issues. And I think we have seen where they have been called 

on that, and a number of times they’ve had to redo Bills. 

They’ve had to redo Bills. They’ve pulled Bills. Redone them 

and/or at times have gotten us into a fair amount of difficulty, 

such as I mentioned before under the finances. 

 

So we cannot just simply accept at face value the things that are 

being brought forward here. I mean I think that most people in 

Saskatchewan are now telling me that, just a minute, you’d 

better pay a little, better pay good attention because we’re not 

very happy about what is happening in our province; not happy 

at all about that. And that we don’t want to on this side be 

called on the carpet because of the inabilities or the lack of 

thorough research of the government. That we will not be a 

party to faulty legislation just simply because the government 

has put that forward. That we are here to do the due diligence. 

That we are here to make the tough decisions of whether to 

allow these Bills to pass forward or whether we will do the due 

diligence. 

 

And right now in this province I would say, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that people are in fact telling us to do the due 

diligence, to take the time on the Bills, to go over them, to ask 

the questions that need to be asked. Because there is a distrust; 

there is a distrust building in the province, and it’s growing, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And the party over there are oblivious to this. 

They think that not much is happening. 

 

And it is amazing that after such a short time that they have lost 

so much touch with the legislation, with the people of this 

province, that they have lost touch so quickly with the people of 

this province regarding the issues of the day. And so then when 

they bring forward something . . . And now they wonder why 

people are saying to them, whoa, just a minute; what are you 

doing? Because people in Saskatchewan are very astute when it 

comes to politics, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re very astute. 

 

And those members well across the way know that in 1986 after 

one term they lost the majority of the vote in this province. And 

it was only because of the way the constituencies were that they 

won power. So I would hope that they’re sleeping well, but I 

would suggest to them that they should be wary of that because 

their day of reckoning is coming sooner than they realize. 

 

But again, it’s amazing, it’s amazing that they would be out of 

touch so quickly and not realize what is in fact happening in the 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4385 

province. But it is up to us. Now we’ll continue doing our jobs 

and calling them on the issues of the day. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that is how quickly, unfortunately, the people who are no longer 

in touch with the people of this province can lose touch and 

become so oblivious to things that people are telling them. 

 

So again from whether it be in this Act or some of the other 

Bills that they have passed, there is again a skepticism in the 

province of the ability of those members to actually perform 

their duties. And it’s an unfortunate thing to have to stand and 

say that after two, just over two years in government. 

 

But I not only speak for myself but I speak for thousands of 

people in this province when I say that, that they’ve come to the 

realization of how out of touch and how skeptical they’ve 

grown of this government who have brought forward Bills, who 

have brought forward Bills in here who . . . They have had the 

ability, Mr. Speaker, to completely alienate thousands of people 

in this province. Thousands of people they’ve alienated in the 

province with some of their legislation. 

 

And it surprises me that they would be, that they would be 

cackling from over on that side, in fact, doing that. I think if I 

was them I’d be sitting there concerned to kind of get my 

shoulder to the wheel and try and get things right as opposed to 

doing that. But I mean, I can see that the, perhaps, the 

arrogance, what arrogance will do to you and how quickly you 

can become arrogant and not listen to the people of this 

province. But there’ll be, there’ll be a day of reckoning for that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

There will be a time when they will look back, look back at Bill 

104 and say, you know, maybe we should have paid some more 

attention to the speech around Bill 104. Because had we paid 

more attention to that speech, we perhaps would not be sitting 

on this side — where they will be after November in 2011. 

They’ll be over here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, wondering, we 

should have listened to Bill 104 but we didn’t. We didn’t. We 

weren’t paying attention, we weren’t paying attention, and 

that’s what happens to . . . How quickly. The people of this 

province because they are astute, the people of this province are 

astute and would not put up with the kind of nonsense that has 

been at times coming across the floor, passing as legislation 

here. 

 

So they feel that they can do this. They feel they have some sort 

of right to do it. The appearance is coming off that way, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. The arrogance is coming, is starting to show 

through, and the people of this province will not put up with 

that. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Bill 104, Mr. Speaker, Bill 104 

speaks to rights and a lot of the times on that side we have 

noticed that in terms of rights, that they take those rights lightly, 

that they do not feel people have those rights. They will 

question Charter rights that people have and they dismiss that. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they laugh at those, laugh at the 

rights of Saskatchewan people because then somehow they feel 

if they can belittle those rights, they will not have to address 

them. 

 

And the legislation is all about rights, and they should 

understand that. And all the times when they put forward 

legislation when they withdraw it, and go forward in an attempt 

to do something with it — that is the thing that people 

remember. They remember that because each act of arrogance 

and each act of incompetence by that government comes 

forward and will be remembered come election day. Because 

we still — even though those members might act like it — we 

still live in a democracy. And even though they will try, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, as we heard in question period today, even if 

they try, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to play with the electoral officer 

and bring politics into that, the important issue . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — From time to time 

while I’ve been sitting in the Chair over the last three days, I 

have heard the distinct sound of whistling in the House. 

Whistling is an inappropriate behaviour in the House. I would 

appreciate the member restraining himself or herself from 

offering us these musical renditions. And so we’ll continue with 

the debate now. The member from Saskatoon Fairview has the 

floor. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, again as I was talking about rights of 

individuals and . . . Perhaps there will be some whistling in the 

halls, but that will be after 2011, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’ll 

be whistling all right when those members find themselves on 

this side. And there won’t be that many, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

there won’t be that many that will find themselves on this side. 

So perhaps we’ll talk about that day again. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we see coming from that side, 

from that Sask Party, is a lot of, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I may 

say, the lack of understanding of rights. Of rights of people, 

rights of Saskatchewan citizens that they run right over and 

trample and then laugh about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, laugh about 

because they feel that these are meaningless. And again that is 

what is important when we’re talking about Bill 104, about 

rights. Because rights on one hand of people who are charged, 

and rights of people who are the recipients of offences, that we 

have to balance those. So we have to take those seriously. But 

many times on that side of the House it’s not what we have 

heard from those people. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are some of my concerns. These are 

some of the comments that I wish to put on the record and to 

have. I know that there are many, there are things that we need 

to talk about some more and perhaps I could just talk about the 

issues around hunting and fishing offences and the significant 

number of tickets for out of province is, as I think I was started, 

that area we have to look at. We have to see because this 

involves going outside, involving other police forces, contacting 

other people. I can’t imagine what this would take to get . . . 

and the resources that we have to use in order to properly serve 

people who are in fact out-of-province or out-of-country 

offenders. This is an issue I think is long overdue and it is good 

to see that we are moving in that area. The issue though is, as 

always, is when this is done that we are not in fact creating 

issues in our court system, that we do not want to solve one 

problem and in fact create another. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the issue to allow hearings after 

conviction where persons are convicted in a trial without the 

person being present raises concerns. Further discussion on that, 

further background material, further legal opinions on that 



4386 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

would have been useful in terms of bringing this Bill forward. 

But at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got most of my comments on 

the record and at this time I’d like to adjourn debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — It has been moved by 

the member from Saskatoon Fairview that debate be adjourned 

on Bill No. 104, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment 

Act, 2009 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 125 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 125 — The Crown 

Minerals Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to 

join into the discussion this evening, this Monday night, on Bill 

No. 125, An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act, Bill 125. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when any individual thinks about the history of 

this province, when we think about many of the positive things 

we have happening in our province in the area of the economy, 

one cannot ignore the important role that resources provide to 

the province. Through the many resources that we have in the 

province, the people of Saskatchewan are able to benefit greatly 

through a number of ways, Mr. Speaker. It can be through the 

jobs that occur in a particular sector in one area — one type of 

resource, Mr. Speaker — or it can be through the royalties and 

the revenue that is generated for the provincial coffers through 

the extraction of resources and then the selling of them, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So when we look at the province as a whole, there’s a number 

of areas where resources, of course, play a very important role. 

Whether that’s in the uranium in the northern mines, Mr. 

Speaker, whether that’s in potash, whether that’s in oil and gas, 

it’s clear that resources play a very important part in our 

provincial economy. Now I think this is something that would 

be recognized and known by many people throughout the 

province. 

 

We can see, Mr. Speaker . . . I remember as a boy in grade 

school when we talked about the importance of potash to the 

provincial economy, how important potash was to the 

provincial economy at that time. And it’s interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, that now in 2010 we continue to have many 

discussions about the minerals and the resources in our 

province, and central to that discussion is often the topic of 

potash. So potash is one area. In whatever mine it’s occurring, 

as I said before, there are many individuals who find 

employment in a potash mine — how that fosters economic 

development in that area through good paying jobs and, more 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, through the royalties that are paid by 

potash companies to the province and the revenue that is 

generated because of that. 

[20:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we know that minerals and resources play a 

very important role in the province, but it’s important that as we 

evaluate the resources that we have at our disposal that we 

make assumptions about the revenue that will be gained from 

those resources in a responsible manner. 

 

And sadly, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen most recently in this 

province by the government opposite is an approach to 

resources that has not been a responsible one. It’s been an 

approach that has instead focused on thinking that it may be 

convenient for their short-term political interest, Mr. Speaker, 

but it’s not an approach that will serve Saskatchewan well over 

the long term. 

 

Because what we’ve seen in this last year is a forecasting of 

revenue that would come from the resources that we’re so 

fortunate to have here in the province. We’ve seen forecasting 

from members opposite that has not proven to be true, a 

forecasting that has not proven to be accurate. Instead we have 

seen what has been coined as a fantasyland budget because so 

much of the most recent budget, Mr. Speaker, relied on 

numbers that clearly were not responsible, numbers that were 

not reflective of the economic forces going on in the province, 

in the country, and in the larger global markets. 

 

So it’s concerning to me, Mr. Speaker, that when we’re looking 

at Bill 125, An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act, it’s 

concerning to me that the same type of reckless approach, the 

same type of pie-in-the-sky approach, the same type of 

fantasyland budgeting approach that we’ve seen in this one 

resource of potash, it’s my concern, Mr. Speaker, that the 

members opposite will take that same approach to managing or 

predicting the amount of revenue generated through potash, that 

they will take that same approach — one that is not based on 

fact, one that is not based on prudent forecasting, one that is not 

based on the best interests of the province — they will take that 

approach and apply it to any changes they may be considering 

in Bill 125, the Crown minerals Act. 

 

And I know as I go about my business, Mr. Speaker, in the 

province talking to individuals, talking to constituents in my 

own area in Saskatoon Massey Place, in Saskatoon generally 

speaking, or in other areas — whether that be in the North, 

whether that be in rural areas — this is a concern that I hear 

echoed by many, many Saskatchewan people. They’re worried, 

Mr. Speaker, that the reckless approach, the irresponsible 

approach, the pie-in-the-sky approach, the fantasyland 

budgeting approach that we’ve seen from members opposite, 

that they’ll be taking this approach that we’ve seen — one area 

of potash — and applying it to the entire resource sector. 

 

And I’ll say, Mr. Speaker, that when looking at the evidence so 

far from members opposite on the issue of resources, on the 

issue of minerals, on the issue of generating revenue from the 

items that we’re so blessed as a province to have in the ground, 

that we’re so blessed as a province to benefit from, I hear these 

concerns from people across the board, Mr. Speaker. Because 

the individuals that I speak to are directly feeling the impact and 

the negative consequences of the pie-in-the-sky budgeting, the 

fantasyland budgeting, the wishful thinking that we’ve seen 

from members opposite. Because they’re starting to now feel, in 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4387 

the areas that they’re working — whether it’s in the CBO 

[community-based organization] sector, whether it’s in one of 

our great provincial educational institutions, whether it’s a civil 

servant doing their best to serve the broader public, whether it’s 

simply a mom and dad doing their best to raise their kids and 

live responsibly in their neighbourhood — they know that when 

looking at minerals, when looking at resources, whenever we’re 

talking about those issues, we need to be doing so in a 

responsible manner. We need to be doing so in a prudent 

manner and a manner that has the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people at its core. 

 

And sadly what we’ve seen from members opposite in the two 

years, Mr. Speaker, a bit over two years that they’ve been in 

power, on the issue of minerals, on the issue of resources, 

we’ve clearly seen the opposite. What we have seen, Mr. 

Speaker, is a selective choosing of numbers in the area of 

minerals, in the area of development of our resources, that is 

simply not factual, is simply not believable, is not relying on the 

best advice that is available to the ministry, is not relying on the 

best advice available to the minister making decisions and the 

Premier and the Finance minister. 

 

Instead we have seen a backwards approach where the 

government came up with a list of things that it would like to 

do, an increase in spending to a huge amount, Mr. Speaker, 

increasing the spending 32 per cent. So that’s since the last 

NDP [New Democratic Party] budget. 

 

We can think of many great business organizations here in the 

province, whether it’s the CFIB [Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business] or any of the chambers, these are real 

business people, Mr. Speaker, that understand some basics 

about balancing the chequebook, paying the bills, and having a 

profit at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker. And these individuals 

know that when you’re looking at projections of revenue in the 

mineral and resource sector, that any projection that is made has 

to be done so with credibility. 

 

And the problem that we have, Mr. Speaker, with the approach 

that we have seen from members opposite is that they ramp up 

spending 32 per cent and thereby have a huge amount of money 

that is needed to meet those commitments. And then, Mr. 

Speaker, they have to, at a budget about one year ago from now, 

come up with a way where they can claim that they’re going to 

actually have the revenue to meet those commitments, to meet 

those increases of 32 per cent. 

 

A 32 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker, is certainly a significant 

amount of an increase. And I think for some of those businesses 

that watch minerals and watch resources and deal with the 

extraction of wealth from our province, Mr. Speaker, the 

generation of wealth in our province, I think many of them 

would take issue with such an increase of 32 per cent since the 

last NDP budget and have some questions about the 

sustainability of that approach. 

 

So what we saw, Mr. Speaker, members opposite, they came up 

with this list of items that they wanted to do in the last budget. 

And, Mr. Speaker, they needed . . . It was clear that the increase 

in spending from the last NDP budget would be 32 per cent. So 

they needed a way at the time one year ago to sell this to the 

public and to suggest that they would in fact be able to have the 

money to pay that huge increase of 32 per cent. 

 

So what did they do, Mr. Speaker? They looked at the minerals, 

the minerals that are in Saskatchewan that have the ability to 

generate revenue for our provincial coffers, and they chose the 

one area, Mr. Speaker, where Saskatchewan is the leader. And 

why did they do that, Mr. Speaker? Because that’s the one area 

where they could do some fantasyland forecasting, some 

fantasyland budgeting and thereby come up with the money 

supposedly to pay for this 32 per cent increase in spending. 

 

So I’m concerned, Mr. Speaker, when we saw last year when 

they took this approach, with how they view the issue of the 

resources that we have in our province, in the ground, that 

generate wealth and provide services to so many Saskatchewan 

people. It’s my worry that when we’re looking at Bill 125, The 

Crown Minerals Act, that they will take that same reckless 

approach to planning development in the resource sector, in 

planning how they’re going to spend the money they expect to 

receive, and in planning what they actually think the numbers 

will be at the end of day in how much revenue will be 

generated. 

 

And if you look at their track record, Mr. Speaker, in the two 

years, a bit over two years that they’ve been in power, it’s been 

a very bleak track record in the area of fiscal management. It’s 

been a very bleak track record in the area of acting responsibly 

with the resources and the revenue that are generated here in the 

province. 

 

And as I said before, I think this is something that is widely 

recognized by the people of Saskatchewan. And I say it’s 

widely recognized because this is what I’m hearing from many 

individuals as I go about my business and talk to people. I know 

all the members in the Assembly, I’m sure all the members in 

the Assembly have similar experiences because now they are, 

we are all coming in contact with the individuals in the province 

who were promised something by the Sask Party over that 32 

per cent increase in spending. And now, Mr. Speaker, with the 

cuts, with the deferrals, with the clawbacks that are occurring 

under the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, individuals are 

starting to feel the consequences of that fantasyland budgeting 

that we saw so clearly from members opposite one year ago. 

Individuals in Saskatchewan are . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member’s on an 

interesting area of discussion, but it’s not pertaining to the Bill. 

And I’m looking at the legislation and this is about the 

implementation of a new web-based . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. The Bill is about 

the implementation of a new web-based mineral registry 

system, not about how the money was spent. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. Order. It’s not 

about how the money was spent. It’s not about budgeting. I’d 

appreciate it if the member would address the Bill in his 

comments. 

 



4388 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry if the members 

opposite don’t like some of the things I have to say about 

minerals in Saskatchewan. I’m sorry if members opposite don’t 

like some of the points that I have to say about how they treat 

the resource sector here in the province, Mr. Speaker. I’m sorry 

if I’ve interrupted their viewing of the most recent DVD [digital 

versatile disc] of the Sandra Bullock recent release from the 

video store, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the issues that we’re talking about here, Mr. Speaker, their 

approach to the resource sector has a direct implication to how 

they deal with the minor details, Mr. Speaker. If the general 

approach to a sector — resources, whether it be potash, whether 

it be uranium, whether it be oil and gas — if the general 

approach, Mr. Speaker, is one of reckless, irresponsible 

handling of the issues, it does not to me generate a whole lot of 

confidence in their ability to get things like Bill 125, The Crown 

Minerals Act right. And I know based on my discussions with 

individuals in the province, based on my discussions with 

individuals in the Assembly, within the broader circles that we 

all navigate, I’m hearing similar worries, similar concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 125, An Act to amend The Crown Minerals 

Act, I had a chance, Mr. Speaker, to go through some of the 

remarks made by the minister in the second reading. And in the 

minister’s second reading, which for members at home who are 

following along in Hansard, can be found on page 4173 of 

March 15, 2010 in Saskatchewan Hansard. If individuals want 

to look that up at a later date, they can see some of the points 

that I’ll be referring to, points that were made by the minister in 

his second reading speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The one line that . . . What’s essentially being suggested here in 

this legislation is the implementation of an electronic registry 

which will reduce the cost of acquiring mineral dispositions by 

eliminating costly ground staking — so the minister says in his 

second reading speech. 

 

We have additional . . . In looking at this legislation and what it 

essentially does, some individuals might describe aspects of this 

legislation as housekeeping, and some might describe it as more 

significant changes. The Act, Bill 125, was first introduced in 

1984 to govern . . . Or the existing legislation was introduced in 

1984 to govern Crown mineral rights and how they are granted. 

Section 21 in the proposed legislation is changed to allow the 

minister to withdraw and reopen land using the Energy and 

Resources website instead of the Gazette. So what we see, Mr. 

Speaker, is an approach of increased automation, using the 

Internet, using a website through Energy and Resources to 

allow individuals who are interested in accessing information 

and supplying information an easier way to do this, and 

specifically how this can affect oil and gas exploration notices 

as this began to be published online in July 2006. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, when I was going through this 

information, when I read the minister’s remarks from his 

second reading, there was an interesting quote. And the quote at 

the top of page 4173 states: “Over the past two years, our 

ministry has laid the groundwork for a complete transformation 

of our business activities in the area of mining and oil and gas.” 

A complete transformation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[21:00] 

And I took a double take when I read this because I could have 

sworn that just a few days ago, on BNN [Business News 

Network], I heard the minister say they had done absolutely 

nothing in the area of royalty changes in the area of oil and gas. 

Everything is status quo from what was put in place through the 

NDP, and the minister was actually bragging that this was a 

good thing. And I would agree because I think the royalty 

structure is a good one, and it’s a sound one. But then for the 

minister in his second reading speech to say that there’s a 

complete transformation going on — to me, it didn’t match up. 

 

There was two stories there. On the one hand, talk about 

complete transformation, that we’re living in this new era under 

these wizards of finance and business on the opposite side. And 

then out of the other side of his mouth in an interview on BNN, 

suggesting that and informing individuals in the business sector 

that everything is the same. We haven’t touched anything. It’s 

good. Why would I touch anything; it’s good. So two very 

conflicting messages, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s puzzling why the minister would take such an approach. 

Why wouldn’t the minister, Mr. Speaker, be consistent in his 

remarks? Why wouldn’t the minister be consistent in the 

approach that he is bringing to the area of oil and gas? 

 

Now when looking at the area of Bill 125, The Crown Minerals 

Amendment Act, 2009, Part II in this proposed legislation 

creates a Crown mineral dispositions electronic registry, known 

as mineral administration registry Saskatchewan or MARS, that 

will administer Crown dispositions and also outlines parameters 

for the operation of this registry. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said, some aspects to this Bill are of a 

housekeeping nature and do not reorder the world. Though 

there are aspects, Mr. Speaker, where increased automation and 

increased use of the Internet, if that makes it better, Mr. 

Speaker, for individuals to conduct their business, to promote 

the growth and the development of the resource sector here in 

Saskatchewan, and that would be a good thing. And there are 

other instances, other examples that we can see in the province, 

in different ministries where increased automation, increased 

modernization is a good thing. 

 

I can think, Mr. Speaker, in a similar example, speaking in last 

sitting on a process that allows the issuing of tickets to be done 

in a more automated way, not requiring a law enforcement 

officer to do that. So it’s true, when there are examples where 

government can become more efficient and deliver a better 

service to individuals, then that’s a good thing, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m not going to argue with that. And so if this MARS approach 

does in fact allow the resource sector to do more, to operate 

more efficiently, meet their needs in a better way, then that in 

fact, Mr. Speaker, probably is a good thing. 

 

I don’t know all the details, but there are instances where 

increased automation and increased use of the Internet is of 

course a positive thing. And we see that throughout society in 

general, as when there are instances where computers and the 

use of technology can make life easier, can make life better, can 

make life more hassle free, then of course that’s a good thing. 

And why wouldn’t we support that? 

 

There are examples though, Mr. Speaker, where the Sask Party 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4389 

approach to a given issue can be very short-sighted, where an 

approach for automation and an approach of modernization, as 

is suggested in Bill 125, can in fact be a smokescreen for 

something else. And I think that’s a concern whenever we’re 

looking at changes by this Sask Party government, that we have 

to be asking ourselves those questions. 

 

Remember this is the same government that gave us a 

fantasyland budget. This is the same government that said we 

were going to pull $3 billion worth of potash revenue in this 

year. So when we hear those types of outrageous claims, when 

they are making smaller claims, Mr. Speaker, about whether or 

not modernization or automation can save money and save 

time, I want to ask some serious questions about whether in fact 

that will indeed come true. Because, Mr. Speaker, if they’re 

willing to feed some pretty big lines on issues like potash 

royalties of $3 billion when in fact we’re paying the potash 

companies a few hundred million dollars, if they’re willing to 

try to pull those lines on the Saskatchewan people, I can only 

imagine what they’re willing to try to pull when it comes to the 

small things like the implementation of the MARS system. And 

again now, the MARS system is the mineral administration 

registry Saskatchewan. 

 

Now another very interesting approach with this electronic 

registry that comes to mind for me is how in fact this online 

registry will operate, how it will function, and what resources, 

what larger structures are in place to enable the MARS process 

and the electronic registry to in fact serve the interests of 

individuals working in the resource sector. Because it’s 

everyone wish in this province that the resource sector thrive 

and flourish because we know a great of deal of Saskatchewan’s 

economic activity depends on resources. We know what can 

happen when there’s an overreliance on the resource sector, 

when there’s pie in the sky thinking about the resource sector, 

when there’s fantasyland budgeting about the resource sector. 

 

But no one, even if we don’t agree with what is a realistic 

projection for potash numbers this year or last year or next year, 

we certainly can agree that the resource sector is an important 

one and one that provides a great deal of benefits to a great 

number of Saskatchewan people. I think members on both sides 

of the House would agree on that while we would not agree on 

how the sector should necessarily be managed. Well actually 

perhaps we can agree on how the sector can be managed, 

because the minister was on BNN saying what was in place is 

completely fine and good and is responsible for much of the 

success in the sector. So perhaps there are more areas of 

agreement than I initially would assume. 

 

But when we see the pie in the sky budgeting of projections of 

$3 billion of potash royalty coming into the province when in 

fact we’re paying $200 million, it causes me some concern. I 

know it causes Saskatchewan people some concern. 

 

So when looking at this automated process, the MARS process, 

as it’s been called — it takes a while to get this acronym in the 

head — but it’s the mineral administration registry 

Saskatchewan, the MARS system. 

 

There is an interesting quote, interesting phrase again that I read 

in the minister’s remarks in his second reading speech. So the 

first remarks that I found very interesting, puzzling, somewhat 

humorous if they weren’t so sad is that, the first bit was that 

over the past two years the minister suggesting that they’re 

laying the groundwork for the transformation, and then days 

later, Mr. Speaker, goes on BNN and suggests that the status 

quo that the NDP had in place was great. It would cause me to 

wonder what kind of transformation this would actually be if on 

another day, a few days later the minister says, well everything 

is actually just fine according to the royalty regime that was put 

in place by the NDP. That was the first bit that I found quite 

interesting. 

 

The next bit that I found quite interesting, Mr. Speaker, was talk 

of this electronic registry. And to quote the minister’s words 

here, he says: 

 

It will speed up the issuance of mineral dispositions by 

integrating electronic information maintained by the 

Energy and Resources ministries and the geoportal 

maintained by Information Services Corporation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you didn’t find the beginning part of the 

quote interesting, that’s okay. If you didn’t catch that or if 

someone in the Assembly didn’t catch that, the real interesting 

bit in that quote, Mr. Speaker, are the last three words: 

Information Services Corporation. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that members opposite would 

make such a statement about the Information Services 

Corporation because, like many other things in the province, 

like many other functions of government, what we see here are 

two different stories. We see one story that was said about 

Information Services Corporation before the election, and we 

see a completely different story, Mr. Speaker, after the election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m speaking about Information Services 

Corporation, which can be found in the minister’s second 

reading statement on Hansard page 4173, March 15, 2010, 

where the minister in his second reading speech, Mr. Speaker, 

brings up the issue of the Information Services Corporation. So 

I’m pleased to make some remarks about the minister’s remarks 

on the Information Services Corporation because I think the 

remarks are very telling. Because, Mr. Speaker, on this issue of 

the Information Services Corporation, we’ve had two very 

different stories, two very different stories. 

 

And before I go down this Information Services Corporation 

train of thought too far, it reminds me to earlier remarks made 

by the Minister of Agriculture, earlier remarks when he said, in 

opposition I said anything and I did it all the time — I’m 

paraphrasing, I don’t have the verbatim Hansard in front of me 

— but in opposition I said anything. And now, Mr. Speaker, in 

government you have to be responsible. 

 

Well I think, Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of Energy and 

Resources was making his second reading remarks about the 

Information Services Corporation and how this would tie in to 

the electronic registry for Bill 125, The Crown Minerals 

Amendment Act, perhaps, Mr. Speaker, he was borrowing from 

that same approach to say one thing in opposition and say 

another thing when you’re in government. 

 

Because what we saw from members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

over their years in opposition, was a great deal of skepticism 



4390 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

about Information Services Corporation, a great deal of 

skepticism about the value and the merit of the Crowns in 

general. And so now, Mr. Speaker, eerily similar to the earlier 

comments that were made on BNN by the minister about how 

everything . . . the royalty regime in Saskatchewan is as great as 

the NDP left it, and we don’t have any plan on changing it 

because it’s working so well. 

 

Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, when the minister was thinking about 

Information Services Corporation he had a similar conversion, a 

similar change of thought, a similar change of heart about how 

Information Services Corporation could in fact play an 

important role, a beneficial role with the implementation of 

MARS. And I’m not talking about the planet, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

talking about the mineral administration registry Saskatchewan, 

more easily referred to as MARS. 

 

And so you can see, we have in this instance, at one time in 

opposition when it was convenient to run down the Crowns 

publicly, publicly because I won’t suggest now, Mr. Speaker, 

that the Crowns are being buttressed or supported or growth is 

encouraged in the Crown sector by members opposite in any 

way. But I will say, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the public remarks 

that they will make, what we saw in opposition when looking at 

things like the information services commission and perhaps 

how ISC [Information Services Corporation] could deal with 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Corporation, I thank the Deputy 

Premier for correcting my slip there. It was corporation, not 

commission. I’m glad that he is following the speech so closely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we see is this approach of say one thing in 

opposition, say another thing in government. It causes me some 

concern because their willingness to do that, how do we know 

that they actually have the best interest of the Crowns, the 

Crowns like ISC, at heart. Because it’s one thing to set up a 

scenario where they could in fact benefit from the Crown sector 

in some way — and an example is the implementation of this 

electronic registry — when it’s to their convenience, they might 

pretend that they’re the great defenders, the great supporters of 

the Crowns. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think when they let their guard down a bit 

or when you catch one of the opposite members in a special 

moment of, I won’t say honesty, but a special moment of being 

forthright, we see different examples. I can think of the House 

Leader, Mr. Speaker, when he talked about how great it would 

be to hive off SecurTek. And we see, Mr. Speaker, example 

after example when it’s convenient for them, such as with this 

electronic registry, when it’s convenient for them to use the 

Crowns in some small way, they’re happy to give lip service to 

the Crowns, saying, yes perhaps there is a role here and perhaps 

we can get the new electronic registry going and perhaps that 

will benefit the resource sector in some way. 

 

But in moments when individuals have their guard down or 

when they’re caught in an interview by a good reporter or when 

they simply want to tell like it is according to their world view, 

the story that they give about Crowns is a very, very different 

story. And I know for all Saskatchewan people that is a true 

concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so I’ve had a chance to talk about how important 

the resource sector, how important the minerals that are in the 

ground under the boundaries of Saskatchewan, how important 

they are to our province because it provides so many benefits to 

Saskatchewan people through the jobs that are generated in 

those sectors, from the royalties that are paid by companies and 

how that benefits the province as a whole. 

 

[21:15] 

 

I’ve talked about, Mr. Speaker, how when the government has a 

fantasyland approach to the resource sector that Saskatchewan 

people are harmed, Saskatchewan people do not benefit. We see 

very negative outcomes for Saskatchewan people. I’ve talked 

about that for some time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve also talked about how, when we look at the 

remarks that the minister made in his second reading speech, 

how there are some very puzzling statements made Mr. 

Speaker, changes where he talks about transformation in his 

second reading speech but days later on BNN says that 

everything is fine. Let’s stay the course that the NDP set. Very 

puzzling. Makes you wonder who’s doing the thinking and 

calling the shots over there. 

 

And other statements, Mr. Speaker, where, when it’s convenient 

to find a role for the Crowns or to serve some small area in 

what they’re doing, such as this electronic registry proposed in 

Bill 125, that they go down this approach of supporting the 

Crowns in some nominal way. But we know, Mr. Speaker, 

based on past comments and based on current actions, that the 

reality that we see is a very different one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve also talked about how, when there are 

instances where automation and change or a switch to going 

electronic makes good sense and actually benefits the 

individuals in the sector, how that is a positive thing. And 

we’ve seen this in other examples, in other sectors of 

government, whether that is . . . The one example I gave was 

the legislation that we looked at last sitting about how tickets 

can be delivered in a more automated way, not requiring a law 

enforcement officer to do that. 

 

But I also said, Mr. Speaker, that it’s important that that 

approach does not serve as a smokescreen for a simple slashing 

of services or a simple reduction of the services that are 

provided to people in Saskatchewan. Because, Mr. Speaker, we 

know that the individuals who work in the resource sector do 

require on a stable and predictable and efficient government 

when it comes to the area of resources. 

 

I also talked, Mr. Speaker, about how in opposition members 

opposite were more than willing to say one thing and now, in 

government, do a very different thing, such as supporting 

Information Services Corporation through the development of 

this electronic registry proposed in Bill 125. 

 

So we know that there can certainly, the members opposite, 

when looking at resources, when looking at minerals and how 

Saskatchewan people can benefit and how the sector can 

develop and thrive, we know the members opposite have a 

pretty poor track record on this issue. So one would have to ask 

how this total transformation that the minister referred to in his 

second reading speech, how this electronic registry, the MARS 

system, could in fact help the development of the resource 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4391 

sector in the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if we look at the Sask Party record, if we 

look at oil well completions in the province, in 2008 there were 

2,604 oil well completions in Saskatchewan. Now that’s 2008; 

there were 2,604 completions. So, Mr. Speaker, I would think 

under the great financial and business geniuses that the 

members opposite suggest that they are, you would think that, 

Mr. Speaker, with the new-found era of hope and optimism that 

members opposite proclaim they have, you would think, Mr. 

Speaker, with their approach of cheerleading, their approach of 

pompoms, their approach of pretending that they’re doing what 

is best for the people of Saskatchewan, you would think, Mr. 

Speaker, that oil well completions would increase from 2008 to 

2009 because, as I said, in 2008 there were 2,604 oil well 

completions. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, but interestingly enough, despite the 

rhetoric from members opposite, despite their claims of how the 

shackles of the Bolsheviks would be broken once they came to 

power and somehow oil well completions would skyrocket in 

the province with their coming to power, in 2009, Mr. Speaker, 

we actually saw a decrease in the number of oil well 

completions — a decrease. We went from 2,604 oil well 

completions in 2008, and 2009 we see 1,338 completions, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So it causes me to wonder when the minister brings ups Bill 

125, and in his remarks, his second reading speech remarks, 

talks about this transformative change, Mr. Speaker, that is 

occurring under this government and how the changes that 

they’ve made are benefiting the resource sector in such a major 

way, I wonder what the minister is speaking of, Mr. Speaker. 

Because when looking at oil well completions in Saskatchewan, 

in 2008 there were 2,604 oil well completions and in 2009, Mr. 

Speaker, 1,338. 

 

So the message that the minister is giving, the message that the 

Premier is giving, the Finance minister, the entire cabinet and 

all members opposite, Mr. Speaker, this message that by 

coming to power somehow what had been occurring in the 

resource sector would dramatically change because of the 

new-found whatever they were bringing, Mr. Speaker, it’s not 

believable. Because if it was believable, Mr. Speaker, I would 

suggest that from 2008 to 2009 we would not see a decrease in 

the number of oil well completions. We would see an increase, 

Mr. Speaker, in the number of oil well completions. 

 

So by the logic that the members opposite put out there all the 

time in the Assembly and in the public that any positive change, 

Mr. Speaker, is their doing, it’s through changes that they’ve 

brought in, Mr. Speaker, well if they’re going to play that game, 

Mr. Speaker, they have to own this reduction. If they’re 

responsible supposedly for the good things, Mr. Speaker, then 

surely the leadership in the province has to be responsible for 

the decreases. 

 

The decrease in oil well completions from 2008 to 2009 from 

2,604 to 1,338 does not make sense to me, Mr. Speaker. I know 

it does not make sense to many people here in Saskatchewan 

that the talk that we get from members opposite, you know, 

when it’s convenient for them to say one thing, they’ll say it but 

when you look at the facts, when you actually see oil well 

completions from 2008 to 2009 dropping, to me the rhetoric 

that we get from members opposite simply does not hold water. 

 

This area, Mr. Speaker, in Bill 125, The Crown Minerals 

Amendment Act, in the minister’s second reading response to 

the reading, to the legislation, the minister said some interesting 

comments. He talked about, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, the 

“. . . transformation of our business activities in the area of 

mining and oil and gas.” He talked about, Mr. Speaker, a 

transformation in “. . . our business activities in the area of 

mining and oil and gas.” Well, Mr. Speaker, I now understand, I 

now have a better picture in my mind how it is that the Premier 

is able to make some of the speeches that he makes, Mr. 

Speaker, because I think he’s exclusively being briefed by the 

Minister of Energy and Resources. 

 

And I would say to the Premier, perhaps you want to widen 

your circle. Perhaps the Premier would like to update his 

briefing binder because I think all of the statements that he’s 

getting from the Minister of Energy and Resources are perhaps 

not the most helpful for him when he goes around the province 

speaking to individuals and talking about our resource sector. 

Because after all, as the Minister of Energy and Resources 

stated on BNN, the Premier apparently is our spokesperson in 

the area of oil and gas. 

 

And what’s troubling, Mr. Speaker, are some of the remarks 

that the Premier is making around the province because I don’t 

think, Mr. Speaker, that they’re necessarily based on fact. I 

think perhaps they are more based on poor briefings by the 

Minister of Energy and Resources. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t have the opportunity to attend the 

sod-turning ceremony in Lloydminster of the Husky operation 

some time ago, last week I believe. But I know the Premier was 

there and I know, Mr. Speaker, that another individual from 

government was there and I know that there were a couple of 

members from the opposition there. And I wasn’t there to hear 

the speech that the Premier gave but I was able to hear the 

report and the notes from the remarks made by the Premier at 

Lloydminster. 

 

And I’m concerned, Mr. Speaker, that some of the remarks that 

the Premier made in Lloydminster were more based on the 

second reading remarks that the Minister of Energy and 

Resources made on March 15th, where he talked about a “. . . 

transformation of our business activities in the area of mining 

and oil and gas.” I think, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if they 

recently spent some time together talking about the resource 

sector or if they’re just resorting to their default position to 

always cheer and to throw caution to the wind when it comes to 

paying attention to the facts. I don’t know what approach they 

were taking, but I know the minister is suggesting a complete 

transformation of our business activities, as he states in his 

speech. 

 

When the Premier was at the sod-turning ceremony, he 

suggested that Saskatchewan would very soon pass Alberta in 

total crude production of barrels per day. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that statement in itself is an okay statement maybe to make, but 

I think it’s important to look at the facts. So if the Minister of 

Energy and Resources in his speech in dealing with minerals is 

talking about a total transformation, well maybe the Premier is 



4392 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

getting his briefings from the minister’s second reading speech 

on Bill 125. I don’t know. But when I look at, in 2008, the 

comparison of total crude production from Saskatchewan to 

Alberta, what the numbers would suggest, in 2008 

Saskatchewan produced 440,706 barrels. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Order. The member 

will know the rules of this House, that comments must be 

related directly to the Bill before discussion. I would like to also 

remind members that if members would like to make 

comments, they are not allowed to make comments from behind 

the bar. If they would like to join us in front of the bar, their 

comments will be put on the record. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. When I went 

through the minister’s second reading remarks, Mr. Speaker, on 

this Bill, on Bill 125, Bill 125, An Act to Amend The Crown 

Minerals Act, in reading from Saskatchewan Hansard from 

March 15, 2010, page 4173, quoting from the Minister of 

Energy and Resources, he said, “Over the past two years, our 

ministry has laid the groundwork for a complete transformation 

of our business activities in the area of mining and oil and gas.” 

Mining and oil and gas — remarks made by the minister in 

Saskatchewan Hansard in the second reading of Bill 125, The 

Crown Minerals Amendment Act. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when talking about this total transformation 

that the minister suggests is occurring here in the province, I 

can understand why the Premier perhaps is making some of the 

remarks in the broader public that he is making because I think 

he’s exclusively getting his information from the Minister of 

Energy and Resources. Perhaps he is only relying on the 

minister’s second reading speeches. I don’t know. I’m not 

organizing the Premier’s briefing binder; that’s up to others to 

do. 

 

But what I would say is, based on the evidence, based on the 

comments that the Premier is making out and about dealing 

with oil and gas and mining, Mr. Speaker, when the minister is 

suggesting that there’s a total transformation, I see why the 

Premier is perhaps making some remarks suggesting that 

Saskatchewan would soon pass Alberta in crude production 

barrels per day. 

 

But what I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, in Bill 125, when the 

minister talks about this total transformation, that he might not 

actually be clued into his portfolio in the way he ought to be, 

and perhaps he’s giving poor information to the Premier. 

Because when you look at the facts, Mr. Speaker, when you 

look at total crude production barrels per day, we see in 2008, 

440,706 in Saskatchewan and we see, Mr. Speaker, 1,710,120 

per day, Mr. Speaker. I’m looking at the bar graph, Mr. 

Speaker, and members are asking me if that is close. And based 

on my reading of the bar graph, Mr. Speaker, it is not close. 

 

[21:30] 

 

So based on that, Mr. Speaker, I would not suggest that to make 

the statement publicly with some of the key leaders in the 

resource sector at a very important event, to suggest that 

Saskatchewan would soon pass Alberta in crude production per 

day, to me, Mr. Speaker, is a puzzling statement for the Premier 

to make, a puzzling statement for the minister to suggest to the 

Premier that he ought to make, based on his second reading 

speech, Bill 125, An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act. 

 

So those numbers, Mr. Speaker, were for 2008. If you look at 

2009, we see much the same story . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Well members ask did we close the gap, and my reading of 

the bar graph suggests, no, we did not close the gap from 

2008-2009. 2009: 423,387 in Saskatchewan; and in Alberta: 

1,786,482. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, when the minister in his second reading 

speech talks about a total transformation of the sector through 

the implementation of the MARS system, the electronic 

registry, whether the electronic registry, Mr. Speaker, whether 

MARS will allow us to close that gap, I don’t know. And again 

for members who are tuning in at home, MARS is the mineral 

administration registry Saskatchewan which will be operated 

through Information Services Corporation, one of the many 

beloved Crowns, supposedly, of members opposite. That was 

another part of my speech where I’m not quite buying that 

argument, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But when the minister in his second reading speech talks about 

this total transformation, I think when we look at the facts, 

when we look at the bar graph, Mr. Speaker, total 

transformation, I don’t think it’s occurring. And in fact when 

we look at the remarks that the Minister of Energy and 

Resources says on BNN that we’re actually going to keep the 

status quo from the royalty regime that was put in place from 

the previous New Democratic government, and how that’s a 

good thing because the regime is working well, Mr. Speaker, to 

me that doesn’t speak to total transformation. That actually 

speaks to a continuation of much of the solid foundation that’s 

been put in place. 

 

So when looking at this electronic registry called MARS and 

how this may in some ways be able to streamline and improve 

the process for individuals involved in the resource sector, for 

the minister to suggest that this is a total transformation by 

having an online electronic registry, to me, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

think it’s going to close that gap. And I’m not making any 

statement, Mr. Speaker, about what the gap should be and on 

whether we’re going up or down. Really, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

the topic for another speech and another debate. 

 

What I would say, Mr. Speaker, though, whenever we’re 

dealing with any piece of legislation, whenever we’re dealing 

with any of the resources here in the province, just base your 

lines on fact. The facts, Mr. Speaker, do not back up what the 

Premier, what I heard the Premier said at the sod-turning 

ceremony of the Husky operation in Lloydminster. So it’s fine 

and good, perhaps, to go to such an event. I think that’s a good 

thing. But if you’re going to go, just base your remarks on fact. 

You don’t need to exaggerate. You don’t need to pretend that 

there are 1,000 balloons when there’s only 100. Now I’m not 

suggesting the members opposite don’t have 1,000 balloons 

because I know they love balloons. But, Mr. Speaker, if you 

only have 100 balloons, don’t pretend you have 1,000 balloons. 

Just tell the facts as they are. 

 

So don’t suggest in your second reading speech that there’s a 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4393 

total transformation of the resource sector based on the 

introduction of the MARS system. Don’t suggest that there’s a 

total transformation occurring when in fact, Mr. Speaker, if you 

look at the bar graph, the facts tell a very different story. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, if you even just listen to the minister on another 

day, the minister tells a very different story. On one day he’s 

speaking total transformation and how things, Mr. Speaker, 

under the previous administration weren’t clipping along fine. 

On the next, Mr. Speaker, he talks about total transformation 

that is needed and how that somehow, simply by having 

members opposite, yes, in the House, that this will in fact come 

to pass. 

 

And so what I would say, Mr. Speaker, when dealing with a 

sector as important as the resource sector in the province; when 

we know that so, so many Saskatchewan people rely on how 

well the resource sector is doing; when we know that the 

programs that we deliver in this province, whether it be health 

care, whether it be education, whether it be paving of roads, 

whether it be any given project that any member of this 

Assembly wants to see happen in their constituency and serve 

the people of this province through the provision of either that 

service or that facility, Mr. Speaker; when we are talking about 

issues, issues that are as important as the services and the 

facilities that Saskatchewan people use, Mr. Speaker; when we 

are talking about how those services, how those facilities are 

paid for, a great deal of them paid for, Mr. Speaker, through the 

resources that are provided by Saskatchewan resources — 

resources, Mr. Speaker, that belong to every Saskatchewan 

person — it’s so important, Mr. Speaker, that we get it right. 

 

It’s so important, Mr. Speaker, that we rely on the facts. It’s so 

important, Mr. Speaker, that we don’t resort to fantasyland 

budgeting, that we don’t resort to pie in the sky talk; but instead 

we simply rely on the facts and that we tell people of 

Saskatchewan how it really is. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to suggest that the introduction of MARS is 

part of a total transformation of the resource sector when in fact, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s perhaps one small part of the resource sector 

— I’m not saying it’s not an important part; I’m not saying it 

won’t serve a real purpose, Mr. Speaker — but to me there is 

some concerns when the hype and the rhetoric that we hear 

from members opposite is not backed up by fact, is not backed 

up by the information that Saskatchewan people have to 

determine whether or not the government is in fact increasing, 

having a role in increasing or decreasing the extraction of 

resources from the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when looking at any change to legislation, 

it’s so very important to ensure that changes that occur through 

proposed legislation here in the Assembly, it’s so very 

important to ensure that the changes are in fact what individuals 

working in that sector, working in that area in fact really want 

and in fact really need. Because, Mr. Speaker, if what 

individuals are requesting for changes to programs, whether it’s 

Bill 125 or something else, it’s so very important that the 

changes reflect the needs on the ground, reflect the suggestions 

and their proposals from individuals who are directly involved 

in the resource sector. 

 

Because if those two things aren’t in step or in tune, what we 

can have, Mr. Speaker, are changes coming forward from 

government through proposed legislation that don’t serve the 

best interests of the sector and then could have a detrimental 

effect to the sector and to Saskatchewan people because, as I 

pointed out, for so many of the services that we want for our 

families here in Saskatchewan, the availability of resources is 

certainly important. 

 

So it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that proper consultation, proper 

discussion, proper meetings occurs with the individuals actually 

working in that sector because there’s nothing worse than not 

delivering the changes that are requested by a particular group. 

And we’ve seen some glaring problems, Mr. Speaker, with 

members opposite and their ability to properly consult with the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so I’m concerned, when we’re looking at Bill 125, The 

Crown Minerals Amendment Act, when we’re looking at the 

potential changes, it’s so very important that the potential 

changes are in fact what individuals are wanting, what 

individuals are stating through proper consultation. 

 

Because we’ve seen other examples. You know, Mr. Speaker, 

we saw the cutting of services for victims of domestic abuse in 

Saskatoon, my home city. We saw that without consultation. 

And it was clear that it was felt in the community by individuals 

who rely on that service, by individuals who have benefited 

from that service, from individuals working in that area, Mr. 

Speaker, individuals providing services to victims of domestic 

abuse. When the cuts were made by members opposite in that 

area without consultation, Mr. Speaker, it had a negative effect 

for Saskatchewan people. 

 

It didn’t help Saskatchewan people. It didn’t create a better 

province. It didn’t create a healthier province. It didn’t create a 

more secure province, Mr. Speaker. What we saw was a lot of 

confusion, a lot of anger, a lot of upset individuals over the 

unilateral cutting of services for victims of domestic abuse. So 

when we’re looking at Bill 125, an Act to amend Crown 

minerals, it’s important that we make sure proper consultation 

took place because what we don’t want to see, Mr. Speaker, is 

the type of consultation that took place when services were cut 

to victims of domestic abuse. 

 

I don’t know why, Mr. Speaker, they would take that approach 

of not having proper consultation. I don’t know why they 

wouldn’t choose to meet with providers of that service. I don’t 

know why, Mr. Speaker, they would choose not to listen to 

victims of domestic violence who have benefited from the 

services provided. But if that same approach is what we see in 

Bill 125 when the minister speaks of consultation with 

individuals, to me that is troubling. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, members opposite might say, oh the 

member from Massey Place is not being fair because he’s using 

one example, and so on. Who’s to say the same approach of 

weak consultation occurs in other areas of government? Well, 

Mr. Speaker, if we look at the facts, if we look at areas where 

consultation should have occurred but consultation has failed to 

occur, we see, Mr. Speaker, some other examples that to me, 

when I’m looking at Bill 125, an Act to amend . . . You think I 

would have the name other than 125 down in memory now, but 

The Crown Minerals Amendment Act. We would think, Mr. 

Speaker, that they would get the consultation right, but when 



4394 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

we look at other examples where consultation’s been so 

inadequate, so flawed, so negative in its outcomes, well I guess 

when it’s absent, Mr. Speaker, of course it’s going to be 

negative in its outcomes because the only way you can consult 

with people is to talk to people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We saw this also with their broken promise on PST funding to 

municipalities, Mr. Speaker. There was no consultation with 

municipalities. The only consultation that took place, Mr. 

Speaker, was by the Premier and the media. That’s not 

consultation. And I sure hope, Mr. Speaker, when looking at 

Bill 125, when looking at proposed changes to The Crown 

Minerals Act I sure hope, Mr. Speaker, that the minister, the 

members opposite are not conducting consultation in the media 

and the media alone. 

 

Because we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, when that type of 

consultation occurs, we see members opposite having to make 

apologies. And you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s better to get it right. 

I know the Premier had to apologize to the municipalities for 

the way that he consulted or the absence of the consultation on 

the broken promise to provide PST funding. I know that 

angered many people in the province. 

 

So it’s my sincere hope, Mr. Speaker, when members opposite 

thought up these changes in Bill 125, The Crown Minerals Act, 

proposed changes to The Crown Minerals Act, Bill 125, my 

sincere, my honest hope, Mr. Speaker, is that they took the time 

to do proper consultation. 

 

You know, we saw with victims of domestic abuse, when the 

services were cut for some of the most vulnerable in society at 

perhaps some of the worst moments in their personal lives, we 

saw the complete absence of consultation. That was not a good 

thing, Mr. Speaker. Many people were offended, many people 

were hurt on a personal level because of that absence of 

consultation — individuals who have poured their lives, their 

careers, their heart and soul into the provision of services for 

women who are victims of domestic abuse. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, members might say, well how on earth can 

the member from Massey Place compare changes to the 

minerals Act to the mean-spirited cuts for service for victims of 

domestic abuse? But, Mr. Speaker, it speaks to an approach and 

it speaks to a philosophy the members opposite have. It speaks 

to an approach where they think, Mr. Speaker, because they 

have a simple majority, that they can run roughshod over the 

democratic process here in the Legislative Assembly, that they 

don’t have to follow the basic tenets of democracy of consulting 

with people in the broader public. They think, Mr. Speaker, that 

because they have the majority, they have more members on 

that side than this House, Mr. Speaker, that they can do 

whatever the heck they want, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[21:45] 

 

We see it with the independent officers of this legislature, Mr. 

Speaker, where we see bullying tactics by members opposite. 

Simply because they have a majority they think, Mr. Speaker, 

they can politically, politically interfere with how independent 

officers of the Legislative Assembly are selected, how 

independent officers of the Legislative Assembly can act. And 

I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker, it puts through a tone and an 

approach of fear, Mr. Speaker, through every independent 

officer of this Assembly — officers, Mr. Speaker, that have 

been given a mandate to serve the people . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — It’s an interesting 

debate, and it’s one worth having, but not on this Bill. Would 

the member for Saskatoon Massey Place proceed with his 

discussion of the Bill in front of us. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I learned in church, Mr. 

Speaker, as a boy, I learned in church that if you’re not faithful 

when you’re given a little, Mr. Speaker, that you won’t be 

faithful when you’re given a lot. If members opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, can’t be faithful with the little matters like in Bill 125, 

if they can’t ensure proper consultation has occurred with 

individuals on Bill 125, then, Mr. Speaker, it’s no surprise that 

they don’t have proper consultation with independent officers 

of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

It’s no surprise, Mr. Speaker, if they don’t want to follow 

proper consultation in Bill 125, an Act to amend how there’s a 

registry for minerals and resources here in the province, Mr. 

Speaker, if they can’t do that properly, if they can’t consult on 

issues like that, if they can’t consult on issues like cutting 

services for victims of domestic abuse, if they can’t consult on 

breaking their promises on the provision of PST [provincial 

sales tax] funding to municipalities, Mr. Speaker, well then, Mr. 

Speaker, how can we trust the members opposite on the big 

issues? I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. I know members opposite 

would simply want us to trust them, believe them, assume that 

they will do what’s best for the province. 

 

But when you look at the little details, Mr. Speaker, when you 

look at the small aspects that involve the consultation — not 

with huge amounts of the public because when you consult with 

a large, large population in the province, Mr. Speaker, it’s more 

evident to everyone whether or not the consultation is a true and 

a good one and an accurate, an honest, genuine, a sincere 

consultation — but when looking at the smaller Bills, the 

smaller changes, Mr. Speaker, that perhaps don’t directly affect 

everyone in the province, changes like in Bill 125 where we see 

amendment to change The Crown Minerals Act, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s the small changes, Mr. Speaker, that when proper 

consultation does not occur with the actual individuals working 

in the resource sector providing the leadership, Mr. Speaker, 

that the Saskatchewan people really need when it comes to 

looking at minerals and resources in the ground, when it comes 

to providing the cold, hard facts, unlike the facts that the 

Premier relies on when he has speaking engagements 

throughout the province, if we look at these small details, Mr. 

Speaker, they’re very telling. 

 

Because if you can’t consult properly on the small details, how, 

Mr. Speaker, can we trust members opposite to consult on the 

huge matters that affect hundreds and hundreds of thousands of 

people here in the province? And when you combine, Mr. 

Speaker, a flawed consultation, an inadequate consultation, a 

consultation that only seeks for expediency and convenience, 

Mr. Speaker, when that is all that your primary aim and goal is, 

Mr. Speaker, how can we expect that the changes in Bill 125 

are in fact serving the best interests of Saskatchewan people? 

 

You know, members opposite have some questions about the 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4395 

value of minerals, the value of resources to the province, Mr. 

Speaker. They think, Mr. Speaker, based on the heckles from 

their seats . . . And, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy if some of the 

members have awoken from their slumber. I’m happy if some 

of the members have taken the earbuds out of their laptop 

computers and pressed pause on the DVD that they rented. 

That’s a good thing, Mr. Speaker, because the issues that we’re 

discussing in Bill 125, issues about the minerals, issues about 

the resources here in the province, issues about how we can 

ensure as legislators that the activity occurring in the resource 

sector is occurring efficiently, is occurring in a way that 

benefits the greatest number of Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m so very pleased the members opposite are paying 

attention to this speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because I think some of the members opposite need to sit down 

with the Premier and talk about what is occurring in the mineral 

and resource sector. Because based on the speeches that the 

Premier’s making in various locales around the province, Mr. 

Speaker, they’re not accurate. They’re not based on fact. 

They’re not taking a true, honest look at the numbers. They’re 

simply relying, Mr. Speaker, on the Minister of Energy and 

Resources’ second reading speech on Bill 125, this Act to 

amend. 

 

In this speech, Mr. Speaker, the minister stated in his second 

reading speech on Bill 125, he talked about “. . . a complete 

transformation of our business activities in the area of mining 

and oil and gas.” He talked about a complete transformation in 

Bill 125. Now, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier goes around the 

public talking about the resource sector, talking about the 

minerals that we have in the ground, Mr. Speaker, he’s only 

taking the verbatim Hansard here of what the minister said in 

his speech on March 15th, 2010. And I don’t think, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s an accurate picture of everything that’s 

occurring in the resource sector in the province. 

 

Because I think when you look at the actual numbers, when you 

look at the actual activity, I think it tells a different story. I think 

the story that it does tell, Mr. Speaker, is a Premier that can 

only resort to hype, a Premier that can only resort to balloons. 

And he can’t rely on the facts, Mr. Speaker, because when you 

look at the facts it tells a very different story. It tells a story, Mr. 

Speaker, of completely inadequate consultation with the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, members opposite from their seats, the 

member from Silver Springs, says doom and gloom. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I now understand how we’ve gotten into the huge 

mess with potash resources that we have. The member opposite 

says it’s doom and gloom to simply look at the facts, to take an 

honest look at the numbers and come up with some realistic and 

authentic projections. 

 

I understand, Mr. Speaker, this ethos that they have where they 

have to be spinning all the time, they have to be waving 

pompoms and raising balloons on every occasion. And the 

problem, Mr. Speaker, when we take that approach and nothing 

but that approach to the resource sector, it gets us into a very, 

very dangerous spot. It gets us into the scenario when we’re 

looking at the resources here in the province, when we’re 

looking at Bill 125 and how we can pull resources out of the 

ground and how we can gain royalties from that wealth, how we 

can do this in an efficient way so that all Saskatchewan people 

can benefit, to simply say, Mr. Speaker, that it’s a bad thing to 

look at the facts, to look at the numbers. 

 

I now understand, Mr. Speaker, how the Minister of Energy and 

Resources suggested we were going to earn $3 billion from 

potash. Mr. Speaker, you would think, you would think the 

Minister of Energy and Resources would be somewhere in the 

right ballpark, Mr. Speaker, with respect to how much we 

would gain from the minerals and resources we’re pulling out 

of the ground. But no, Mr. Speaker, he was off by billions and 

billions and billions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. On one item, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So to suggest that it’s a negative thing to look at the facts, to 

come up with a truthful and an honest portrayal of what’s 

happening in our resource sector, to suggest that that’s a bad 

thing, Mr. Speaker, I would have to wholeheartedly disagree. I 

think the bad thing, Mr. Speaker, is to cook the numbers to 

simply match your 32 per cent increase in spending, Mr. 

Speaker. That is a bad thing. 

 

I would suggest a bad thing, Mr. Speaker, is to ignore common 

sense, to ignore the advice given by many people in the 

province, around the world, from individuals — even if they’re 

in the official opposition, Mr. Speaker. I think the foolish thing 

would be to ignore that advice, Mr. Speaker. To simply choose 

any number for potash that suits their fancy, Mr. Speaker, to 

make the appropriate revenue amount to match the 32 per cent 

increase in spending, well my goodness’ sake, to suggest that 

that is a negative thing, I simply do not know where . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I’d ask the member 

from Saskatoon Massey Place if he has anything to say about 

the implementation of a new web-based mineral registry 

system. If he does, would he please get to the point. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Bill 125 . . . I’m not even 

on my consultation points yet, Mr. Speaker. But when looking 

at Bill 125, An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act, members 

opposite from their seat . . . I’m not, Mr. Speaker, asking 

members to heckle from their seats, Mr. Speaker. Members 

from opposite are doing their very best to enter this debate 

because, Mr. Speaker, I think the truth hurts for them. I think 

the truth hurts for them. When I talk about, in Bill 125, 

suggestions to change how a registry occurs in the area of 

resources, Mr. Speaker, for members opposite to suggest to take 

an honest look at 125 — to form an opinion based on the facts, 

to form an opinion based on what we hear from Saskatchewan 

people, to form an opinion that is in fact in the interests of 

Saskatchewan people — to suggest that is a bad thing and 

should not inform our opinion of Bill 125, to me is puzzling. I 

do not understand. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when I hear this approach, when I hear the 

heckles from members opposite, I now understand. I now 

understand the complete dearth of competence around the 

cabinet table. And I understand, Mr. Speaker, how we could get 

to a situation where the Minister of Energy and Resources, 

backed up, backed up, Mr. Speaker, by the Minister of Finance 

and ultimately approved, endorsed, and favoured by the 

Premier, I understand how we could get to this situation where 

potash numbers are so horribly off. 



4396 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

We know in looking at Bill 125, Mr. Speaker, that the resource 

sector is so very, very important to Saskatchewan people. It 

provides the services that Saskatchewan people need through 

the royalties that are received in the provincial coffers, through 

the jobs that are generated in communities throughout the 

province in a variety of areas. 

 

So in looking at Bill 125, as I said before in my speech, and I’m 

happy to say again because when there are good changes I think 

they should be endorsed and supported and backed up by the 

opposition, if the introduction, Mr. Speaker, if the introduction 

of the MARS electronic program — and again MARS is the 

mineral administration registry Saskatchewan — if the 

introduction of MARS has a benefit to the resource sector and 

Saskatchewan people, if that is true, if that is factual, Mr. 

Speaker, then speaking personally for myself, I won’t speak for 

every member on this side, I think that’s a fine thing. 

 

But what I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to support 

MARS, if we think that this MARS approach is a good thing, 

let’s have an honest look at this legislation. Let’s look at the 

comments made by the minister in his second reading speech, 

comments that suggest Information Services Corporation has a 

great role to play in the province. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, in taking an honest and a hard look at 

the facts stated by the minister in his second reading speech on 

Bill 125, and when we compare that to the statements made by 

members opposite, even the minister himself and comments he 

made on BNN where he said everything was great, when he 

was speaking of the royalty regime, when we take that honest 

look and see what other members have said — and I recall, Mr. 

Speaker, the Government House Leader suggesting that it 

would be great to hive off SecurTek — in moments when 

individuals are speaking straight from the heart, we know what 

their true intention is around the Crown corporations, Mr. 

Speaker. And while on one given issue around Bill 125, it might 

be convenient for them to have a role for ISC with respect to the 

introduction of MARS, if that’s factual and true, then I think 

that’s a good thing. 

 

But when we look at the whole picture, Mr. Speaker — when 

we look at, as the Ag minister said, when they said one thing in 

opposition and did another thing in government, Mr. Speaker — 

when we look at the true motives behind legislation, the true 

motives of a particular piece of legislation, then I’m not quite as 

willing to simply take them at their word that they think 

Information Services Corporation can serve a great role with the 

introduction of MARS. And again MARS is not the planet. It’s 

the mineral administration registry Saskatchewan. 

 

So to me, Mr. Speaker, the only way, the only way . . . I won’t 

say the only way — one of the key ways; excuse me — one of 

the key ways we can take that honest and accurate look at the 

facts, at the numbers of what Saskatchewan people are saying, 

is through true consultation, Mr. Speaker. And even though 

members opposite say, what is the member from Massey Place, 

why is he harping on that consultation is so very important on 

Bill 125, this Act to introduce an electronic registry? Why is 

this so important? 

 

[22:00] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important, as I’ve stated before, 

because if you can’t do the small things right like proper 

consultation around one particular piece of legislation, why 

should we assume, Mr. Speaker, that they’re going to get the 

larger pieces right? And that ties in to a general competence, 

general ability for the government to deliver what they say to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And it gets us to that very troubling, somewhat comical but 

mostly troubling fact where the Premier will go around, make 

statements which aren’t based on fact, which are simply based 

on wishful thinking, statements that are not accurate, that are 

simply coming from the notes that the minister made in his 

second reading speech. And to me, Mr. Speaker, that’s a worry, 

that’s a problem because when I go around and speak to 

individuals in the province whether it’s in my constituency or 

here in Regina or in other parts of the province, people in 

Saskatchewan want accuracy, especially when it comes to our 

resources, especially when it comes to an area of the provincial 

economy, Mr. Speaker, that is so vital. 

 

And what we’ve seen from members opposite — and this is my 

worry about Bill 125, Mr. Speaker — that we’re seeing this 

same pattern of flawed consultation, of complete ignoring of the 

factual reality, of ignoring the facts and being ignorant of the 

facts. If we see this again in Bill 125, Mr. Speaker, the 

introduction of MARS and how an e-registry can help the 

resource sector, Saskatchewan people aren’t going to settle for 

that because they want the complete and honest story. And it’s 

not enough to simply have spin, to have wishful thinking, to 

have a fantasyland budget, fantasyland amendments, 

fantasyland legislation, anything fantasyland, Mr. Speaker. I 

think when it comes to the fantasyland track record we have 

from members opposite, Saskatchewan people don’t want it. 

They want action that is based on the facts. 

 

When looking at some of the consultation that needs to occur, I 

do have some notes, Mr. Speaker, of some of the 

correspondence that was sent out to individuals last fall in the 

sector and some of the changes that are . . . that the minister was 

suggesting that they were going to bring in and change. And it 

is my sincere hope, as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, that true 

consultation does occur. It’s my hope that the feedback that can 

be generated from that exercise, I hope, Mr. Speaker, I really 

hope, Mr. Speaker, I really, really hope, Mr. Speaker, that 

they’re not going to ignore that consultation. I really hope, Mr. 

Speaker, that they’re not going to selectively choose the pieces 

of feedback that is convenient, that is convenient, Mr. Speaker, 

for their own agenda, their agenda, Mr. Speaker, of not telling 

the whole story when it comes to our resource sector, an 

agenda, Mr. Speaker, that does not rely on the basic facts that 

we have about the resource sector, instead resorts, Mr. Speaker, 

simply to wishful thinking. 

 

So when looking at the proposed changes that we have in this 

piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker . . . And I will let members 

opposite know, Mr. Speaker, that I do not intend in speaking 

until 10:30 on this piece of legislation because I know some 

members opposite have hit pause on their DVD, and they 

desperately want to get back to the Jim Carrey rerun. So I will 

allow another member from the Assembly on this side to soon 

speak on a piece of legislation. 

 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4397 

But, Mr. Speaker, if, Mr. Speaker, my comments in some way 

have struck a nerve opposite, if it has caused even for a few of 

them, Mr. Speaker, if it has caused even for a few of them to 

have a bit of introspection — to look at their approach of 

governance, to look at their approach of flawed consultation, to 

look at their approach of ignoring the facts, to look at the 

reality, Mr. Speaker — even if, Mr. Speaker, it caused one 

member opposite to hit pause on their DVD and listen to my 

remarks, to follow some introspection, to ask the hard 

questions, even if it causes change in just one person, Mr. 

Speaker, I will be very pleased.  

 

Because I know, Mr. Speaker, that when looking at Bill 125 and 

looking at Bill 125, I think there’s been an absence of straight 

talk from members in caucus and members in cabinet about Bill 

125. I think, Mr. Speaker, they have solely relied upon the 

minister’s second reading speech that talked about total 

transformation, talked about total transformation of the oil and 

gas and energy sector here in the province and then days later, 

days later goes on BNN and says actually everything is staying 

the same because it’s working rather well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even if it causes one member opposite to realize 

the double-talk that is occurring, to realize the two stories, the 

inconsistencies in the two stories that the minister and the 

Premier are spinning; even if it causes one member, Mr. 

Speaker, in the member’s lounge, in the hallway, in the 

bathroom — I don’t care where they have this conversation, 

Mr. Speaker — but even if it causes one member to go to the 

minister, to go to the Premier and say, listen, listen I’ve heard 

from the Saskatchewan people and I too believe that we should 

deal with the facts. I too believe that we should have proper 

consultation with the Saskatchewan people. I too believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that we shouldn’t rely upon our own hype, our own 

rhetoric, our own spin, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s my sincere hope, Mr. Speaker, that through the course of 

my speech, members opposite, at least one of them took out the 

earbuds, Mr. Speaker, and listened to what I had to say about 

the need for taking an honest and true look at the facts and 

allowing that to inform their position on any piece of 

legislation. Whether it’s the so-called small Bills like 125, Mr. 

Speaker, that allow an e-registry to do with the resource sector, 

whether it’s the small issues like that or whether it’s the huge 

issues, Mr. Speaker, that aren’t even legislation but issues that 

cut to the core and the heart of our democratic process, like 

independent officers of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, I hope, 

Mr. Speaker, that there is one member over there. 

 

You know, the Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations, 

Mr. Speaker, bangs on his desk when I say I hope there is one 

member over there who is willing to speak some truth and 

speak some honesty to the Premier and to the minister, Mr. 

Speaker. And perhaps, perhaps that is the one individual, Mr. 

Speaker, who took my remarks to heart and has had some type 

of conversion, Mr. Speaker. But I doubt it. I don’t think, Mr. 

Speaker, that that is the member, based on the approach that 

we’ve seen him take in his own file in one area such as duty to 

consult. But, Mr. Speaker, I know you’re one for encouraging 

the speaker to always stay on point, so I won’t deliver a speech 

on duty to consult this evening. 

 

What I will say, Mr. Speaker, when looking at Bill 125, while 

some members, while some people in the province may say this 

is not earth-shattering legislation, it’s not legislation that turns 

the world upside down, it’s not legislation that, contrary to what 

the minister would suggest in his second reading remarks, is a 

total and complete transformation of the energy sector — I 

don’t think that has much credibility — Mr. Speaker, I hope 

there is one member opposite, one member opposite who is 

willing to go to the Premier and say, let’s just let the facts speak 

for themselves especially in the resource sector, especially in an 

area of the economy of the province that has such a great 

bearing on Saskatchewan people. Let’s just rely on the facts. 

Let’s not pretend that we’re going to pass Alberta in the 

production of crude oil, Mr. Speaker, if that’s not the case. 

 

Let’s not go out there and spin that story because, one, it’s 

embarrassing for the individual making those remarks in public. 

I don’t think that’s a good thing. But more importantly, Mr. 

Speaker . . . Because I’m not really concerned if the Premier is 

embarrassed or not embarrassed. That’s up to him to define his 

own approach and how he wants to deliver his speech about 

125, about the resources and energy here in the province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, don’t pretend. Don’t be a pretender. Don’t 

pretend that something is what it isn’t. So don’t pretend, Mr. 

Speaker, that Bill 125 as legislation, as a proposed change that 

is going to revolutionize the oil and gas and resource sector in 

the province, don’t pretend that’s what it’s going to do if it’s 

not. It’s fine to say, Mr. Speaker, that the amendments proposed 

in Bill 125 will make some changes in the resource sector, will 

perhaps make things more efficient in some areas, will perhaps 

allows some companies, some individuals to do better. That’s 

fine. That’s good. Those are fair statements, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I would encourage someone on the opposite side to go to 

the Premier, to go to the minister and say, don’t pretend. Don’t 

pretend. Don’t pretend to be something that you’re not. Simply 

allow the facts about Bill 125 — what changes, what the 

introduction of MARS will do — simply allow the facts to 

speak for themselves. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that if even one 

member opposite, one member opposite is willing to go have a 

conversation with the Premier or the minister and to tell them 

when it comes to Bill 125, I for one want you to rely on the 

facts, I for one want you to speak in the most honest and 

transparent way to Saskatchewan people, I think, Mr. Speaker, 

if there’s one member, one member from the other side who’s 

willing to do that, I think that will be a good thing and I think 

Saskatchewan will be a better place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I will conclude my remarks on Bill 

No. 125, An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act. I will 

conclude my remarks at this time, and I would move that we 

adjourn debate. 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member for 

Saskatoon Massey Place has moved adjournment of debate on 

Bill No. 125, The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2009. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Carried. 



4398 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

Bill No. 126 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 126 — The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great 

pleasure to follow such a great speech, as my colleague from 

the member from Saskatoon Massey Place just did a terrific job 

on his Bill. 

 

The Bill that we’re talking about here today that I’m very 

pleased to be speaking about, Bill 126, An Act respecting the 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases and 

Adaptation to Climate Change. And you know, many would 

argue that this is one of the absolutely most important Bills of 

our time. Many people in fact feel that the very future of 

agriculture, of our water resource, and even our wildlife 

depends on our actions on environmental issues. So, Mr. 

Speaker, there’s no question that a Bill respecting the reduction 

of greenhouse gases and adaptation to climate change would be 

incredibly important. 

 

The problem that we have is, in this Bill — as is the case with 

virtually every Bill that I’ve seen so far — is there’s clearly a 

lack of meaningful consultation with the people of 

Saskatchewan. And why do I say that, Mr. Speaker? I say that 

because in 2007, the Sask Party campaigned on a promise to 

reduce CO2 emissions, greenhouse gas emissions, by 32 per 

cent with the base year being 2006. I know that they promised 

that because that was the NDP promise and they said, us too. Us 

too, they said then in 2007. But you know, Mr. Speaker, that 

was then. 

 

Well fast-forward now and what do we have? We have an 

anemic Bill, a very anemic, watered down Bill that says, not a 

reduction of 32 per cent based on 2004, but instead we’re going 

to go to 2006 when the CO2 emissions were higher. And we’re 

not going to reduce it by 32 per cent; we’re going to reduce it 

by 20 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they’re saying now 

with respect to management and reduction of greenhouse gases 

and adaptation to climate change — watered it down. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker — just think about this — they’ve said 

we’re going to basically set the target at about 60 per cent of 

what the New Democrat government at the time set and what 

they campaigned on. Sixty per cent, that’s how much they’ve 

lowered this target, Mr. Speaker. Then they’ve said, and the 

target is in 2020. Well let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that’s not 

one election away; the next election is 2011. It’s doubtful the 

Sask Party is going to survive in government 2011, never mind, 

Mr. Speaker, never mind 2000 and, four years later, 2011, 2015, 

and then 2019. 

 

[22:15] 

 

There’s going to be, if they’re in the order they are supposed to 

be, three full general elections between the time this Bill is 

being proposed to be passed and the government meeting a 

hugely watered down target. Well what a shame that is. First 

you set the target so low you can trip over it, so low you could 

just trip over it and claim victory. Then you say, but we won’t 

be accountable; you can’t say we missed it until three more 

general elections have passed us by. I can hardly believe it. 

 

At a time when many think that our actions, not just the actions 

of Saskatchewan people and businesses and industry and 

government, but the action of governments around the world 

need to coalesce, the action of industry around the world needs 

to come together, the action of individuals around the world 

needs to come together, never have we seen a time, Mr. 

Speaker, where the environment is more in need of good 

stewardship. Never in the history of mankind have we seen a 

time when the environment is more crying out for good 

stewardship. 

 

Never, Mr. Speaker, have we ever even dreamt of a time when a 

chunk of Antarctica, a chunk larger than the continent of 

Australia would slide off into the ocean. That happened last 

summer. That happened. A chunk of Antarctica broke off into 

the ocean, and it’s a chunk of ice larger than Australia. Well this 

should be causing us to sit up and pay attention. 

 

Then let’s just be a little bit more selfish, Mr. Speaker, when it 

comes to CO2 emissions and the environment. Let’s be a little 

more selfish and talk about our own little corner of the world. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have a situation where the Leader-Post 

just a couple of weeks ago printed a map of Canada, a map of 

Canada, and it showed the temperature for January and 

February. According to Environment Canada, our little corner 

of the world right here is as close to normal as any part of 

Canada, and it gets progressively hotter as we get towards 

Baffin Island where the change in temperature was about seven 

and a half degrees Celsius warmer than normal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And of course the tie has been absolutely direct between CO2 

greenhouse gas emissions and global warming. The science of 

that is virtually indisputable. There’s still a few people that will 

argue, and that’s absolutely their right to argue that there is no 

direct tie, but they’re a decreasingly small minority of people, 

Mr. Speaker, that say there isn’t a direct tie between greenhouse 

gases and global warming. And if ever you saw global 

warming, I mean you can’t possibly dispute that a country, 

Canada, the second largest country in the world geographically, 

and the map shows that all of the second largest country in the 

world is hugely warmer than it’s ever been before, hugely 

warmer than ever before in January and February, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a very complex Bill here, a complex Bill that I argue 

doesn’t go nearly far enough. It speaks of a target. It speaks of a 

20 per cent reduction with a baseline year being 2006, three 

years ago. Not the commitment that was made during the last 

election in 2007, which was a reduction from the year 2004, a 

reduction of 32 per cent. Instead it’s from 2006, a higher level 

of CO2 emissions, and the reduction’s only 20 per cent. And the 

target is all the way out at 2020 — I’ve already said, three 

elections into the future. Three elections will have passed. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we need to act. We need a government that 

doesn’t simply set one target during an election, a target of 

convenience, then in 2009-2010 set another. Well in fact in 

2009, they had a different piece of legislation than this. There 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4399 

are some changes from 2009 to this piece of legislation 

introduced now this year. Well, Mr. Speaker, we need to have 

more than simply targets of convenience. We need to have 

targets that a government is committed to meeting, targets that a 

government feels with every fibre of its being. Otherwise save 

your breath and certainly save the paper. You know, trees take 

CO2 out of the air. Save the trees. Don’t bother printing a Bill 

that’s 40 pages long, Mr. Speaker, 40 pages long. Don’t bother 

doing it if you don’t have any intention of doing something 

about greenhouse gas emissions. 

 

We need a government that makes and sticks to a plan of action, 

Mr. Speaker. A plan of action, not just some target of 

convenience, you know, a target that’s convenient one day. 

We’ve already found a target of convenience in 2007 during 

election wasn’t convenient already by 2009, and 2009 wasn’t 

convenient by 2010. And the question is how can we trust the 

government, how can we trust the Sask Party government on 

the environment when three times now the ground keeps 

shifting? How can we trust them that this Bill is a good Bill, if 

they have any intention of meeting this anemic target? How can 

we trust the Sask Party government on that? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to move into energy conservation in a 

huge way. We need to move into alternate energy. We had, 

under the previous government, set up the largest wind capacity 

per capita of any province or territory in Canada. More wind 

energy per capita than anywhere in Canada. And you know, you 

really have to scratch your head to point to any successes on 

that subsequent. You really have to scratch your head with 

respect to wind power. 

 

There’s some talk of some wind, I saw in the paper down 

around Moosomin, and I wish them well. But I mean that’s 

about it. I just can’t point to anything else. And what have they 

done with respect to natural gas and power production, Mr. 

Speaker? This is a technology that’s been good and it’s been off 

the shelf for 50 years and more. You could build a gas turbine, 

generate electricity, and turn around and sell it. SaskPower’s 

been in that business for probably longer than I have been alive. 

Probably that long. Probably that long. 

 

And what did they do now? They just announced a new power 

generation, gas turbine power generation. And who’s going 

build it and who’s going to operate it and who’s going to reap 

the benefits financially? Tell you it’s a company from Ontario 

that’s going to do that; not SaskPower that’s had the 

technology, has the people, has the ability. No. The Sask Party 

government is saying, we don’t have any faith in our own 

people, our Saskatchewan people. They can’t do what they’ve 

been doing for 50-plus years and been doing it better than 

anybody else or as good as anybody else. They’re saying, no, 

you can’t do it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, wonder why we’re concerned about this Bill 

No. 126, An Act respecting the Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases and Adaptation to Climate Change when the 

government refuses to use the tools that it’s had at its disposal 

for decades? It refuses to use those tools. It gives them away 

and refuses to act on other things that might actually make a 

difference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we have a situation where, of the 

greenhouse gases in this world, in rough, real rough numbers, 

one-third of the greenhouse gases come from buildings — our 

homes, our apartments, our buildings. One-third of the 

greenhouse gases come from transportation — our trucks, our 

cars, our buses, our airplanes, our ships I suppose, but we don’t 

have a lot of ships in Saskatchewan. We do have some pleasure 

boats and some working craft but . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Yes, and a couple of ferries. Yes, thank you. My colleague 

points out we have a couple of ferries in Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, and roughly one-third of the greenhouse gases, the 

remaining one-third come from manufacturing and business. 

And that’s in really, really down and dirty rough numbers. 

That’s it. One-third, one-third, one-third. Well what have we 

got? 

 

We’ve got a situation where the government’s been advertising 

low-flush toilets. And they’re important. That’s a good step 

one, a good step one. It kind of reminds me of the ad I saw on 

TV the other night about the steps to a healthy lifestyle. It starts 

with a guy riding the biggest wave I ever saw, just coming at 

you. And you just think, this is amazing. And the ad says step 

no. 10,271 in changing your life. And step one, and then it 

reverts to, I think it’s some breakfast cereal, and that’s step one. 

Well the low-flush toilet might be step one, but it sure isn’t step 

28 or it isn’t step 10,271. It’s maybe step one, and it should 

happen. I don’t mean to denigrate that program in itself, but it’s 

just such a tiny, tiny first step — important, absolutely, but a 

tiny first step. 

 

So why don’t we have a government that spends more time 

actually helping people, helping businesses to realize how they 

can conserve energy, realize how they can conserve energy in a 

very meaningful way. In most of our buildings, if we improve 

the envelopes, if we improve the insulation value — the 

windows, increase the caulking, that sort of thing — the 

reduction is phenomenal. The savings in energy is just 

phenomenal in a great, great many buildings. We need a 

government that’ll set standards and then help individuals and 

companies reach those standards and even go beyond those 

standards where they can. And this would be a good thing. 

 

We need a government that’s committed not to driving around 

in the biggest Jeeps they can find, the biggest gas-guzzler, 

all-terrain vehicles that they can find when they campaigned in 

2011 on having an energy-efficient fleet for the CVA, central 

vehicle agency of the Government of Saskatchewan. And yet, 

you know, Mr. Speaker, the reality, the talk, the talk has been 

cheap; the reality is something different. We have a government 

that has not walked the talk. They talk the talk but they’ve never 

walked it. 

 

And we need to move in very real ways. We need to move 

forward. We need to have real targets. We don’t need pretend 

targets, targets of convenience. We don’t need a target that was 

set in 2007 when the Sask Party said, us too, because New 

Democrats had a target of reducing CO2 gases by 32 per cent 

with the base year being 2004. Then two years later, they 

introduce a Bill saying the base isn’t 2004. Now it’s 2006 and 

we’re still committed to a significant reduction in greenhouse 

gases, but change the base year. Now 2010, we’ve changed. The 

base year is 2006 and the reduction isn’t 32 per cent, it’s 20 per 

cent. So we’ve seen changes. 

 



4400 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, we have seen, we have seen things happen here 

that just defy logic. We’ve seen a Bill introduced that has some 

talk but it does not have any plan. It does not tell us how we’re 

going to take those steps to get from here to there, here to there. 

And that’s what people expect of their government is a simple, 

a plan that you can explain, a plan that will help you get from 

here to there. 

 

Because if you don’t know how you’re going to do that, how do 

you even know if you ever got there? When you do get there, 

you won’t even know that you’ve reached utopia. You won’t 

know you’ve reached the promised land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a situation where not one, not two, but 

three complete general elections will pass between this Bill 

being introduced and any government of Saskatchewan being 

held accountable for that. This is a very, very complex Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. And I want to tell you, I am excited about the 

opportunity to pick up and continue my comments on what 

many people will legitimately argue is one of the most 

important Bills of our time, An Act respecting the Management 

and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases and Adaptation to Climate 

Change. These are issues that are affecting every single person 

in Saskatchewan, every single one today, tomorrow, and well 

into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these Saskatchewan people have every right to 

expect a plan and action, strong action from their government. 

What are they getting? A plan that was presented, been 

changed, now changed again. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — It now being 10:30, this 

House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 112 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4373 

 Bill No. 113 — The Justices of the Peace Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4373 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4377 

 Bill No. 104 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4377 

 Bill No. 125 — The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2009 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4386 

 Bill No. 126 — The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4398 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4379 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


