




















































Hansard: March 16, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 31A  TUESDAY, MARCH 16, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4223 

 March 16, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d 

like to introduce a number of guests seated in your gallery, a 

number of chiropractors as well as, I think, some of their 

patients, as well as one that’s seated on the floor who happens 

to be my neighbour. So, Mr. Speaker, I would like . . . And 

maybe a particular mention to the chiropractic association’s 

president, Shane Taylor, who’s seated in the gallery. I’d just 

like all members of the House to welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly. I’m sure there’ll be a little more 

discussion on the services that they provide as we go through 

the day. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add my 

welcome to the chiropractors of the province, many of whom 

are in the gallery today, and particularly to Dr. Shane Taylor, 

the president of the Chiropractors’ Associations of 

Saskatchewan and Jim Stewart, their executive director. 

 

Many people in the gallery today are patients who use 

chiropractic care and they’ve come here to express their 

concern about the government’s proposed de-insuring of 

chiropractic care. They also have come to present on behalf of 

many people in the province, thousands and thousands and 

thousands, I believe, signatures on petitions. So I’m looking 

forward to seeing that after question period. And welcome to 

the gallery. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an honour and pleasure on behalf of 

the Government of Saskatchewan and all of the people in 

Saskatchewan to welcome a very distinguished visitor seated in 

your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re honoured today to have in the province of 

Saskatchewan the ambassador to Canada from Italy, Mr. 

Andrea Meloni. Mr. Meloni is on his first official visit to the 

province of Saskatchewan, a very short visit, about a day and a 

half, I understand, and I hope that he has had a great 

opportunity to understand our terrific province and what goes 

on in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of being in Italy for the first 

time last fall for a couple of weeks, and it was a tremendous 

honour for me to see such great history and such a great 

country. I also understand that Italy, as far as one of the leaders 

in the European Union, has moved into the top 10, one of the 

top 10 countries of doing business with the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Meloni, we want to welcome you to the Assembly, and 

we wish you well in your stay as the ambassador to Canada 

from Italy. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add the loyal 

opposition’s welcome to the ambassador to Saskatchewan. We 

know the contributions that the Italian-Canadian citizens of our 

community have provided in Saskatchewan but in Canada as a 

whole. We also are all going to be watching Italy very closely 

in the coming weeks as we know that that’s where the world 

championship for curling is going to take place. And so we’ll be 

seeing at least one part of Italy in a more focused way. But 

welcome to Saskatchewan, and we very much appreciate the 

role that you can play in our country. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose, the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to this Assembly it’s my pleasure to 

introduce in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, a number of people who 

are here today representing area transportation planning 

committees. They were here for a signing ceremony, which we 

just finished a few minutes ago, to formalize the relationship 

between their groups and the provincial government. I’d like to 

acknowledge all the good work they’ve done helping us 

prioritize highway projects in the past and going into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll just ask each of them to just wave as I mention 

them: Richard Porter from the north central committee and also 

representing SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities] today; Larry Sommerfeld from the central area 

committee; Glen Strong from the Athabasca Basin committee; 

Merv Kryzanowski from the north east committee; Barry 

Opekokew from the north-north west committee; Carl 

Lentowicz from the north-north east committee; Don Kirby 

from the south central committee; Redge Nelson from the south 

east committee; Morgan Powell from the south west committee; 

Ken Ogle from the west central committee; Gary Kayter from 

the east central committee; and Sharon Armstrong, representing 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 

today. I’d like to ask all my colleagues to please give them a 

warm welcome to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 

would like to welcome our area transportation planning 

committee Chairs to the legislature today. And I know that they 

do great work out there. There’s nothing like getting 

information from the people who are on the front lines, and 

these folks certainly are, throughout our great province of ours, 

they are the front-line troops. 

 

And I’d also like to say a special welcome to Mr. Glen Strong. I 



4224 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

had the opportunity of meeting Mr. Strong way up north a 

couple of years ago on a very rough highway but I’m sure it’s 

much improved since then. So I’d ask all the members to 

welcome our guests here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Kelvington-Wadena, the Minister for Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to all my colleagues in the House it’s my 

pleasure to introduce the following guests seated in the 

government gallery today. We have Marilyn Braun-Pollon, 

vice-president of Saskatchewan and agribusiness of the 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business; Virginia Labbie, 

policy analyst for Saskatchewan and agribusiness of the 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business; Grant Bastedo, 

director of communications from Information Services 

Corporation; Bryan Burnett, vice-president of marketing and 

business development from Information Services Corporation. 

 

They join with us today as I announce a new and exciting 

initiative that’s going to take place in ISC [Information Services 

Corporation of Saskatchewan]. I’ll be making a ministerial 

statement right after question period. 

 

I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming these 

guests to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to join in 

the welcoming of the people involved with the highway 

transportation committee, and in particular I want to welcome 

Sharon Armstrong and Mr. Porter as well. I understand that 

these two folks have been involved with this process for a long, 

long time. And I also want to welcome, from the Athabasca 

Basin, Mr. Strong, and also from our region, Mr. Opekokew. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, as the next Highways 

minister, we’re going to do a lot more with this group. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave for an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce to you and through you 12 of 

Saskatchewan’s nearly 250 volunteer crop reporters. Mr. 

Speaker, these 12 crop reporters are being recognized today for 

their dedication and commitment to the Saskatchewan 

agriculture industry. 

Mr. Speaker, eight of the crop reporters sitting in your gallery 

today are being recognized for 25 years of volunteer service. 

Four of the crop reporters are being recognized for 30 years of 

volunteer service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these crop reporters have volunteered their 

personal time during the crop season to collect information 

about the crop and forage development and moisture levels in 

their RMs [rural municipality]. Mr. Speaker, the purpose of the 

crop report is to provide timely and accurate information about 

the development of Saskatchewan crops and forages to 

producers and the general public. I would ask the crop reporters 

being recognized for 25 years of service, and their spouses, to 

stand as I announce their names. 

 

Irene and Derald Ahner of the RM of Big Stick. Both Derald 

and Irene are crop reporters. Allan Aitken from the RM of 

Eyebrow and his wife Sherry. Michael Gould from the RM of 

Enfield and his wife Marg. Darcy Kentel and his wife Laurie 

from the RM of Churchbridge in the great constituency of 

Melville-Saltcoats. Bernard Slugoski from the RM of Buchanan 

and his wife Marg. Vincent Weisner from the RM of Eye Hill 

and his wife Gwen. Lambert Wourms from the RM of 

Frenchman Butte and his wife Lillian and their grandson 

Michael. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are two other crop reporters who have 

dedicated 25 years of service but could not attend today, and 

they are Marion and Harvey Kelly of the RM of Round Valley. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have with us today crop reporters who 

have provided 30 years of volunteer service. I would ask again 

to have them stand as I introduce them. They are: Bernard Cey 

of the RM of Reford and his wife Cheryl; Larry Kuntz of the 

RM of Buffalo and his wife Rita; David Thompson of the RM 

of Kellross and his wife Carole; and William Walter of the RM 

of Nipawin and his wife Elaine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with me in 

recognizing and thanking these crop reporters for their service 

and welcome them to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure today 

on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition to welcome our 

guests, the crop reporters. It is so nice to see such a fine group 

of people that have worked and volunteered for so many years 

on behalf of all of Saskatchewan farmers and agribusiness, as I 

know, having been a former reader of the crop report. I used to 

read it weekly. I know how important it was to the agribusiness. 

I was working in another lifetime for what was then known as 

Sask Wheat Pool, but I know that the work that these crop 

reporters do is just phenomenally important to our province and 

to the people of the province. 

 

In particular though, there are two that are known to me as they 

reside in a former . . . well in the constituency that my 

grandmother once represented. It was then called Maple Creek 

constituency; now of course it’s Cypress Hills. But I want to 

recognize my friends Irene and Derald Ahner in the gallery 

there. It’s great to have you two and all of the other crop 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4225 

reporters and I thank them on behalf of the official Leader of 

the Opposition and all of my colleagues. I thank you all for the 

work that you have done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Humboldt, the 

Minister Responsible for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s truly an 

honour today to stand and introduce a fabulous school group 

that are in the west gallery. There’s 49 students from Bruno that 

are here with us today, from grades 6 to 9. They’re 

accompanied with their teachers, Jeff Marshak and Corrinne 

Arnold, as well as some chaperones, Todd Borstmayer and 

Michelle Ebner. I hope they enjoy the proceedings and I’m 

looking forward to meeting with them later. So welcome, all of 

you, to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

members of the legislature, I’d like to introduce a number of 

trade unionists in your gallery who have joined us today. Terry 

Parker, business manager for the Saskatchewan Building Trades 

Council. Gary Vieser is up there, business manager for the 

IBEW [International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers]. 

Dallas Rogers is there, business manager for the Boilermakers. 

And Chuck Rudder there, business manager for the Heat and 

Frost Insulators union. I ask all members of the Legislative 

Assembly to welcome these trade unionists to their Assembly. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake, 

the Minister Responsible for Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I would like to introduce a friend of mine, the reeve of 

the RM of Meadow Lake, Mr. Ray Wilfing, who joins us today. 

And Ray is active on the area transportation planning 

committee with North Central Rail and all other organizations 

in northwestern Saskatchewan. So please join with me in 

welcoming Ray Wilfing to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

get guests from Cypress Hills into the legislature very often. It’s 

a long distance to travel, so when they do arrive I like to 

welcome them and make sure that they feel welcomed to the 

Assembly. 

 

And today I know that the Ahners have been recognized 

already. I appreciate their commitment to the crop insurance 

endeavours that they’ve participated in over the last number of 

years — Irene and Derald from the Maple Creek area. 

 

And also I’d like to indicate my appreciation for Morgan 

Powell who is part of the transportation planning group that are 

here today. Morgan is the Chair of the south west transportation 

planning committee. He and I have become friends as a result 

of transportation issues. We talk frequently, and he’s been a real 

support for the undertakings of the ministry in the southwest 

part over the last number of years. So I’d like to recognize him 

as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and to 

you, to this House, I would like to introduce again the mayor of 

Wynyard. I’ve worked many years with her, and she’s worked 

many, many years to make the town of Wynyard what it is. And 

she’s worked many years with different organizations such as 

the highways and such as municipal to do a lot of good work for 

this province. So again I would like to welcome Mayor Sharon 

Armstrong to her legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 

would like to recognize someone who has already been 

introduced, Mr. Dave Thompson, one of the crop reporters who 

has done that work for some 30 years. I know a little bit about 

it; I took a short stint at it. But Dave is very active in his 

community. He had been the reeve of RM of Kelross for a 

number of years, is still a Lions Club member in the community 

of Kelliher. And it seems any time there’s something happening 

in Kelliher you’ll see Dave, along with his good wife, Carole. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to 

recognize a constituent, Gary Kayter who has served many 

years on the area transportation assembly. And I’d like all 

members to welcome these people to their Assembly. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — Before we move forward with presenting 

petitions, I would just like to not only extend an invitation to all 

of our guests, but also ask our guests to refrain from any further 

participation in any form in the debate on the floor of the 

Assembly. That would be appreciated. We really welcome you 

to your Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to present a petition in support of a middle school for 

Warman. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize the urgency of a middle 

school for the fast growing community of Warman. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have hundreds and hundreds of 

signatures throughout Warman and the people that want to 

support Warman, and there’s a number of pages here that have 

the signatures. And people are really working hard to make sure 

this petition is being heard through our opposition caucus. And 

I so present. 



4226 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

proud today to rise to present a petition on behalf of concerned 

citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned over the condition 

of our highways, in particular Highway 310. This petition states 

that the condition of 310 has deteriorated to the point where it’s 

now a potential safety hazard for the residents who have to 

travel on that highway each and every day. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 

read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to No. 310 Highway that the people of 

Saskatchewan need. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Ituna, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 

to introduce a petition that was put together by the 

Saskatchewan Student Coalition. This petition is regarding the 

Saskatchewan scholarship fund that was promised as part of the 

Sask Party election platform in the last general election. The 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement the promised Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the signatories of this are from many places all 

around Regina and I noted, including one very familiar name, 

being Benjamin Crescent, Les Benjamin being a former MP 

[Member of Parliament]. But these petitions are from all over 

Regina, and I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I am very 

pleased to rise and present a petition in support of people with 

autism. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing a 

comprehensive provincial autism spectrum strategy that is 

based on proven best practice, evidence-based research, 

treatments, and programming; and given the complexity of 

the disorder and its treatments, that individualized funding 

concept be adapted for parents and guardians of autistic 

individuals. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on these petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from 

Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Tisdale, Gull Lake, Arborfield, 

and Carmichael. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Now thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. We know that 

workers in community-based organizations in Saskatchewan 

have traditionally been underpaid and many continue to earn 

poverty level wages and, in fact, research shows that they earn 

about 8 to $10 per hour less than employees performing work of 

equal value in government departments. 

 

Now I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity with 

employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these folks come from the good city of Regina. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. With 

the waiting lists of almost one full year, I would like to read the 

prayer as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition circulated by the Saskatchewan Student 

Coalition, a petition in support of affordable undergraduate 

tuition and a request for the Sask Party’s actions to match its 

rhetoric. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average of 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4227 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government is 

leaving them behind with respect to providing safe and 

affordable water and who yet have not had any commitment of 

assistance. This has now resulted in water bills in excess of 

$165 per month and is causing residents to choose between 

water and necessities such as nutritious food. Mr. Speaker, the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Duck Lake and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of the withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, 

the existing construction industry labour relations Act, 1992, 

has proved a stable environment for labour relations in the 

construction industry in our province. And with the stable 

environment, Mr. Speaker, we all know this provides for quality 

and safe work construction sites. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, the petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed by the people in Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to rise to present a petition in support of reducing 

the interest rates on fixed-rate student loans to prime. Mr. 

Speaker, the petitioners note that students in Saskatchewan are 

paying the highest amount of interest on fixed-rate student loans 

in Canada at prime plus 2.5 per cent. The petitioners, Mr. 

Speaker, call upon the Legislative Assembly to: 

 

. . . cause the government to immediately reduce the 

interest on fixed-rate student loans to the prime rate of 

borrowing so that students can accumulate less debt and 

focus their finances on building their lives here in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by 

Saskatchewan residents whose addresses appear to be all 

from the city of Regina but I’m assuming, Mr. Speaker, 

probably come from many communities across the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 

present a petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan 

concerned about this government’s disregard for legal and 

constitutional rights. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples, and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of the legal obligation to provide 

all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so submit, Mr. Speaker. The signatures on the petition are 

from residents of Regina, Saskatoon, and North Battleford. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise again 

here today as I have every day in this session to present 

petitions on behalf of concerned residents of Saskatchewan as it 

relates to the unprecedented mismanagement of their finances 

by the Sask Party. They allude to the shameful $1 billion deficit 

that’s been created and they recognize that this is a problem that 

is getting worse, not better, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Estevan. I 

so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

to present a petition in support of the expansion of the graduate 



4228 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

retention program. This petition, Mr. Speaker, is basically about 

fairness and about the need to retain the best and the brightest 

here in the province. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitioners are from Estevan and Weyburn. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wish to 

present a petition for a private Bill on behalf of the petitioners 

from the Orange Benevolent Society of Saskatchewan. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to amend An Act to 

incorporate The Orange Benevolent Society of 

Saskatchewan, being chapter 79 of the Statutes of 

Saskatchewan, 1927. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and this petition is signed by the executive 

director of the Orange Benevolent Society and I am pleased to 

present it on their behalf. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Saskatchewan Paralympian Wins Silver 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Vancouver 2010 Winter Paralympics got off to a great start this 

past weekend. I’m proud to announce that Colette Bourgonje 

from Saskatoon captured Canada’s first medal on Sunday, 

winning a silver in the 10-kilometre cross-country sit-ski. 

 

Collette Bourgonje is originally from Porcupine Plain but now 

resides in Saskatoon. She was a nationally renowned 

cross-country runner, and after a tragic accident in 1980 she 

took up wheelchair racing and later cross-country skiing in the 

sit-ski class. 

 

Not only is Ms. Bourgonje the only Canadian to compete in all 

five Paralympic Winter Games, this weekend’s silver medal 

makes her the first Paralympian to win a medal on home turf. 

Ms. Bourgonje, who is 48 years old, proudly told the media 

that, “Age is nothing, attitude is everything and I lived by that 

today.” 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Paralympics emphasize the participants’ 

athletic achievements, not their disability. As the official motto 

of the “Spirit In Motion” attests, the games are a remarkable 

display of how to overcome physical barriers to succeed. 

 

As Sir Philip Craven, president of the international Paralympic 

committee, put it so eloquently: “The paralympic movement 

inspires people both with and without a disability to interact in 

the same global family, enjoy equal social rights and build a 

harmonious world together.” 

 

I ask all members to join with me today in congratulating 

Colette Bourgonje on her silver medal, and in wishing all 

Canadian Paralympians good luck in the days to come. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Agricultural Safety Week 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. March 14th to 20th 

has been proclaimed Agricultural Safety Week in 

Saskatchewan. This week is a time to make note of the hazards 

that exist on farms across this great province and to find ways 

to make farming safer. 

 

Compared to the national average, Saskatchewan farmers have 

twice the hospitalization rate and one and a half times the death 

rate for injury. Every single year, an average of 21 people die 

on provincial farms and over 300 are hospitalized due to 

preventable injuries. 

 

Many people don’t realize that farming is the fourth most 

hazardous industry in Canada. As a crucial part of our growing 

economy and a vital human resource, we need to be aware of 

the dangers facing our farmers and support safety initiatives for 

them. Mr. Speaker, farming was the bedrock that this province 

was built on, and continues to be a cornerstone of our growing 

economy. 

 

While we strive to provide safe workplaces across the province, 

we must remember that farming can also lead to serious injuries 

to family members. All too often, a loved one has been 

needlessly injured or killed, and we must work to prevent these 

tragic accidents from occurring. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

100th Anniversary of International Women’s Day 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, on March 6th, my colleagues from 

Regina Dewdney, Regina Elphinstone-Centre, Regina 

Rosemont, and myself had the privilege of attending Honour & 

Give, the 100th anniversary celebration of International 

Women’s Day. The event, which was hosted by the Prairie Lily 

Feminist Society, had an outstanding turnout with over 550 

people attending the celebration. 

 

One of the features of the evening was a slide presentation that 

featured 100 women of significance and influence. Some of the 

women featured were Dr. Lynda Haverstock for her 

achievement as the first female leader of a Saskatchewan 

provincial political party, Nettie Wiebe for her political 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4229 

involvement and advocacy, and of course, Buffy Sainte-Marie, 

who was born on the Piapot Reserve, for her role in the 

advancement of women’s issues globally. 

 

Buffy Sainte-Marie was also the guest speaker for the evening, 

and provided the crowd with a provocative presentation on the 

differences between men and women, and how they relate to 

each other. The Prairie Lily Feminist Society is a newly 

informed society of Saskatchewan feminists. They focus on 

empowerment, education, and skill building, in order to build a 

network of support, solidarity, and sisterhood for women across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government has 

shown its lack of respect for such issues, given that it has 

cancelled the funding for the Status of Women office and the 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women is not even one 

of the female members of their caucus, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all of my colleagues to 

congratulate the Prairie Lily Feminist Society on a very 

successful event to celebrate the 100th anniversary of 

International Women’s Day and the accomplishments that 

women have achieved. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Good Economic News 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are more 

good news stories about the province of Saskatchewan today. 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader-Post business section was full of 

positive news. Two of the headlines were “Sask. expected to 

lead” and “Expansion completed at gas plant.” 

 

The people of our province should be proud and encouraged to 

see such headlines because their hard work continues to 

improve Saskatchewan’s economy. Mr. Speaker, the article, 

“Sask. expected to lead” states that CIBC World Markets 

upgraded its 2010 economic growth projections. They have 

bumped up Saskatchewan’s projected nation-leading economic 

growth by half a percentage point, fully to 3.5 per cent. A senior 

economist states that: 

 

In Saskatchewan’s case, I’m not focused particularly on 

the downturn in 2009. I’m focused on what looked to be 

strong fundamentals for supporting positive and robust 

growth, not just for this year, but next year, too. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to see that professionals around the 

world notice what people in Saskatchewan already know: our 

economy is strong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why do the NDP [New Democratic Party] always 

want to talk negatively about the people of Saskatchewan and 

their economy? I guess, Mr. Speaker, some people appreciate 

the beauty of a rose, while others will always complain about 

how prickly the thorns are. 

 

The Speaker: — Next statement. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

United Nations Convention on the Rights 

of Persons with Disabilities 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week, on March 

11th at the United Nations in New York, Canada ratified the 

UN [United Nations] Convention on the Rights of Persons with 

Disabilities. And there are many to be thanked for making this 

happen from Saskatchewan, including the Saskatchewan 

Association for Community Living and IDEA [Individuals with 

Disabilities Equity Alliance]. 

 

This is a moment for all Canadians should be proud of, says 

Kevin McTavish, executive director of the Saskatchewan 

Association for Community Living. 

 

And I would like to acknowledge the final push led by Judy 

Wasylycia-Leis, MP, NDP critic for persons with disabilities, 

and MP Steven Fletcher in their motion of December 10th 

calling on the government to ratify the convention ahead of the 

Paralympics. This motion was passed by all parties just before 

parliament broke for Christmas. And now we can proudly 

celebrate the Paralympics in Vancouver without looking over 

our shoulder. Mr. Speaker, the convention is an international 

human rights instrument of the United Nations intended to 

protect the rights and dignity of persons with disabilities. 

 

And as a party to the convention, Canada is required to 

promote, protect, and ensure the full enjoyment of human rights 

by persons with disabilities and to ensure that they enjoy full 

equality under the law. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, we’ve come a long 

way in recognizing basic human rights, but our work is still not 

yet done as we struggle to make sure our province and our 

country for all citizens is a better place to live. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Issues Facing Livestock Producers 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are some 

things that will always be true in Saskatchewan — winters will 

be cold, summers will be hot, livestock producers will always 

know what is best for themselves, and the NDP will always be 

disconnected from rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have here an opposition that cannot even 

understand the basic concepts of The Agri-Food Amendment 

Act, 2009. Something as simple as a $2 levy seems to mystify 

the member from Nutana. 

 

The Chair of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association, Mr. 

Jack Hextall, had to write to the member to correct her 

ill-advised argument in the House on March 9th and point out 

why this Bill is very important to the livestock producers of 

Saskatchewan. The member from Nutana suggested that 

producers cannot make a buck in the cattle industry because it’s 

gone down the tubes since these guys came to office. Mr. 

Hextall corrects the member again, stating, “The real crux for 

beef producers came in May 2003 with BSE. Further 

contributing factors are the rise in the Canadian dollar and the 

recession.” 

 

Did the former agricultural critic really forget about BSE 



4230 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

[bovine spongiform encephalopathy]? This is yet again another 

demonstration of the disconnect between the NDP and rural 

Saskatchewan. The complete lack of understanding of the issues 

that agricultural producers are facing is yet another slap in the 

face to rural Saskatchewan from a backwards-looking, 

out-of-date NDP opposition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Last Year’s Budget 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year 

when former NDP Finance minister Harry Van Mulligen took 

the members opposite to task for the wrong-headed budget, the 

member from Meadow Lake had the audacity to stand up in this 

Chamber and mock Mr. Van Mulligen. 

 

That member said, I quote, “To put it bluntly, he’s dead 

wrong.” The member from Meadow Lake went on to say, I 

quote, “. . . it’s truly alarming that someone could occupy the 

office of minister of Finance and have such little understanding 

of one of the province’s most important revenue sources.” 

 

He didn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker, he went on. I quote, “Today I 

would call on that member to do the right thing — acknowledge 

his serious blunder and publicly correct the false claims he 

made to the people of Saskatchewan . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what the member from Meadow Lake said 

last year, mocking our former Finance critic and lauding the 

Sask Party’s failed budget. Well one year later, we see the fruit 

of the Sask Party budget: a 110 per cent miss on potash revenue 

projections, double digit runaway spending, a provincial bank 

account that has gone from $2.3 billion to a deficit of $1 billion, 

and the Premier is writing cheques to the potash companies 

while he’s telling Saskatchewan people to wait for next year. 

Talk about truly alarming, Mr. Speaker, the last Sask Party 

budget was dead wrong from the very beginning. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Chiropractic Services 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Health 

has said that chiropractic care is an affordable treatment that 

people are willing to pay for. Well, Mr. Speaker, in the words 

of Kim, one of many Saskatchewan people who live with 

multiple sclerosis: 

 

These treatments may appear affordable when they’re 

needed only occasionally, but when required weekly they 

become a burden. Without these treatments I would 

become disabled. I would have to go on disability, which 

would make me more dependent on the government and 

government-funded services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain to Kim, who’s here today 

to hear the answer, and the many citizens like her, why his 

government is axing funding to a service that allows people to 

remain active, contributing members of society? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, over the last number of 

years, I’ve been elected for 10 years, I’ve had the opportunity to 

attend many of the lobby’s information evenings that the 

chiropractors have put on when we were in opposition and the 

last couple years that we have been in government, Mr. 

Speaker. They’ve been very educational, informative for all of 

our MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] on both sides 

of the House, Mr. Speaker. Not once will you hear me, as the 

Minister of Health or our government, question the efficacy of 

the treatments that chiropractors give to thousands and 

thousands of people around this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said that when you look at the chiropractic 

services across Canada, there are a number of provinces and 

territories that don’t cover any chiropractic services at all — 

nine. Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple that cover for low income 

and, Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple that cover general 

chiropractic services, Mr. Speaker. As I said, there is no one 

questioning their efficacy. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — No, Mr. Speaker, most people are just 

questioning the minister’s sincerity. 

 

Charlene suffers from Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, CMT, a 

progressive disorder affecting both motor and sensory skills. 

She requires oxygen 24 hours a day and uses a VPAP [variable 

positive airway pressure] machine to breathe at night. Charlene 

visits a chiropractor regularly for treatment of lower back pain, 

as a result of the surgery she has undergone, and shoulder pain 

which is common in CMT patients. 

 

Charlene lives on a disability income. If chiropractic care 

funding is cut, Charlene will be forced to pay over $1,500 a 

year for treatment. She cannot afford that, and her alternative is 

to live in a numb, medicated state. Mr. Speaker, can the 

minister explain to Charlene, who is also here today, how she 

will pay for the chiropractic care she needs when he cuts the 

funding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, chiropractic service 

right now in Saskatchewan is a shared service that the 

government subsidizes. It pays for a portion of every treatment 

and the patient pays for the larger share, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we move forward on March 24th, a decision 

will be made. It will be communicated as to whether that 

subsidy is still in place. But I will say though, Mr. Speaker, that 

when you look across Canada, when you look across, you 

know, the rest of provinces, some cover, some don’t, just like 

many other basket of services that we offer in health care, Mr. 

Speaker. Some are dictated by the Canada Health Act that have 

to be subsidized, others aren’t. And it’s a decision of provincial 

governments at various levels as to whether they decide to 

cover those services, Mr. Speaker. And I look forward to the 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4231 

next question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the people are looking 

forward to actually an answer as well. 

 

Ten years ago, Kathy went on disability due to debilitating 

headaches, jaw and shoulder pain. After seeing a chiropractor 

twice a week for over a year, the pain subsided to a point where 

Kathy says, “My quality of life has increased substantially.” 

Kathy can’t afford to pay 100 per cent of her chiropractic care 

services. If funding for chiropractic is eliminated, to quote 

Kathy, “My quality of life will once again slip into something 

that I would not wish on anyone.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain to Kathy, who is also here 

today, and others like her why his government is taking actions 

that will force her to suffer with debilitating pain and to live a 

substandard quality of life? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, every day 

across this province in many communities, large and small, 

chiropractors supply services and do a great job of supplying 

that service. People choose to go to the chiropractor if they so 

choose and it’s partially subsidized, Mr. Speaker. Those 

services, whether it’s subsidized or not subsidized, will be 

available in those communities, Mr. Speaker. It’s been the 

evidence in other provinces. 

 

But what I will say, Mr. Speaker, is that there is a basket of 

services that we cover through the Ministry of Health. Some are 

subsidized, some aren’t, Mr. Speaker. And as we move towards 

March 24th, like in every other budget year when decisions 

were made by previous governments, those are communicated 

on March the 24th, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know if she’s asking 

me to communicate them before. 

 

I remember not too long ago when they were in government, 

Mr. Speaker, they raised the PST [provincial sales tax] one per 

cent. They didn’t tell anybody before, in fact they didn’t tell 

them in an election. They did it the day of the budget. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, in the gallery today are a number 

of people who haven’t chosen to be injured, but they’re very 

concerned about the government’s refusal to honour their 

agreement with the Saskatchewan chiropractors. Their 

experiences, in the cases that I’ve shared today, are reflective of 

the many more stories of people who will be hurt by this 

government’s failure to continue to fund chiropractic care. And 

the minister may be dodging until the 24th, but he has pretty 

clearly said and intimated and suggested and wink-winked that 

it’s going to be gone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: is he going to honour the 

agreement that was agreed to with the chiropractors and to 

continue to fund chiropractic care, or are these people and 

others like them who rely on chiropractic care going to be the 

next victims of his government’s financial mismanagement? 

Yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I answered these 

questions last week, and I’ve answered them a number of times 

today. The answer will be communicated to all in the province 

on March 24th. 

 

There are varying degrees of coverage, as I said, across Canada. 

In Manitoba they cover chiropractic services to a maximum of 

12 visits per year. Other provinces will only cover for low 

income. And the vast majority, nine provinces and territories, 

don’t cover chiropractic services at all, not even for low 

income. 

 

There is a real variance around the province, Mr. Speaker. And 

as we move towards the 24th, as I said, Mr. Speaker, the 

decision will be announced at that time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Funding for Health Care Facilities 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 

morning The Battlefords Daily News reported that Prairie North 

Regional Authority chief executive officer David Fan is hopeful 

but doubtful that next week’s provincial budget will identify 

funding for the replacement of Saskatchewan Hospital. Can the 

minister tell Mr. Fan, those who care about mental health in 

Saskatchewan and others, should David Fan be hopeful or 

doubtful? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, over the last two and a 

half years as the Minister of Health I’ve had the great 

opportunity to travel the province and talk to many health care 

professions, but also visit many health care facilities. And I 

have been through the Saskatchewan Hospital in North 

Battleford, a full tour of the facility, and it is the oldest health 

care facility we have in the province. 

 

It is shameful that after 16 years . . . And for a few years the 

member opposite who has asked the question was the Minister 

of Health, never moved on the file. Never moved on the file, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’ve put $450,000 in to planning 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — We have put . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the half a dozen 

opposition members to work with the other members to allow 



4232 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

the minister to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, 

we put $450,000 into the health region to do planning for this 

facility. We know that it’s in poor shape. But unfortunately 

many of our health care facilities are in rough shape because of 

the decline and the deterioration that was let to go under the 

former government. They simply didn’t put enough into capital 

to keep our health care facilities in the proper shape. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Fan told the Daily News that 

he’s doubtful because, and I quote, “There’s not much money to 

be had at this point.” He implies that while the financial status 

of the province is doing well, the provincial government’s 

financial status is not. Therefore I argue that it’s lack of 

financial competence that is holding up hospital reconstruction, 

not lack of need. To the minister: is Mr. Fan right? Is 

Saskatchewan hospital next year country or is it next, next, 

next, next year country? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, certainly as we move 

forward and we look at the shape of the Saskatchewan hospital 

in North Battleford, it’s a provincial hospital, solely responsible 

for the provincial government to fund any construction of that 

facility. We’ve put 450,000 into planning as we move forward, 

and we see what is needed and scoped out. We’ll certainly be 

moving on that facility into the future. 

 

But what we won’t do, Mr. Speaker, what we won’t do is what 

that former government did, for example, to the people in 

Preeceville, where year after year after year they made an 

announcement like they did in Humboldt, Mr. Speaker. You 

could be guaranteed every four years just before an election 

they’d make an announcement, and they never built it. It got 

done under our government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year the minister 

simply said, as he just did right now, nearly half a million 

dollars for additional planning. But Mr. Fan says none of that 

money has been spent because the minister can’t decide what to 

do with it. His exact words, Mr. Fan says his officials are still 

“waiting for government to clarify exactly what it is they’re 

looking for with regards to this study.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, vulnerable people and families are being 

penalized because this government can’t balance its books or 

manage what was a $2.3 billion surplus in this province. So, 

Mr. Speaker, when is the minister going to quit stalling the 

project and take the steps necessary to move it forward? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the CEO 

[chief executive officer] David Fan said, the money is in the 

health region. They can go ahead and start with the planning 

and the scoping of a new facility as they move forward, which 

is a far cry from what the former government did. 

And especially it’s really ironic that that member would stand 

on his feet and question our government on the Sask Hospital. 

When he was the minister of Health, he did absolutely nothing 

in his own community, Mr. Speaker. That’s absolutely amazing. 

Mr. Speaker, we’re moving ahead on many facilities around the 

province, North Battleford being one of them, with planning 

money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very sorry that so many of these facilities 

have fallen in such poor repair over the last number of years. In 

fact in our first budget, we put $100 million into just capital 

repairs within the health regions of our province, Mr. Speaker 

— far more than that government ever did in its 16 years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Support for Northerners 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party 

government has been neglecting northern communities since the 

day they took office. They’ve done nothing to support the 

forestry industry. They’ve done nothing to address the shortage 

of affordable housing. While people with addictions and mental 

health issues are crying out for help, the Sask Party has done 

nothing. 

 

When will the minister stop ignoring northern people and 

address the issues that matter? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I know I can speak to the unprecedented infrastructure 

investment that this government has made into northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. You need look no further than 

communities like La Loche, like La Ronge. We have made very 

significant and very real investments in the futures of those 

communities, which we deeply believe in, Mr. Speaker. And we 

look forward to continuing to work with them in a very 

collaborative fashion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Highway 102 is the only 

road access for communities like Grandmother’s Bay, Sucker 

River, Stanley Mission, Missinipe, Southend. Thousands of 

people depend on this road to get to and from their homes and 

to their workplace. Mr. Speaker, this highway has huge 

potholes and ruts that cause real danger to anyone who dares to 

drive on it. Emergency services are concerned about the 

response time and the care of the patients. 

 

To the minister: does someone have to be killed or seriously 

injured before the Sask Party will fix this highway? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

when our government took office two and a half years ago, we 

inherited a massive infrastructure deficit from the members 

opposite. We have many projects to do, Mr. Speaker, projects 

. . . 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4233 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

of Highways. Order. The Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are many 

projects that need to be done across this province, Mr. Speaker, 

projects that were left undone by the members opposite. We 

have dramatically increased Highways budgets right across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. In fact the two largest Highways 

budgets in Saskatchewan history were the last two years under a 

Sask Party government. Mr. Speaker, we have much more work 

to do in the North. We’ve made a good start and will continue 

in that direction. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the trucks that travel Highway 

102 serve the mining industry and generate millions of dollars 

for this provincial government. Highway No. 102 also provides 

access to tourist destinations, bringing in millions into the 

provincial economy. In fact the member from Cypress Hills 

said on March 27th, 2007, “We need good quality roads, and 

we especially need them in the areas that are generating so 

much wealth for our economy and province.” 

 

To the minister: since the North contributes so much to the 

provincial economy, will he commit today to investing that 

wealth into paving Highway No. 102 to Southend? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, the North does contribute a 

great deal to the economy of this province. We recognize this, 

and we’re doing work in the North. Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite ignored the North, as they ignored rural Saskatchewan 

and the entire province and paid no attention to economic 

development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re doing projects in the North. We’ll continue 

to do projects in the North. Mr. Speaker, we recognize the vital 

role that the North plays in economic development, and we will 

continue on the good work that’s already been started. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Forthcoming Budget 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, there’s just something 

about the lead-up to this budget that’s bringing a real sense of 

déjà vu to this Chamber. Last year this is what the minister had 

to say, and I quote, “This new balance is built on strong but 

cautious revenue estimates.” That was last year. We know how 

that turned out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yesterday the minister was back at the same rhetoric, saying, I 

quote, “This budget has been prepared with a great deal of 

discipline and caution and prudence.” 

 

To the minister: he was wrong last year. Why should we trust 

him now? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to again 

engage in the debate in this House, in the Assembly, in regard 

to the upcoming budget. Mr. Speaker, the member yesterday 

asked the question of what’s the plan for the budget. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, you can see it today. In the business section of the 

paper today, Mr. Speaker, you can see how the economy of this 

province is going. Our plan is to keep the economy growing as 

it has in this last year and it’s projected to do in the years 

coming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan is going to lead this 

country in the next year or two by most forecasters’ projections. 

Our budget is going to ensure that that continues. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, again, those comments 

make the opposition nervous. With record revenues, we see the 

Sask Party screw up the finances. What we wish they would do 

is simply leave the economy alone. It’s doing just fine because 

of the people of this province. 

 

Last year, last year, Mr. Speaker, the member from Carrot River 

Valley said, I quote: 

 

. . . this budget is not only a fantastic and historic budget 

for Saskatchewan but also the best budget in all of Canada 

and probably the best [budget] in North America. Oh heck, 

let’s go a little further, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s going to be 

the best budget in the whole world. 

 

Yesterday, we heard some of the over-the-top rhetoric again 

from the Minister of Finance about this year’s budget which he 

called a great budget which will make Saskatchewan people 

very proud. To the minister: the over-the-top rhetoric is 

sounding eerily similar. Why should we expect different results 

this time round? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Party 

government budgets have created the opportunity for people in 

this province to grow. They’ve created the opportunity for 

people to do well. Three hundred million dollars tax relief from 

income tax is a very important tool for people to advance the 

needs of their families, to pay for rent, and to pay for the things 

families need. That’s very important. Mr. Speaker, this province 

has improved its financial situation over the period of time that 

this government has been in place, and we’ve done it rather 

dramatically. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no sense for the opposition to put gloom 

and doom on everything good that is happening in this province 

because this province is growing. And this province is going to 

lead the nation, and the Saskatchewan Party government wants 

to be very much an exciting part of that. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



4234 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, last year the Minister of 

Energy and Resources said that, in his budget speech, I quote, 

“. . . people are looking at Saskatchewan and they’re saying, 

this government is on the right track. This government is 

moving in the right directions.” 

 

That was last year, Mr. Speaker. Just days ago on BNN 

[Business News Network], the same minister said this. I quote, 

“You will see in our upcoming budget that, uh, I think it will be 

a very responsible budget.” Clearly the Sask Party government 

has learned absolutely nothing from their historic budget 

blunder of last year. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party refusing to learn from 

their lesson, and why are they setting us up for yet another 

disastrous budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the inescapable facts of 

the matter are this province has improved its financial position 

significantly since this party took government. If we look at 

what was in the Growth and Financial Security Fund in 2007, in 

mid-year it was $1.2 billion. Mr. Speaker, the third quarter 

forecast for this year is $705 million, but importantly the debt 

of this province has gone down by $2.7 billion, Mr. Speaker, 

which is a 2.165, a 2.165 improvement over the term of our 

government. That is important not only for today and tomorrow, 

but it’s important for the future going forward. 

 

And that is the kind of fiscal management that we’ve done in 

spite of the unprecedented meltdown, if you like, of the potash 

industry in 2009-10 that nobody forecast. We didn’t forecast it. 

The independent forecasters didn’t see it. The potash 

corporations didn’t see it. There’s no one in the world that saw 

it coming, but it was a very significant . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we hope that the minister 

would get briefed by his officials or would have a conversation 

with the auditor. This year debt is on the rise under the Sask 

Party, even though their billboards suggest something different. 

 

Mr. Speaker, according to reports from insiders, the déjà vu gets 

worse. Last year the Premier started off expecting $1.9 billion 

in potash royalties. According to media reports, his Energy 

minister was predicting that potash revenues would top $3 

billion. Those projections were dead wrong. 

 

This year insiders are telling us that government is planning a 

four-by-four strategy which will aim to reduce the size of the 

public service by 4 per cent in each of the next four years 

through attrition. Insiders tell us that these projections are 

bound to fail because many of these vacancies must be filled. 

 

To the minister: last year he didn’t listen to his officials or the 

opposition. Why is he repeating the same mistakes all over 

again? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, every year in our budget 

preparation work, we certainly make sure that we listen very 

carefully to the officials in every ministry, that we listen to the 

officials in Energy and Resources in regard to those 

commodities and what’s happening in that commodity world. 

We listen to the officials in the Ministry of Finance to see what 

the important factors are that we need to consider. That is 

certainly something that we’ve done again in this budget 

preparation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have to face the reality of the fact that 

revenues for the Government of Saskatchewan are not going to 

be as great as they were last year, potentially, and that we’re 

going to have to learn to live within our means. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the Premier has said we’re going to make sure that our 

budget is going to be balanced and that it’s going to be 

appropriate to the future of the province. 

 

The future of the province isn’t this year or next year or about 

potash only. It’s about sustainability and the fact that we need 

to make sure that budgets will be sustainable in the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what we know so 

far. The Sask Party is using the same over-the-top rhetoric in 

the lead-up to this budget as they used last year. They’re 

ignoring the recommendations of their officials yet again. Like 

last year, they’re not properly thinking through their 

projections. And they’re making random cuts with no planning 

and no coordination. 

 

To the minister: He’s got over a week, just one week to get this 

right. Will he listen to his officials and fix this budget before it 

does more damage to Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I can 

report to this House that this government has indeed listened to 

its officials. And it’s a good thing that we listened to our 

officials rather than the members opposite because they at least 

understand the opportunities in the economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the officials understand that the balancing of the 

budget is important, the paying down of debt was important. 

And one other thing that’s important is that we invest in the 

infrastructure that that government in the past has neglected. 

And so debt is rising in the Crowns as we make up the gap on 

infrastructure investment that has been so lacking by that 

previous administration. 

 

Our administration, our government believes in the future. We 

believe in growth. We believe in Saskatchewan. And that’s 

going to be reflected in a sustainable way in the budget on the 

24th. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4235 

Crown Investments. 

 

Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan Expansion 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The minister earlier 

indicated there were guests here that would be interested in 

hearing the statement, and I would ask members to allow the 

minister to present the statement without interference, so guests 

can hear what the statement is. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

announce that Information Services Corporation is developing a 

new online portal to provide a more convenient and 

cost-effective means to deliver government services to 

businesses. Currently business owners are required to deal with 

several government ministries in order to conduct business in 

this province. This new service will provide a single point of 

access to most business services provided by government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this initiative is very important to support the 

private sector and to attract entrepreneurs to our province. It 

makes it easier to conduct business in the province and will 

significantly reduce costs for both business and for government. 

 

In 2011, ISC will launch the first phase of the project which 

will be an easy-to-use online business registration service, 

where new businesses will register with the corporations 

branch, with Workers’ Compensation Board, and with the 

Ministry of Finance. In 2012, ISC will expand this service to 

provide a single point of access for day-to-day business needs, 

including getting necessary permits and licences, remitting 

taxes, and complying with other government regulations. 

 

ISC will invest $35 million over the next five years to complete 

the project. Mr. Speaker, this initiative demonstrates this 

government’s commitment to making Saskatchewan an 

appealing place to start and to operate a business. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

want to, on behalf of the opposition, thank the minister for 

sending over a copy of her ministerial statement before the 

House started up this afternoon. 

 

ISC I think is once again proving its value in providing both 

efficient and cost-effective government services, efficient and 

cost-effective to the taxpayer and to the public of 

Saskatchewan, at the same time providing value to property 

owners of various types — real property, personal property — 

and now business operators or potential business operators in 

the province of Saskatchewan. And it’s a win-win for the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A government that likes to talk a lot about innovation and not 

do very much about innovation, as opposition was very 

skeptical about the model of ISC. And if they’d had their way, I 

don’t think, Mr. Speaker, the minister would have been in a 

position to make this very good announcement today. 

 

But I want to congratulate the people of Saskatchewan, the 

Government of Saskatchewan, and ISC in particular on this new 

initiative, on this new expansion of valuable online services to 

the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 587 through 645. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 587 through 645 are ordered. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 646 through 709. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 646 through 709 are tabled. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 710 through 751. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 710 through 751 are ordered. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 97 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Bjornerud that Bill No. 97 — The 

Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 

deal of pleasure to have the opportunity to rise in this House 

and to once again take part in the debate in this House. It’s truly 

a privilege to do so. It’s an honour to do so on behalf of the fine 

folks of Regina Northeast. 

 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, I think all the members would agree 

that it’s a privilege at any point in time to be able to rise in this 

House and take part in the debate and the business of the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. It’s a privilege that is, 

really throughout time, has been a privilege that’s been 

honoured by very few people. And so, Mr. Speaker, I don’t take 

it lightly whenever I do get the opportunity to enter into the 

debate. I do so with my best of abilities because I do know that 

it is truly an honour and a privilege and one that I quite frankly 



4236 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

feel in awe to have the opportunity in my lifetime to be able to 

participate in these proceedings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the debate today is the Bill No. 97. In the short 

title, it’s The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009, but in the long 

title, Mr. Speaker — and I must draw your attention, it is the 

long title — it’s An Act to amend The Agri-Food Act, 2004, to 

repeal The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 and The 

Cattle Marketing Deductions Regulations, 2004 and to make 

consequential amendments to The Department of Agriculture, 

Food and Rural Revitalization Act. Well, Mr. Speaker, it takes 

almost a page just to cover the title. 

 

But anyway, Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting Act the 

government has brought forward at this time. It makes some 

significant changes to the process that has been in place in this 

province for a while as in regards to the collection of the 

deductions from cattle being sold, deductions that go to the 

promoting and supporting and promoting the cattle industry in 

this great province. 

 

And this Bill will now allow the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association — often referred to as the SCA — to collect both 

the $1 non-refundable national levy collected on cattle sold at 

market and the $2 refundable provincial levy collected on cattle 

sold at market. So now, Mr. Speaker, what we’ll see is the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association will be collecting these 

levies and these funds that previously was collected by the 

Department of Agriculture itself. Previously both the national 

and the provincial levies were collected and went into a 

revolving fund in the department. But now, Mr. Speaker, this 

Bill as introduced by this government will change that. We will 

see a change in the authority to collect the levies for the national 

levy as well as for the provincial levy. 

 

That is very important, I think, to the livestock industry in this 

great province because it is a fundamental pillar of financial 

support that helps to advertise the value of the industry, 

advertise the industry to make the industry known, I guess you 

would say, and the part the industry produces and the 

importance of the industry known to the fine people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And they do so through their organizations and do so through 

advertising and provide information, and are in place in the 

event if a crisis situation should arise. They are in place to be 

able to dispense information, correct information, perhaps to 

alleviate any fears that people might have based on the 

misinformation they may receive in regards to a crisis situation 

that does occur. 

 

In the past, Mr. Speaker, this was collected by the Department 

of Agriculture, and the funds were collected and held by the 

Department of Agriculture in a revolving fund. And the 

revolving fund was dispersed only after a decision of the board, 

consisted of a number of livestock producers, would funnel that 

money out. Now, Mr. Speaker, the process was fairly simple. 

The Department of Agriculture across this great province of 

ours, through their ability within the marketing mechanisms 

throughout this province, they would collect these fees from the 

livestock being sold. Both the national fee and the provincial 

fee was collected, and it was held in a revolving fund by the 

Department of Agriculture that . . . 

[14:45] 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. He 

can state his point of order. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe the 

member that is on his feet already spoke to this Bill on 

November the 9th, 2009. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

then take up where my colleague left off on the Bill, An Act to 

amend The Agri-Food Act, 2004. Mr. Speaker, this is a very 

interesting Bill in that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I listened to the 

member’s point of order, but I just want to point out to 

members that when members adjourn a motion, if they have 

adjourned the motion and no one has spoken in between, when 

the motion is first called, that member has the opportunity to 

again stand in their place to speak to the motion. It’s my 

understanding that the member did not adjourn this . . . or 

adjourned this motion . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The 

information I have is that the member, while having adjourned, 

can still speak to the motion. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Muchly appreciate 

that. I find this a very interesting topic and a very interesting 

subject and one that I always enjoy having the opportunity to 

get up and speak on. So, Mr. Speaker, I will try to continue on 

from the point where I left off. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I think we are all aware, this Act will make 

some significant changes to the method used to collect the $1 

refundable national levy collected by the cattle that are sold at a 

livestock facility, and that the $2 refundable provincial 

livestock levy that would be collected on the same animals 

when they are sold at a public auction ring. That money is then 

collected, now will be collected by the Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen’s Association. 

 

But in the past, Mr. Speaker, it was done by the Department of 

Agriculture. And the Department of Agriculture had set up a 

fund, a revolving fund. That funding would be used to support 

the cattlemen’s industry, the cattle industry in this great 

province through various mechanisms as rules required. For 

example it would be, could be used for advertising to ensure 

that the people of Saskatchewan were aware of the livestock 

industry and how important that livestock industry is to our 

province, how important that livestock industry is to the 

economy of Saskatchewan, the great services it provides, all the 

spinoff that comes from the livestock industry that certainly 

supports that industry and supports the economy of our 

province, supports the economy very importantly. And it’s an 

economy of many of our small communities, Mr. Speaker. And 

we find that of course a very essential part of the economy of 

Saskatchewan.  

 

You know, and a successful economy is not made of one major 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4237 

source of revenue. A successful economy is made of a number, 

a number of sources of revenue so that the old saying is, you 

don’t have all your eggs in one basket. It’s spread out, so in the 

peaks and the hollows of revenue being returned to the 

livestock industry, it certainly balances out. But it supports the 

economy in general in the province. 

 

And in the past, Mr. Speaker, in the past the system used was a 

system that would provide the Department of Agriculture the 

ability to collect both the national and the provincial levies so 

that they were held in a revolving fund by the Department of 

Agriculture. That revolving fund, Mr. Speaker, was not 

administered as such by the Department of Agriculture. It was 

held by the Department of Agriculture and dispensed by them, 

but it was only dispensed, only dispensed after the decision was 

made by a government-appointed board that consisted of a 

number of livestock producers. They would determine how that 

money should be used. They would determine how and when 

that money should be dispensed. And they would do so, Mr. 

Speaker, in a way that would certainly be beneficial to the 

livestock industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now that is, as we’ve already indicated but I think it bears 

repeating, that is a very important industry to our province and 

to the commerce of Saskatchewan and to the economy of this 

great province of ours. 

 

But the board of directors, the board that would oversee the 

distribution of those funds was a board that was made up of 

livestock producers — really what I would call front-line 

people, Mr. Speaker. These were people who were involved in 

the industry at the grassroots level. These are the people who 

recognized what the industry needed. These are the people that 

would have the ability to make recommendations as to what 

avenues should be used, the way the money should be used to 

strengthen this industry. And it would only be a benefit to all of 

the people of Saskatchewan by being a benefit to the economy 

of this great province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it was done in a fair and equitable and 

balanced way. It was done by the primary producers themselves 

that sat on that board. They made the decisions on behalf of 

their fellow producers as to how these funds could be 

distributed and used and dispensed, I should say, in a way that 

would be the most beneficial to the industry. And that, Mr. 

Speaker, was certainly essential to the well-being of the 

economy and essential to the well-being of the livestock 

industry in this great province of ours. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this Bill, once it becomes proclaimed, will 

shift that. It will shift that. It will take the ability for the 

Department of Agriculture to now to collect the funds and to 

hold them in a revolving fund, but rather what it will do is now 

make it available to the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association. 

They will have then control over those funds. And they then 

will make the decisions of how those funds will be used. They 

will make the decisions on what avenues those funds will be 

dispensed. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a concern. This is a concern because, 

I believe, it’s fair to say that not every livestock producer in 

Saskatchewan is a member of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association. Not every livestock producer in Saskatchewan is a 

member of the Cattlemen’s Association. And, Mr. Speaker, that 

means that there will be no representation for those individuals 

who are not members of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association but yet are making those contributions at the 

check-offs when they sell their animals through the livestock 

marketing system in this great province. 

 

When they sell their animals, they will be checked off just like 

everybody else. They will be levied the $1 fee and the $2 fee 

provincially. But yet, Mr. Speaker, that money now will go into 

the control of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association. And 

if they’re not a member, if the livestock producer is not a 

member — and I can assure you that many aren’t — if they’re 

not a member of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association, 

then they will not have any input into how that money is used. 

They will not have any input. They will not have any say in 

how their money is spent to support their industry. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that becomes a concern to me because here 

we have a situation created by this government that we will be 

collecting money from all livestock producers, anybody who is 

dispensing cattle through an auction mart and the levees are 

being collected. The federal levee of $1, the provincial levee of 

$2 is being collected, going to the Cattlemen’s Association, 

going into the fund there. But the producer who is having that 

money collected off his backs of his animals really will now not 

have any ability to have any input into how that money is used. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this I don’t — I simply can’t — see as being 

correct. I certainly can’t see it as being helpful to the industry. I 

can’t see it when you have a smaller, select group of livestock 

producers under the umbrella of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association having the control over the funds that are collected 

by all the livestock that are marketed in this great province of 

ours. And yet not all of the producers who produce those 

animals who are contributing to that fund have the ability to 

have any input into how that fund is being dispensed. That, Mr. 

Speaker, becomes an issue that is a problem to me because in 

the past, when it was done by the Department of Agriculture, it 

went into a revolving fund. Every producer, every producer had 

input into it because every producer contributed. 

 

But because it was being held by the Department of Agriculture 

and being dispensed upon the advice of a board that was made 

up of livestock producers, every producer had the opportunity 

to make the representation to either somebody on the board or 

perhaps to the department themselves or even through their 

local elected MLA to have some influence as to how that 

money was being disbursed. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that raises an issue. That raises a big-time 

issue with me because it just doesn’t seem correct, doesn’t seem 

right at all that members should be obligated to pay. Members 

who are involved in the livestock industry are obligated to pay 

their levees because they’re simply deducted at the source of 

market. At the auction-mart, for example, those levees are 

deducted. 

 

The individual producer has no control over them. He can’t say, 

well I don’t want to contribute today, so don’t take the fees off 

my animals. They don’t have that ability, Mr. Speaker, because 

those deductions are taken right at the source of market. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that means that that money now, now will go into 



4238 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association, into their control. 

They will make the decisions of how that money is disbursed. 

They’ll make the decisions on what that money is spent on. And 

the individual producer, if they’re not a member, if they’re not a 

member of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association, then 

they’ll have no say over the manner in which their money is 

being used. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is who asked for these changes? The 

government doesn’t indicate anywhere that they were lobbied to 

make these changes. The government doesn’t indicate any place 

who lobbied, who asked for these changes. That becomes the 

question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Who’s the driving force behind this? Why did the government 

react in a way of developing such a Bill as Bill 97? At whose 

request? Who lobbied the government? What arguments did 

they put forward? Those are the interim . . . those are the types 

of information and those types of answers that we need on this 

side, Mr. Speaker, to be able to weigh the balance of this Bill 

and to see if this Bill has any merit to it at all. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that is, I suppose, the fundamental question that needs 

to be asked is, who lobbied the government? 

 

Next of course, Mr. Speaker, is consultation. What consultation 

did this government do? Now we know from our past 

experiences on other Bills that the consultation by this 

government with groups that are being affected by changes to 

the Act are usually quite limited. In fact, Mr. Speaker, most of 

the Bills we’ve seen before this legislature, produced by this 

government, has had limited or no consultation done at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m hoping that once again that is not the case. 

I’m hoping that this government did do due diligence and did 

go out and consult with the livestock industry and those 

involved in the livestock industry as to the effect, as to the 

effect of this, changes as brought about as a result of this Bill. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if that happened. And I say I 

wonder if that happened because it’s been our caucus’s 

opportunity to contact some producers. We haven’t had the 

time, Mr. Speaker, to contact a wide range of producers, but we 

have contacted some producers and we were startled. And I 

have to use the word startled because simply that’s the way we 

were. We were startled because when we contacted producers, 

what we found out was some producers liked the idea — yes 

they did — but some did not. But what startled us was a lot 

didn’t know this was happening. A lot of producers didn’t know 

this was happening. 

 

Now I can’t put a percentage on it, Mr. Speaker, because we 

haven’t had the ability to talk to that wide a range of producers. 

But what those producers that we have talked to . . . It really 

startles me to know that this government hasn’t done, hasn’t 

done — once again, hasn’t done — a reasonable job of 

consulting with the industry because a lot of producers freely 

admit they didn’t know this was happening. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that is a case to be concerned about because 

when you have changes to an Act, when you have changes to an 

Act that can have a positive effect to those involved in the 

industry and to the industry itself . . . or it can have a negative 

effect, Mr. Speaker. 

[15:00] 

 

I believe that the government, this government, I believe any 

government of any political stripe fundamentally wants to make 

changes to modernize the Act that governs — in this particular 

case — the livestock industry, wants to modernize and bring it 

into line with the changes that has happened within the industry 

over the last number of years. And usually it’s driven by the 

industry itself. Usually representatives from the industry will 

make presentations to the government and requests to the 

government and lobby the government for certain changes. And 

they will in that process be able to point out to the government, 

and the minister in particular, as to how these changes will be 

beneficial to the industry, how these changes will affect the 

industry in a very positive way, how it will grow the industry or 

how it will help grow the industry, how it will protect the 

industry, how it will make the industry stronger, and how it will 

add to the economy of this great province. That’s usually the 

role of those involved in the industry who lobby the 

government for certain changes. 

 

They want to see these changes because it’s their experience, 

their first, front-line experiences that have told them and 

showed them that these changes need to be done in order to 

ensure that the industry stays strong, to ensure that the industry 

is an industry that will be there, not only for today and for the 

producers of today, but will be there for the future generations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t just happen with helter-skelter. It 

happens with good planning, good foresight, a vision of the 

future, a commitment to ensuring that those changes have 

positive effects to the industry, a commitment that an industry 

stays strong. 

 

Now in the last few years, the livestock industry in 

Saskatchewan, I believe right across Canada, has been buffeted 

with some rather huge waves and some bad weather as far as 

the economy is concerned. We’ve had some BSE [bovine 

spongiform encephalopathy] problems. We’ve had marketing 

problems. We’ve had low prices, and that has had a very 

negative effect on the industry, and it’s buffeted the industry. 

And this hasn’t been short term. It’s been long term. 

 

I’ve personally have had some experience in the industry, 

having been a livestock producer for 20 years. I know that high 

prices and — peaks and valleys I guess you would say in the 

market — high prices and low prices is not something 

uncommon to the industry. It’s a commonplace in the industry. 

You take the good with the bad as the old-timers would say. But 

it was my experience that when you had a peak, peak years 

where the income of the prices of livestock, prices per pound 

was exceptionally high, it would be that way for a year or two, 

and then it would come down. And when it’d come down, 

sometimes it would go a long way down. It would go down to 

the bottom, and it would be at the bottom, but for a year or two. 

So at over a five-year or a 10-year period, it sort of all averaged 

out. And yes, you had to ride. You had to ride the waves, as the 

old-timers would say. You take the good with the bad. You 

level it off, and you made a profit. And that was, that was what 

the livestock industry was all about. 

 

But in more recent years, we’ve seen that not be the case. In 

more recent years, we’ve seen the livestock industry face some 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4239 

really tough economic challenges. We’ve seen challenges after 

challenge after challenge whack the industry as big waves as 

would roll across the bow of a ship. Well we’re seeing that 

happen in the livestock industry with decreasing prices and 

situations that drove the value of the product down. 

 

And that has been, Mr. Speaker, something that has been going 

on on a continuous basis for not only one or two years, but has 

now gone on for several years consecutively. And when that 

happens, Mr. Speaker, then it is tough. It is tough for the 

industry to hold its producers together. It is tough to have young 

people have the faith in the future to be able to ride those 

economic storms and to make a commitment that they are going 

to stick with this industry through thick and thin with the hope 

that when they come out the other end, they will be in a 

prosperous situation. 

 

We’re seeing, Mr. Speaker . . . And if you have travelled around 

the province — and I’m sure you have, Mr. Speaker, as well as 

many of the members in this great Assembly — and spent some 

time in rural Saskatchewan, and I have done that the last couple 

of summers, partially because of my responsibilities as the critic 

for Highways and Infrastructure. I was, you know, obligated, I 

guess you would say, to travel a lot of the highways in 

Saskatchewan, responding to reports I was getting in my office 

about road conditions and highway conditions. But that also 

gave me the opportunity to spend a lot of time in rural 

Saskatchewan, in small town Saskatchewan. 

 

I had also the opportunity to talk and visit with many residents 

of small towns who, as you know, Mr. Speaker, from your 

experience, I’m sure, and many others will agree . . . that small 

town Saskatchewan is unique because it’s just a warm and 

friendly place. You can go into a small town Saskatchewan 

café. There’ll be, you know, a dozen or 15 people there, many 

of them old-timers, retired already. And it doesn’t take much to 

strike up a conversation with them. And they’re certainly 

willing to share their experiences and the experiences of their 

lifetime with you as they are a wealth of knowledge. 

 

And when you sit down and you have the opportunity to spend, 

you know, a half hour or 45 minutes, sometimes even an hour 

and in some cases longer than that, chatting with these good 

folks, you learn a lot. You learn a lot about what is the issues 

that they are facing, you know, in their own little community 

and even some their personal issues. But you also gain a lot of 

knowledge from their experience of the past, the experiences 

that they have been through as a result of their chosen 

professions. And many of these of course are farmers, retired 

farmers. Most of them, many of them — I shouldn’t say most 

— but many of them also didn’t only grain farm; they also were 

livestock producers. They all run a herd of cattle, mostly beef 

cattle. There’d be the odd one you’d run into was a dairy 

operation, but they were a little further apart. But certainly beef 

operations were more common. 

 

And you would sit and talk to them, and they would be willing 

to share with you some of their experiences and some of their 

thoughts of the industry, the industry as they experienced it 

through their career in farming — some 40 or 50 years — and 

how that industry has changed and how they recognize that 

industry has changed till today where you don’t have the same 

opportunities, I suppose, as you had in the past with smaller 

herds and smaller operations. Today it has become virtually a 

specialized operation. 

 

When you talk to farmers out there today, it’s not a 30- or a 40- 

cow herd. It’s more like a 300- or a 400- cow herd. So it has 

certainly changed dramatically. And with that changes comes 

the need, I guess you would say, to have a reasonable return on 

an ongoing basis in order to support the business that is a large 

commerce. It’s a large business when you’re talking 350, 400 

cows. It’s a large, large business, and you need to have a decent 

turnover, a decent revenue stream in order to be able to 

maintain that. 

 

And when you’re in the industry, and you recognize that while 

you’re in this industry you’re going to have, you know, the 

good years and the bad years, and you’re going to have to ride 

them through. And you can do it, and you can do it 

economically. And you can do it. And you can even plan for it 

to some degree because in the past you knew that it would be 

one or two years of bad prices, and then the prices would come 

back, and it would be a little bit of a relief there. 

 

And you would once again be able to enjoy a year or two of 

profit before the costs perhaps caught up to the increased return 

that you’re receiving. And it would be before the economy of 

the livestock industry had a downturn again. And there would 

be a portion of time there, a bit of margin of profit that you’d be 

able to sustain your operation with. 

 

But in today’s world, that’s not the case when today’s world, as 

a result of year after year of prices being so depressed, that a lot 

of cases that the return after years of labour in the livestock 

industry, the return was not adequate enough to meet the costs 

of maintaining that herd. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, of course gets very hard to convince 

young people that this is what they should stay and do. I mean 

after one or two or three years, it’s one thing. But when you’re 

going on five-plus years of experiencing incomes that are less 

than the cost of production, then you find yourself very difficult 

to explain to young people why they should continue to stay in 

the industry. 

 

And as a result of that, we’re seeing the exodus of the industry 

today. We’re seeing people who are making up their minds that 

this is enough. Some, Mr. Speaker, some are making up their 

minds because they’re of the age of retirement. They’re looking 

at retirement on the horizon. They’re saying, I’ve been in the 

livestock industry all my life, and it’s time for me to make a 

decision that I think I’m going to get out of it. I’m getting up 

there in age. The work is getting a little bit harder, and the 

return certainly isn’t there. So I think I will just disperse my 

herd, and I will look forward to enjoying a more leisurely 

retirement. 

 

And that is understandable, Mr. Speaker, because after spending 

a lifetime in the industry and working hard at it . . . And it is 

work; it’s seven days a week, 365 days a year. And it’s a 

commitment that you make when you go into that industry. And 

it’s a commitment that you see through and many have. And it 

comes time for their retirement, so they graciously make their 

exit by dispersing their cow herd. 

 



4240 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

But what becomes quite concerning, Mr. Speaker, is when 

you’re talking to younger people, people who are been in the 

industry perhaps 10 years, maybe even 15. I’m thinking of a 

couple myself that had at least been in the industry at least 15, 

maybe 20 years now. And when I say younger people, are 

certainly younger when they’re compared to me, but they’re 

middle aged. And they have said, look I’ve been in this industry 

for, you know, 15 or 20 years. And the first five years I enjoyed 

it, and it was profitable. I worked hard, made a profit. And I 

enjoyed the profit, and I reinvested that profit back into my 

operation. And as a result of that, I grew my operation, and we 

or I moved my cow herd from 100 to maybe 250 or 300. But 

today they’re tired of working year after year after year with a 

commitment to the industry but not seeing a return that would 

be inadequate to meet the cost of production. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we see then is that we see that industry is 

in desperate need of some support. It’s in desperate need of 

some support. Now I believe that there’s a role for the federal 

government to play, and I believe that there’s a role for the 

provincial government to play. And I believe that the provincial 

government has been lax on being able to attract from the 

federal government meaningful support to ensure that the 

industry would survive in this great province of ours. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that support comes in various packages. It’s 

also the support that’s provided through the check-offs — the 

check-off system that is in this province here that causes the 

federal government, to the federal levy, to be checked off at $1 

per head as the animals are sold through the marketplace. 

There’s also the provincial levy that’s collected at $2 a head, I 

believe it is, that is refundable if you apply, but I don’t think too 

many producers have ever applied for the refunding of that 

levy. 

 

But that levy can be used to strengthen the industry, can be used 

to strengthen the industry through an advocate position to 

ensure that the people of Saskatchewan, the people of Canada 

fully realize how important this industry is to our economy — 

to the economy not only of Saskatchewan, but to the national 

economy — and how important it is that we continue to have 

that strong industry. And in order to have that strong industry, 

you have to be able to attract young people into the industry to 

continue on. You have to be able to attract them in. But in order 

to detract them, you have to be able to demonstrate to them that 

they can make a reasonable living, that they can enjoy a 

reasonable return from their efforts and their labour within that 

industry. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is the role for the levy that’s being 

checked off here, the levy that’s really a question here in this 

Bill being checked off and the role it can play to support the 

industry. And that’s just perhaps one small way it can be used 

to support the industry. 

 

Another way it could be used, a very important way it could be 

used, is to help lobby international governments in regards to 

many of the restrictions that they place on our beef and the 

importation of our beef. I’m thinking particularly of the United 

States who are looking at country of origin labelling that drives 

up the cost, drives up the cost to the packing plant because it’s 

an extra handling of the product. They have to do an extra effort 

that they have to do. And it drives up the cost, and it makes then 

the beef produced and coming out of Canada a little more costly 

than that coming from elsewhere. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I also believe it increases the costs because 

in the packing plants when they are receiving semi loads of 

finished beef, they would have the ability, without the 

requirement for the country of origin labelling, without that 

they’d have the ability to blend the animals together, whether 

they came from the US [United States] or whether they came 

from Canada or whether they came from Ontario or Alberta or 

BC [British Columbia] or Wyoming or Oklahoma or wherever 

they might have come from. They’d be able to blend them 

together in types so that they would basically have packages of 

similar types of beef, and it wouldn’t matter what country they 

came from because they’ve got to all be processed. 

 

Whereas when you have a country of origin labelling required, 

that means that those animals coming in to the packing industry 

have to be segregated. They have to be separate. They have to 

have bins set aside for Canadian beef. When the semi-trailers 

are coming out of Brooks, Alberta or out of Saskatchewan here, 

hauling Saskatchewan’s finished beef, and they’re headed down 

to Sioux Falls and Sioux City to the huge, huge packing plants 

there, when they get there, they can’t be just unloaded into the 

pen and blended in with other cattle of the same type. They 

have to be segregated. They have to be kept aside. They have to 

be kept in special pens which are designated Canadian pens. It’s 

where Canadian cattle go. They have to be handled separately. 

 

[15:15] 

 

All of this, Mr. Speaker, increased the cost to the industry. All 

this increased the cost to the packing industry. And quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, they pass those costs on. They pass those 

costs on to the consumer, only limited because the consumer 

isn’t going to pay more for Canadian beef just simply because 

the packers have to pay more to handle it. The consumer’s 

going to say, I want to buy the best beef possible for the least 

price. If that beef comes from the United States, they’ll buy 

from the US. If that beef comes from Australia, they’ll buy it 

from Australia. 

 

So that means that Canadian beef, though more costly to the 

packer, the packer then is going to compensate themselves by 

paying less to the Canadian producer. That means, once again, 

the Canadian producer gets less. That means in a time when we 

have an economy and an industry that is under pressure, under 

economic pressure because of low cattle prices, we’re seeing 

added costs that drive those prices down even more to the 

producer so that the producer’s income is even less. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that makes it tough then for the industry to be able 

to say to the young people, come and join our industry because 

there is a future here. It’s tough to say that when they — the 

young people — look at it and say, well I can’t see why I 

should put all the work, first all the investment, the capital 

investment, then all the work and all the commitment into an 

industry that doesn’t return me the cost of production. That, Mr. 

Speaker, quite frankly causes young people to head the other 

way. They look at this and they say, no, I’m not going to do 

this. I’m going to do something else. I’m going to grain farm, or 

I’m going to go into raising legumes or perhaps into dehy 

operations. 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4241 

We’re seeing all types of other choices that farmers will make 

rather than getting involved in the livestock industry which, Mr. 

Speaker, is a concern to me because we spent a long time in this 

province. The former government, I believe even the last couple 

of former governments have worked very hard to try to build 

the livestock industry here in Saskatchewan. I know that during 

the time of the former government, the livestock population of 

Saskatchewan really took off. I think we had the largest 

livestock herd ever in the history of this province up until the 

change of government here. And now it’s been going downhill 

ever since. 

 

We’re seeing the population, the breeding population of the 

herds in Saskatchewan here drop dramatically, and we’re seeing 

some herds being sold off. And most recently — I shouldn’t say 

most recently, it was probably a month, month and a half ago 

— I had the opportunity to be up in Tisdale, Saskatchewan, and 

there I ended up in a conversation with a producer who had 

been in the industry for a lot of years, a lot of years. And he was 

telling me that that fall at one of the markets that he was at there 

was a cow herd dispersal. These were bred cows. These were 

not cull cows. These were not the old cows. These were not cull 

cows that were cut off. These were good quality, firm, solid, 

breeding cows that on any given time would have gone into the 

breeding herd of this great province of ours, and the producers 

would have been happy to have them. 

 

Well there was 90 of them. There was 90 of them that was 

dispersed at this particular sale. They were advertised. The 

advertising was done, well, right across the area, and the 

producers in the area certainly knew that this good quality herd 

was being dispersed on this particular date. And he tells me that 

all 90 cows went to slaughter. None of them went back into the 

cow herd. All went to slaughter. 

 

So that’s very concerning when you hear that because that’s the 

mainstay, that’s the mainstay of our industry — those young, 

solid breeding cows, many of them with 8 or 10 years of 

productive life ahead of them — and not being able to benefit 

from that because they’ve gone into the slaughter system 

because nobody out there was willing to expand their operation. 

Nobody out there was willing to invest in that industry, invest 

in those cows to support that industry. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m hoping to be able to point out the 

need to have a check-off system and monies available through 

the check-off system to support that industry, to ensure that 

industry stays strong into the future. We have the check-off 

system. We have the funds available, and the funds are being 

checked off. The concern I have, Mr. Speaker, is how are these 

funds being used? 

 

In the past, in the past, the funds were collected by the 

Department of Agriculture. The funds went into a revolving 

fund held by the Department of Agriculture, and these funds 

were then disbursed only upon the recommendations of a board 

that was made up of livestock producers. The livestock 

producers that sat on that board would make decisions as to 

what would be the best use of this money. How could this 

money be disbursed to best affect the industry, to ensure the 

industry would stay strong, to ensure that industry had the 

ability to react when perhaps a crisis would appear or a situation 

would appear with a foreign government that would need some 

consultation or lobbying and that funds would be available. And 

the board would then make those decisions as to disburse those 

funds in that way. 

 

But that, Mr. Speaker, meant that the revenue that was 

collected, the fees that were collected came from all the cattle 

that were sold through our auction system. That means every 

producer contributed. And that also means that when the funds 

were held in a revolving fund by the Department of Agriculture, 

that means every producer had say in how those funds would be 

used. They had say. 

 

They could talk to those members of their industry who sat on 

the advisory board with the Department of Agriculture, advising 

how these funds should be spent. They could talk to them 

directly and share with them their thoughts, share with them 

their ideas. They could perhaps even talk to the department 

themselves if they couldn’t get a hold of or didn’t know who, 

perhaps, their representative on the board. They would be able 

to talk to the department themselves. They’d be able to call the 

department up and they’d be able to talk to somebody in the 

livestock division, the Department of Agriculture that would be 

able to relay — at least relay — their thoughts on to the board. 

 

Even, Mr. Speaker, a little bit further afield, but even, Mr. 

Speaker, they would be able to talk to their MLA on either side 

of the House and they’d be able to share their thoughts and their 

concerns. Because it was their dollar. It was their dollar being 

collected. They had the right to have input into how that dollar 

was going to be spent. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if this Bill is to go through in its present 

form, we’ll see that changed. If this Bill goes through in its 

present form, we will see that changed and it will be changed to 

allowing the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association to now 

collect the $1 national levy and the $2 provincial levy. And they 

will hold those funds, and they will make the decisions. I mean 

they, I mean the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association will 

make the decisions as to how those funds are disbursed. In 

principle, at first glance you say, well that’s okay. That seems 

all right. Except, Mr. Speaker, except not every livestock 

producer in Saskatchewan is a member of the Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen’s Association. 

 

Every livestock producer in Saskatchewan, when they sell their 

animals through the marketing system, will contribute to the 

fund. They will through the national check-off and the 

provincial check-off. But if they’re not a member of the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association, they will not have the 

ability to influence how those funds are disbursed. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, I find that fundamentally wrong. I find a problem with 

that, Mr. Speaker, personally. 

 

I would like to know what cattle producers across this great 

province of ours are saying about this. I’d like to know. I would 

like to know who lobbied the government to make these 

changes. What organization, what individuals lobbied the 

government to make these changes? Maybe it’s legitimate. 

Maybe it is. But I don’t know that because I don’t know who 

lobbied the government. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, who the 

government talked to. Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know 

if the government talked to anybody in the livestock industry in 

regards to these changes. Did they or did they not? I don’t 



4242 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

know. 

 

What I do know is that what little time we’ve had to be able to 

research this, we’ve found out that some producers like the idea 

and some producers did not like the idea. But what really 

shocked me was the large, large number of producers that had 

absolutely no idea that this was happening, had no idea this was 

happening. 

 

So with that I would think that one would suggest that there 

needs to be further consultation, or at least some consultation, 

with the industry out there and the members of that industry. 

And there’s, you know, there’s simply a number of questions 

that arise when you look at this Bill. There’s a number of 

questions that arise from the intent of this Bill that I believe 

need to be asked. 

 

Now it’s one thing for me to be curious. It’s one thing for me to 

be wondering about what questions should be asked. I think it’s 

more important that we hear from the people involved in the 

industry — the front-line people, the people who get up every 

morning and go out there and look after those animals, that get 

up every morning regardless of how cold it may be. In the 

winter months they get up every morning and they go out there 

and they feed those animals and make sure that they’re well 

looked after. The same people who go out there, and when they 

discover that their watering bowl is froze and their cattle aren’t 

getting to fresh water, they have to do whatever it takes to get 

that watering bowl working. 

 

And usually what it ends up being is very, very cold hands. 

Because I’ve had that opportunity and experience in my life 

more than once, and I can assure you when it’s 35 and 40 below 

outside and there’s a wind blowing and you have to take a 

watering bowl apart, you’re going to end up getting wet. It can’t 

be helped. You’re going to end up getting wet. And when you 

get wet and your hands or perhaps even as far up as your elbow 

and get a little water splashed on the front of you and it’s 35 

below outside, that freezes very quickly. I can assure you one 

thing; your hands get very cold. 

 

And those are the things that those producers go through. They 

don’t complain about it. Many of them won’t even talk about it 

because it’s just a thing they do. If they have to do it, they do it. 

They don’t think twice about it. But it’s a commitment that they 

make to ensuring that those animals are looked after, and 

looked after in the best of possible ways. 

 

And it’s because they have pride, they have a pride in their 

herd. They have a pride in the herd that they have, their cattle 

that they have. They have a pride in their industry. And they 

certainly should have the ability to have input into the decision 

making process of how the funds that are being checked off of 

those same animals that they sell at the market, they should 

have the ability to have input and some say, some sense of 

direction, some ability to influence how those funds are 

disbursed, Mr. Speaker. And this Bill, it will certainly limit that. 

If this Bill is proclaimed it will certainly limit that. 

 

Because many, many producers out there who are involved in 

the livestock industry and maybe have been for generations but 

have never been a member of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association, okay? And therefore once the Bill is proclaimed 

and the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association has sole control, 

sole jurisdiction over the funds that are being collected through 

the check-offs, they will have the ability to determine how those 

funds are disbursed and not that of the producer whose funds it 

is that they are disbursing. That, Mr. Speaker, I find very, very 

questionable, very questionable. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, there is no indication in this Bill, absolutely 

no indication in this Bill anywhere that I have been able to 

come across, or any of my colleagues, as to the fundamental 

answers to some very fundamental questions, like what is the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association doing with these funds 

into the future? We’re saying they’re going to collect the funds. 

We’re saying they’re going to disburse the funds. But nowhere 

does it say how they’re going to disburse the funds. 

 

What are they going to spend those funds on? Is there any type 

of guidelines? Have they put forward any suggestions or any 

types of guidelines of how they would spend producers’ money, 

producers’ money that they’re going to be collecting — many 

producers who are not members? Many producers have no input 

or no influence into how those funds would be disbursed. They 

haven’t had any idea how the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association plans to use that money. 

 

And it may be very legit. They may have some very good ideas, 

very solid ideas that will support the industry, and that could be. 

All I’m asking is I’d like to hear. I’d like the producers of this 

province to know what those ideas are — unlike the results of 

some of our research which show that the vast majority of 

producers of Saskatchewan have no idea that this change, that 

this Act is coming about and that these changes are going to 

happen. No idea. And they have absolutely no idea thusly, Mr. 

Speaker, they have absolutely no idea of what the plans are by 

the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association as far as the use of 

these funds into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s just one of a very simple question that I 

think needs to be asked or, more importantly I think, needs to 

be answered. Now how much money, Mr. Speaker, how much 

money will be allotted to research and development within the 

industry? Another question, Mr. Speaker. How much money 

will be allotted to research and development? We know the 

amount of . . . We have at least a pretty good idea of the amount 

of funds that’s going to be collected. We know that we’re going 

to be collecting $1 federal levy, national levy, and a $2 

provincial levy on every animal sold through our marketing 

system. And this fund will . . . The money will now go into a 

fund that’s going to be held with the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And what we’re asking — and I think it’s only fair that the 

industry should have some idea of what the plans of the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association has for this money — a 

simple question, a very important question. Because the success 

in the future of having a strong industry here is dependent upon 

being able to meet the changes and the challenges of a changing 

world, and that in order to do that, we know that research and 

development is the key to success. We have to be prepared to 

meet those changes. We can’t meet those changes unless we 

know what they are. When we have an idea what those changes 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4243 

are, we need to be able to produce the product that will meet 

those changes and continue to have a strong industry in this 

great province. In order to do that, in order to do that we must 

have research and development to ensure that we have the 

strong industry here that can, even in these depressed times, in 

these depressed times when the revenue being generated in the 

industry is limited in many cases not even to the cost of 

production, but it is even at that time to be more important that 

we have a good, solid research and development so that we can 

have a strong industry. 

 

We can meet the changes of the changing economy. We can 

meet the changes that what we find other countries . . . Perhaps 

their demands in those countries are changing because of 

lifestyle changes, because of economic changes within those 

countries. Often that will drive demand by their population to 

change and we need to be able to react to those changes. We 

need to be able to identify those changes even before they 

happen so that we can be prepared to react to them, so we can 

be prepared to capture that market when those changes come 

about. And, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t happen, that doesn’t 

happen accidentally. It happens after a reasonably good 

planning. It happens after foresight, vision, and part of that 

vision is having a good research and good development aspect 

to the industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question quite simply is: how much of the 

money will be allocated to research and development within the 

industry? That’s a fairly simple, straightforward question, one 

that I think every producer would like to know the answer to. 

One that every producer has a right to know the answer to. Mr. 

Speaker, we have indicated the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association as being the organization that will now collect the 

funds, the check-off funds. The $1 non-refundable national levy 

and the $2 refundable provincial levy will now be collected by 

the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association. Of course this begs 

the question that that’s not the only livestock association in this 

great province. There are many other livestock associations. 

 

And one that comes to mind, because in years past I was 

actually a member of it, was the Saskatchewan Stock Growers 

Association. And, Mr. Speaker, I wonder what role will the 

Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association and its members, 

which are cattle producers, livestock producers, what role will 

they play in being able to influence the expenditure of the levies 

by the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association? 

 

Will there be any opportunity for producer organizations such 

as the Stock Growers Association to have the ability to carry 

out conversations, to have the ability to have meetings, to have 

the ability to, in a meaningful way, in a meaningful way, to 

have influence over the disbursement of the funds by the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association? 

 

Because quite frankly, I’ve very much enjoyed my time and my 

relationship with the Stock Growers Association. And it was 

primarily an operation that we were involved in because most 

of the members in the association that I was a . . . the branch of 

the association I was involved in, were those who grazed their 

cattle in the forest reserve. And there was many of us. And it 

was a key component to our operation, was the ability to 

continue to lease grazing rights in the provincial forest, and in 

some cases provincial parks, to run our cattle. 

Because quite frankly, it was a commerce that benefited us, but 

it also benefited the forestry. Because if you talk to those people 

who are involved in firefighting and fire suppressions, they will 

tell you that when the underbrush is suppressed and the dry 

grass is not there, then they don’t have the fuel to feed the fire. 

And it often makes the ability to contain a fire or even prevent a 

fire much easier. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is a question I would have — and I think 

many producers across this great province would have — is, 

what role will other farm organizations and livestock 

organizations such as, I’ll just use for an example, such as the 

Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association, what role will they 

have in having any influence over disbursement and the way 

that the money is disbursed by the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association? Will the Stock Growers Association and other 

livestock associations benefit in any manner, shape, or form 

from the revenues being collected, the fees being collected by 

the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association? 

 

A question I have, a question I have is, is there provisions 

within the agreement with the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association that they will be able to use some of the funds 

collected through the check-off system to fund the day-to-day 

operations of their own agency or their own association? Will 

producers’ check-offs go to funding the day-to-day operation of 

the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association? Is there provisions 

in there for that or is there provisions that will prevent that? 

 

Those are the questions, Mr. Speaker, I think need to be 

answered. And I don’t think they’re unfair questions. I mean 

after all, it’s the producers who are funding this. It’s the 

producers through their check-off system are funding this . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Hickie: — To ask leave for introduction of guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Prince Albert. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well to you and 

through you, to all members of the Assembly this afternoon, I 

am going to have some great pleasure to introduce to you Mr. 

Corey O’Soup from Saskatoon who was our candidate in 

Riversdale constituency by-election last year. I got a chance to 

work with Corey . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — He came close. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — And he came close, very close. Yes, he did. I 

had a chance to door knock with Corey on three different 

occasions and work on election day with him. And I just want 

to welcome him to his Assembly and say it’s good to see you, 

sir. I’m glad you’re back in the fold. Thank you. 



4244 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Northeast. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 97 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Harper: — Well, Mr. Speaker, before I get back to my 

remarks, I would like to join with the member from Prince 

Albert in welcoming Mr. O’Soup to the legislature here. I do 

realize that he was the Sask Party candidate in the by-election in 

Saskatoon Riversdale, and I do want to welcome him here. 

 

And I hope he enjoys his time in this Assembly and I hope he 

enjoys the view from the gallery because, Mr. Speaker, as long 

as he runs for a Sask Party candidate in Saskatchewan, the only 

view of this Assembly he’ll ever enjoy is that from the gallery. 

So welcome, Mr. O’Soup. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will get back to the debate at hand now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that it is interesting, I suppose, that 

some of these changes are being made. And they’re being made 

in most cases without the knowledge of the producers 

themselves. We’ve had the opportunity, as I have already 

stated, we’ve had the opportunity to talk to some producers 

across this great province and many of them have indicated that 

they had no idea, they absolutely had no idea that these changes 

were happening. And that, Mr. Speaker, then leads me to 

wonder about what was wrong with the old system of collecting 

the check-off revenues and holding them in a revolving fund in 

the Department of Agriculture to be disbursed only after the 

suggestion and the advice and the direction was given to the 

department by . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Quennell: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

my colleagues for their indulgence. And I apologize for 

interrupting the member that was on his feet. I hope I didn’t 

interrupt his train of thought, and if I did, I hope that he can find 

it again while he’s seated. 

 

In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is an old friend of mine, David 

Brindle. The member from Regina Lakeview on occasion 

introduces to this Legislative Assembly classrooms from 

Sheldon Williams Collegiate. And a few short years ago — or 

at least they seem like short years ago — such an introduction 

might have included David and I, who went to high school 

together at Sheldon Williams Collegiate, Mr. Speaker. He was a 

lot more clean-cut looking then, at the time, because I think he 

was in the Regina Lions Band. And I was not as quite clean cut 

as I might look now, Mr. Speaker. Times have changed. 

 

I’ve never quite figured out what I want to do when I grow up, 

and I’m kind of getting close to it I think, Mr. Speaker. But 

David always knew. He went straight into journalism, at one 

point anchored CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] 

Newsworld out of Calgary, until very recently hosted a talk 

show in Vancouver, and is launching something I’m not quite 

sure I entirely understand, sort of an online media talk show. I 

think people from Saskatchewan will be hearing a lot more 

from him in the near future because of it. 

 

And in any case, I introduce to you and through you to all 

members of the Legislative Assembly my friend, David 

Brindle. And I hope that everyone welcomes him here to the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Northeast. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 97 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do think I can find 

the point where I left off in this and pick up from there. If not, 

Mr. Speaker, then I’ll just have to start from the beginning and 

go all through it again, that’s all, because I don’t want to miss 

anything. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, a number of questions do arise when you 

look at this Bill and you start to review this Bill and, more 

importantly, when you start to talk to producers out there, and 

producer organizations. One of the questions is that in the old 

system in the past, in the old system where the money was 

collected by the Department of Agriculture, it was held in a 

revolving fund and it was only disbursed after and upon the 

advice of a board of directors that was made up of livestock 

producers. Then some of that money, some of that money went 

to the Stock Growers Association, and some of that money that 

went to the Stock Growers Association from the levies was 

used for the operation and the marketing that they did, that they 

do on behalf of their member producers. 

 

My question then, Mr. Speaker, with these changes, these 

changes that are proposed in this Bill, if this Bill is proclaimed, 

then would restrict the funds to be collected to that of the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association only. So does that mean 

that the agreement that was in place with the Department of 

Agriculture in the past by the Stock Growers Association that 

some of those levies, some of those funds would flow through 

to the Stock Growers Association to continue to support their 

organization and support their operation and their marketing? 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, the Stock Growers Association is a 

producer association. It’s made up of simply the producers; 

there is no hierarchy that would make up this particular 

organization. It is simply an organization of producers that do a 

very good job of representing their members and do a very good 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4245 

job of being able to market their products. 

 

So that’s another question, Mr. Speaker, that I think not only I 

would have but I think members of the Stock Growers 

Association would also like to know if they can rely on the 

continued flow of those funds as they had under the old system. 

Mr. Speaker, again the questions that come to mind here when 

you look at a Bill that so dramatically changes things, so 

dramatically changes things. 

 

And it’s been my experience in this great Assembly of ours, as 

I’m sure the other members, is that being in government is not a 

easy job. It is a job that you have to be very careful when you 

make changes because the way the system of government 

operates, both in this province and this great country of ours, is 

very interlocked. It’s very tied together, and sometimes when 

you make a change somewhere in an Act, you have to be very 

careful of what the ramifications of that change might be. In 

some cases it may be like a domino effect. When you make one 

change and you have a domino start to fall and you have 

unintended consequences as a result of that, unintended changes 

are forced because of that. 

 

And I’m wondering, has this government taken the time, has 

this government taken the time to do the due diligence to ensure 

that any negative effects from the changes are going to be very 

limited or perhaps non-existent? Has this government done that 

homework? Have they done their homework? Have they gone 

out and talked to the individuals who are involved in the 

industry here who are going to be affected through these 

changes? And fairly massive changes, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve 

already indicated. 

 

[15:45] 

 

If you look at the changes in Bill 97, and it says right here in the 

title, An Act to amend The Agri-Food Act, 2004 — changes 

there. Then it goes on to say “to repeal The Cattle Marketing 

Deductions Act, 1998” — changes there; “and The Cattle 

Marketing Deductions Regulations, 2004” — changes there; 

“and to make consequential amendments to The Department of 

Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization Act”— changes 

there. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of changes. This Bill will create a 

lot of changes. Now what are the effect of these changes? Has 

the department done its due diligence and been able to identify 

those changes but more importantly been able to identify the 

effect of those changes? And how will it affect the individual 

producers out there? How will it affect the individual producer 

organizations that they are members of, Mr. Speaker? And 

many of them are very reliant upon those organizations for their 

advice, for their direction, for a bit of a window into the future 

as to what the future may hold, and I think they’re rather reliant 

on these organizations. 

 

And I think that most producers would want to have the comfort 

of knowing that these changes, the changes that are proposed in 

this Bill, would not have a negative effect on their 

organizations, but more importantly or as importantly, a 

negative effect on them and their operations. Because we know 

that the margins of profit in the livestock industry and the 

livestock operations today are very narrow, are very narrow, 

and that any significant change to that can be enough to cause 

the operation to go from a very, very thin, profitable operation 

to a negative operation and perhaps even a dramatically 

negative operation. And that’s hard to come back from. That’s 

hard to come back from, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the old days, like I said, when there was peaks and valleys in 

the marketing and we would know that the valley would last 

about two years and we know that the peak would last about 

two years and we knew that that was going to happen, you 

could rely on that. You could make your plans on that. So a lot 

of producers who were, oh skilful I guess you’d say, business 

people, they would look at the opportunity to expand their 

operations in the downturn when the prices were down, when 

cattle values were down, and they would take advantage then of 

those expansions a year or two later when the markets were up. 

 

And those were very successful operators and I know two or 

three of them that did very, very well by doing opposite. They 

used to say they would do opposite of what the government told 

them. If the government told them to sell out and get out of 

cattle, they’d get into it. If the government told them it was time 

to reduce, they would increase. And they were usually quite 

successful at doing that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we see changes to this Act as proposed 

by the government, we wonder then what are these changes, 

what do these changes mean, and what are these changes mean 

in as far as an effect on the industry and an effect on the 

producers within that industry. Well, Mr. Speaker, that becomes 

the issue. That becomes the issue or one of the issues, I guess 

you would say, in this Bill. 

 

And one of the issues is, has that government done its 

homework? Has that government gone out and talked to 

producers? Has that government gone out and talked to those 

people who have been identified, that could possibly be affected 

by the changes in this Act? Have they talked to organizations — 

livestock organizations, farm organizations, organizations that 

represent farmers right across the piece? Have they talked to 

them? Have they got their input? Have they heard from them? 

Have they listened to them? Most importantly, have they 

listened to them? 

 

Often, Mr. Speaker, it’s been suggested that sometimes 

government will go out and talk to people but won’t necessarily 

listen to them. And a question here, Mr. Speaker, is: have they 

listened to them? 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that many of the producers across 

this great province are members of producer organizations. 

Some are members of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association. Some are members of the Stock Growers 

Association. But many, many, many are not members of any 

organization out there. But yet they are key parts of the 

livestock industry in this great province and when they market 

their animals it doesn’t matter whether they’re a member of the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association or the Saskatchewan 

Stock Growers Association. It doesn’t matter to the check-off. 

 

What matters to the check-off is that animal going through the 

ring, that animal going through the marketing system will be 

checked off at a rate of $1 for the national levy and $2 for the 



4246 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

federal levy. And there’s nobody checking to see if they’re a 

member of any organization. They just take the money. They 

take the money. 

 

And in the past it was reasonable and fair that that was done 

because that money would go into the Department of 

Agriculture revolving fund, or revolving fund held by the 

Department of Agriculture. And that revolving fund would be 

only available to support the industry and would be only 

available to support the industry in a way that was 

recommended by a board of livestock producers who made up 

the board, advisory board to the revolving fund — and they 

were representative of all the producers in Saskatchewan. 

 

All producers in Saskatchewan had the ability to have 

discussions with either a board member or somebody from the 

Department of Agriculture to be able to convey their thoughts 

and their beliefs forward to have influence in the way the 

money was disbursed. Mr. Speaker, at that we’re losing that. 

We’re losing that in this entire process. 

 

So then you begin to wonder if we’re losing that, then how 

broad is going to be the advice to the department and how broad 

is the advice going to be to the industry to make the necessary 

changes on an ongoing basis that’s going to be in the best 

interests of the industry? If you have a narrow band of people 

you talk to, then you’re simply going to get a narrow band of 

ideas and a narrow band of suggestions and not perhaps that 

that represents the entire industry. 

 

In order to have representation from the entire industry, you 

need to be able to speak at some point in time to that entire 

industry. You need to be able to provide a way for the industry 

to communicate its thoughts, its suggestions, its ideas forward 

so that they can be well-received and perhaps, Mr. Speaker, 

implemented if they happen to be something that is in the best 

interests of the industry. That, Mr. Speaker, we lose. 

 

Through this Act, I see that we’re losing it because we’re 

restricting now the ability of those to influence the use of these 

funds to simply to those who are members of the Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen’s Association, the only one organization. 

 

There are many organizations representing cattle producers out 

there. There are many cattle producers out there who are not 

members of any organization. So you can see how it narrows 

down the influence over these funds. It narrows down to just 

those who are members of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association. I think, Mr. Speaker, this is dangerous. I think it’s 

dangerous because you narrow down the scope of influence. 

You narrow down the scope of ideas that are coming forward. 

You narrow down the percentage of producers that you talk to. 

You narrow down the percentage of producers you get feedback 

from, ideas from. And that, I think, can be detrimental to the 

industry as a whole. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I can’t help but think that, in a lot of ways, 

what we’re seeing here is these changes are not necessarily 

changes that I think the vast majority of people involved in the 

industry would agree with. I don’t know that for sure. And I 

don’t know that the government knows that for sure because 

there’s been no indication as to the level or the degree of 

consultation this government has done with those people 

involved in the livestock industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question that comes to mind is who within the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association will be determining 

where and when these funds will be allocated? Who within this 

. . . Now we realize that if this Act, if this Act is proclaimed and 

implemented, it will then make provisions for the Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen’s Association to collect the check-off levies. 

 

The question then is, so now the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association will have jurisdiction and influence over these 

levies, influence over how these levies are disbursed. The 

question remains who, who within the Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen’s Association will be determining where and when 

these funds will be allocated? 

 

There is no suggestion in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, that will 

address that concern. There is no suggestions here at all. There 

is nothing in the support information that the government has 

provided to this Bill that comes anywhere near providing that 

type of information. The government is sort of saying, well trust 

me; it’ll be looked after. It’s like the government is saying to 

the cattlemen out there, give me your wallet. Give me your 

funds and trust me. I will spend it on your behalf wisely. Trust 

me. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we wonder, we wonder, would you do that 

in your own operation? The simple question is: would you do 

that in your own operation, whether it be a farm operation or a 

business or a hardware store or a service station? Would you 

just turn your money over? Would you turn your wallet over, 

your chequebook over to somebody because they said, look, I’ll 

disburse your money, and we’ll do it wisely? Trust me. 

 

That’s basically what this government and this Bill is asking the 

producers of the livestock industry to do in this great province, 

is to turn the money over to them, have no say on that money, 

have no control over that money, have no influence on how that 

money might be spent. They just said, trust me. We’ll spend it 

wisely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they’re doing so without even telling us, without 

even telling us who within the Cattlemen’s Association will be 

making that decision, will be making that decision. Who will be 

giving the advice? Who will be making that decision? On what 

grounds are they going to have to produce that decision? On 

what grounds are they going to be required to be able to be 

informed so they can make a decision and an informed decision, 

a decision that is, that is in the best interests of the industry? 

 

There is no assurance here of that at all, Mr. Speaker. There is 

no mechanism here at all to ensure that the producers out there 

will receive the best benefits for those dollars being spent. 

There is no mechanism that assures that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, normally, as in the past when the funds were held 

by the Department of Agriculture in a revolving fund, they were 

only dispensed after the advice of a board of directors, or a 

board would advise the department as to how these funds 

should be disbursed. This board was made up of livestock 

producers from right across this great province of ours. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if that is going to be — and I’m just saying 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4247 

if — I can only imagine that the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association would want to probably follow on that same vein. 

They would want to have advice from the industry as to how 

this money should be spent. At least I would hope that would be 

the case. So if that is the case then, if the board is going to be 

allocating the use of these funds . . . and I would assume that 

that’s what it would be. There would be a board set up to 

provide the advice to the Cattlemen’s Association of how these 

funds should be disbursed in a way that is in the best interest of 

the industry. 

 

Then the question . . . It begs the question, what is going to be 

the makeup of this board? What is going to be the makeup of 

this board? Is this board going to be made up of livestock 

producers, people who are actively involved in the industry, the 

people who are involved in the industry who have everything at 

stake, therefore they’re going to make decisions that are in the 

best interest of their industry because it in turn makes in the 

best interest of their own operations? 

 

And these are the people who are conscious of the need to 

continue to build that industry by attracting young people to the 

industry to ensure that we have a strong livestock industry for 

today and for the future, that we have an industry that will be 

able to survive the market turn down that we’re going through 

now, but to be able to ride the stormy seas of the livestock 

industry and the livestock prices that’s happening right now in 

the livestock commerce that’s going on here with the ups and 

downs within the industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure that we have a board that 

. . . if that is the mechanism that’s going to be used by the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association. They’re going to 

establish a board, advisory board that would be advising the 

association as to what would be the best use of those dollars 

that are being collected through the check-off fund. What’s the 

best use to support the industry, to support the members there, 

but also to grow the industry and to make it a strong industry so 

that we have the ability to attract young people to that industry 

so that it’s a continuum of that industry, so it would be a very 

big part of our economy today and into the future. We don’t 

dare lose that industry. 

 

And what we need to do is to ensure that we have that type of 

individual on that board that will be able to provide that input, 

be able to provide that advice, be able to be futuristic and have 

an idea of what is needed in the future, what changes may be 

needed as time goes on here to ensure that the industry is 

positioned, positioned to meet the challenges of the future 

because there will be challenges. There always will be 

challenges, and we have to be ready for those challenges. We 

have to be position to meet those challenges. 

 

[16:00] 

 

A lot of those challenges come about as changing desires and 

changing demands within the economies of other countries. We 

export. We export a lot of product. Our beef products and our 

beef industry, livestock industry here is exported abroad, okay. 

And those other countries that import our product always have a 

changing desire within their economies. As their economies 

grow stronger, you’ll see as their economies grow stronger that 

the demand for their different products change. 

As economies grow stronger and the people within those 

economies have greater disposable income, the first thing that 

they affect is an improved diet, improved diet. They look at the 

ability to be able to feed themselves and their families with an 

improved diet. And as a result of that, what you’re seeing, will 

see, and have seen and will see into the future a change in 

demand of product being imported from our great country here. 

 

When it comes to the livestock industry, you will see a change 

in the amount of product being imported to varied countries. In 

some cases, you will see that in the past — perhaps history will 

show us — that a significant import by a certain country might 

have been chicken. Maybe 80 per cent of the imports of this 

country might have been chicken. But as their economy has 

grown, and their population starts to benefit from the growth in 

that economy and they start to have greater disposable income, 

you will see that they will move away usually from chicken and 

usually and then next step is into pork, and then as that 

economy grows and their lifestyle improves and they have 

greater disposable income, they’ll move from pork into beef. 

 

And then you’ll see that move also means different cuts of 

product so that you may start out at one point in time, a 

significant amount of hamburger perhaps was being imported 

by a particular country. But as that country’s economy grew and 

the people started to prosper and had a greater degree of 

disposable income, it might have moved up to roasts and from 

roasts into steaks, Mr. Speaker, so that you’ll see there’s a 

change in demand. And that is why it is important that we have 

an industry that is positioned to be able to take on these changes 

and to be able to react to these changes as those changes come 

about. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in order to do that, you have to have 

research and development. You have to have research and 

development that’s properly funded so that you have the ability 

for the industry to react as those changes are identified. You 

have people within the board that’s providing the advice of the 

disbursement of the funds that have the ability to look at the 

market trends, have the ability to notice that things are 

changing, and that have the ability then to be able to position 

the industry in a position to be able to react to those changes so 

that we can take advantage of it, so we can be leading the 

marketplace rather than following. So we can be the first one 

then to provide the product that they want, to provide the 

quality of product that they want. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is part of the wisdom of being able to 

disburse these funds in a way that best benefit the industry, that 

best benefit the industry, that ensure that the industry is able to 

react to the changing marketplace, particularly the international 

changing marketplace, and to be able to react to those changes 

not after, not following, but to be able to lead the way, to be 

there at their doorstep when they want a new product, we have 

that product available for them and to have that product in a 

quality that they want. 

 

It’s an old saying that a successful marketer simply goes out 

and finds out what the purchaser wants, finds out what the 

purchaser is prepared to pay for that particular product, and then 

supplies it to him, and then supplies it to him. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I believe that that is the formula for a successful 

marketing strategy, is that you go out and you talk to those 



4248 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

people who are doing the purchasing. You find out what 

product they’re looking for, what product they’re looking for 

today, and what product will they likely be looking for into the 

future. And then you find what price they’re willing to pay for 

it. Then you go back and you develop the product of that 

quality, the quality that they demand, but do it within the ability 

to market within a price that they’re prepared to pay. 

 

And you don’t just do that once. You do it on an ongoing basis, 

the ongoing basis, and that way you simply stay with the 

changes in the economy and the demand of the economy and 

the population and other countries will require into the future. 

That will change, and we have to be there, and we have to be on 

the leading edge. 

 

And we have to do that through research and development. We 

have to do that by having people who will disburse the funds 

that are collected by these check-offs, to do so in a manner that 

will position the industry to be leading the world, not following. 

And the industry will be strong and will have the ability to 

recognize the changes, to be able to be there when those 

changes are demanded by the countries elsewhere abroad, 

saying that we want this product now. We’re saying okay, 

here’s the product you want. And all of a sudden we become the 

leaders. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, creates a strong industry. That, Mr. 

Speaker, then creates a strong industry here at home, where then 

you have the ability to be able to attract young people to that 

industry so that you can have an industry that will be strong, not 

only today but an industry that will be strong into the future. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, I think is really what governments want. 

I think government wants to ensure that we have an industry 

that will be strong, not only today and right through the 

economic turmoils of today, but will ride through and come out 

of the end of this much stronger and much younger and much 

more willing to react to the changing marketplace and react to 

the changes that are coming forward. 

 

And that is a wise use of the funds that are being deducted 

through the check-offs of our animals that are being sold 

through the marketplace. When those deductions are taken off, 

those fees are taken off and put into a pool that can be used to 

best benefit the industry, then we are certainly headed in the 

right direction. 

 

When we’re headed in that direction, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious 

to say that we will have a strong economy. When we have a 

strong economy that comes about because you have the wise 

use of the money by the industry, that’s being collected from 

the industry, from the producers out there, to ensure that that 

industry has the ability to grow, the ability to stay strong, has 

the ability to react to the changing international marketplace — 

that, Mr. Speaker, certainly has to be key. 

 

There is a significant advantage in having the Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen’s Association act as a self-regulating body. Is there, 

Mr. Speaker? That’s the question. Is there an advantage to it? Is 

there a significant advantage to it? If there is, my question is 

what is the advantage? What is the advantage in having the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association collecting these fees 

rather than the Department of Agriculture as it was done in the 

past? 

 

What is the advantage? That, Mr. Speaker, is missed on me. At 

least it’s missed on me. I haven’t been able to find it in the Act. 

I haven’t been able to find it in any of the briefing information 

that we have been able to receive from the government on this. I 

haven’t been able to find anything that indicated to me what 

was the advantage. What was the advantage in shifting of the 

system of collecting of these check-off fees from that of the 

Department of Agriculture that would hold it in a revolving 

fund to having Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association now 

doing the fee collection? 

 

It’s been lost on me, and there may be, Mr. Speaker, there very 

well may be a logical reason for this and a beneficial one to the 

industry. There could be. I won’t say there isn’t because I don’t 

know. What I do know is that the government hasn’t shown us 

that. The government hasn’t produced any type of information 

or any documentation that would indicate what was the driving 

force behind making these changes. How will it benefit the 

industry in a much more productive way by having the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association collecting the fees 

rather than the Department of Agriculture? 

 

There has been no, there has been no — as my colleague said 

here — there has not only been no compelling argument, there’s 

simply been no argument at all. And that of course is a concern, 

Mr. Speaker. I’d like to know why. 

 

I mean I’d like to know what was the deciding factor that the 

government said, okay, we’re going to make these changes, and 

here’s the reason why. Here’s how it’s going to better the 

industry. Here’s how it’s going to make the industry stronger. 

Here’s how it’s going to make the industry have the ability to 

react to the changing times. Here’s how it’s going to have the 

ability to make the industry react to the changing marketplace. 

 

If that information is provided, Mr. Speaker, I will be the very 

first one to stand on my feet in this Assembly and say that was a 

wise decision by this government. It was a wise decision. If this 

government can show me how in the world these changes, these 

changes are going to better the industry, make the industry 

stronger, make the industry more appealing to young people to 

join the industry and to be willing to make the commitment to 

ride the rough times and take the good times and the rough 

times and be able to be successful in the industry, then I will be 

the first to take my hat off and say this government has finally 

done something right. 

 

But until then, Mr. Speaker, I’m lost for words. I just don’t see 

what significant advantage, what advantage these changes to 

this Act is going to benefit the industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Even ice pellets are falling, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now any fees or levies charged for licensing and registration 

and inspection went into the revolving fund, Mr. Speaker, went 

into the following funds. So when the Department of 

Agriculture was in charge of collecting the check-off fees, the 

fees, all the fees or the levies — different terminology I suppose 

— but the fees or levies that was charged for licensing, for the 

registration, and for the inspections went into that same 

revolving fund. 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4249 

So the money sat there, the money sat there and it grew because 

of the revenue being collected through the various agencies. 

And that money was then disbursed only upon the advice of a 

board of advisors, and that board was made up of livestock 

producers. 

 

So it was the people on the front lines. The people on the front 

lines were involved in the industry, who know the industry, 

who know the reactions of the industry on a day by day basis. 

They were the ones, under the old system, they were the ones 

that would advise the Department of Agriculture as to the best 

expenditures of the funds in that revolving fund — the best 

expenditures that would affect a positive change, have a 

positive effect on the industry, cause the industry to be strong 

and hopefully prosperous. 

 

It would provide the funds in those days when the funds were 

needed perhaps to be able to bridge the industry for a period of 

time until the markets returned in a positive way. So that they 

were available and those decisions were made by a board that 

was made up of livestock producers. 

 

If this Bill goes through, Mr. Speaker, and these changes take 

place, we have no idea, we have no idea what mechanism is 

going to be available to assure that those decisions are still 

made in the best interests of the producers and it’s still made in 

the best interests of the industry. 

 

What we need here, Mr. Speaker, is some assurance from this 

government that we will have a system where we’ll have, the 

producers will have the ability to make the decisions as to those 

recommendations and the use of the funds, so that those 

recommendations would be made in the best interests, in the 

best interests of the producers. Because in the best interests of 

the producers is in the best interest of the industry. And when 

it’s in the best interests of the industry, it’s then in turn in the 

best interests of the economy of this province of which the 

livestock industry is a very key component, a very large 

component and a very key component. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, once again, the smallest of decisions can have 

a very big influence on the outcome. This is why I say, when 

you make changes to an Act — this is something I discovered 

in my brief time in government — was that changing an Act is 

not a simple thing. It’s not a simple thing. It’s easy to change, 

but not easy to change if you want to ensure that the changes 

are a positive change and not a negative change. Because the 

way our government system is, it’s all interlocked. It’s all 

interlocked. One depends on the other. One is held up by the 

other. It’s sort of the ties that bind, you might say. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when you make changes to an Act, you have 

to be very, very careful of what effects may happen as a result 

of those changes. It’s like a domino. It’s a domino effect. If you 

make a change and you knock one domino over, well you don’t 

know how far and how wide-ranging those effects may be. 

 

And will they will be unintended consequences, unintended 

consequences as a result of this changes? We hope not, Mr. 

Speaker. But what we want to ensure is that we have a 

mechanism here that the government has done its due diligence, 

that the government has looked into these things; the 

government has done its research to the best of its ability. 

[16:15] 

 

Now the government hasn’t got a crystal ball, and the members 

over there can’t see the future any better than anybody else. But 

government does have access to officials, officials who are very 

much experienced within the industry, very much versed in the 

industry and can certainly provide quality, quality advice and 

quality suggestions as to what the results of certain changes 

might be. 

 

And it would be, I think, beholden of government to use that 

advice, to call upon its officials. To use that advice, to make 

sure that when there is a change to the Act that those changes 

result in a positive effect to the industry and to the individuals 

within that industry. We certainly want to avoid any negative 

effect, any fallout simply because the government hasn’t done 

its homework or they didn’t listen to their officials. 

 

Particularly, Mr. Speaker, at this time, at this time in the 

livestock industry. Because this time in the livestock industry is 

very susceptible to damage. They’re operating on very thin 

margins. They’ve had a long period of downturn in cattle prices 

and livestock prices. They’re operating on very thin margins. 

Many producers have given up the battle, have packed it in, and 

have left the industry. We’ve seen a significant number of 

producers simply leave the industry. 

 

Last, well last fall and as most recently as the last few weeks 

ago, I’ve got reports of producers simply selling out their cow 

herd. I mean, it’s just kind of hard to believe that a producer 

would sell out his cow herd at a time when the cows are just a 

few weeks or perhaps months from giving birth and the calving 

process start. But it just got to a point that the producers said, 

I’m not going through this another year. And they put them on 

the market. 

 

And yes, Mr. Speaker, I understand some of those cattle went 

back into the cow herd and I’m glad to see that that happened. 

Because boy, you know, it’s a rare opportunity to be able to get 

in the industry or be able to expand your cow herd with animals 

that are good quality animals and are about to reproduce within 

a few weeks or a month or so. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s changes out there. And we want to 

ensure the fact that those changes that come about as a result of 

this Bill are positive changes to the industry, positive changes to 

the producers out there. They’re not negative. Because the 

industry is very tentative right now. It’s struggled for a long 

time through some very tough times, and we would not want to 

see some unintended consequences cause an even greater 

burden on that industry and the ability for that industry to 

continue to survive in this great province of ours. 

 

Because not only is the livestock industry important to rural 

Saskatchewan — and it is, it’s very important to rural 

Saskatchewan; it plays a big part in the rural economy — but 

it’s important to the economy of Saskatchewan as a whole. It’s 

important to the economy of Saskatchewan as a whole. It has a 

very big part to play in our economy right from the farm gate, 

right to the supermarket shelf, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there’s positive things, positive things as a result of a 

strong livestock industry in this province. And we want to 



4250 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

ensure that that strength of the livestock industry continues well 

into the future. In order to ensure that, Mr. Speaker, we need to 

know that the check-off funds that are being collected on a 

regular basis through the marketing system are being used, not 

only wisely, but they’re being used in a way that can best affect 

the livestock industry to ensure that that livestock industry will 

be able to weather the present economic climate it’s in, but be 

able to thrive and grow and become solid — a strong market 

and a strong industry — so that it can withstand the turmoils of 

the marketplace as it will in the future. There will be turmoil in 

the future. 

 

I mean we’re going through some bad times in the livestock 

industry today. I believe that sooner or later we’re going to 

come out of it. And I believe that we will once again return to 

the days of a very prosperous livestock industry and that we 

will have producers out there who will enjoy prosperity. And 

they should. As they should because it’s simply a return on their 

labour and a return on their investment that they certainly are 

entitled to. And when they enjoy prosperity, well, Mr. Speaker, 

the rest of the economy enjoys prosperity. And I believe that we 

will enjoy that period of time of prosperity in the livestock 

industry. 

 

And then after that we will once again go into a downturn in the 

industry and downturn in the revenues being generated within 

that industry. And we will once again return to thinner margins 

and a time of producers will have to be very efficient in their 

operations in order to be able to survive. That’s the nature of the 

business. As I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, in the past . . . That’s 

always been the nature of the business. 

 

But in the past it was the downturns were very . . . they maybe 

went very deep but they didn’t last very long. There were only 

one or two years of poorer prices and then we would come back 

out of that downturn. And after a year or two it’d be at the peak 

of the marketplace. And we would enjoy some great returns, 

and again for a year or two and then it would go the other way. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, what we’re seeing in today’s 

world, in our industry here today, we’re seeing that that 

downturn has lasted a lot longer than I think any producers ever 

thought it would. I think it’s probably lasted longer than any 

expert or anybody that was able to predict the future would 

have predicted that the downturn in the livestock industry 

would have lasted this long. I’m really, really challenged to 

suggest that anybody would have been able to look that far into 

the future and be able to suggest that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 97 is separating one organization out of a 

number of other organizations that pay licensing, registration, 

and inspection fees on an ongoing basis, Mr. Speaker. So you 

wonder why. Why would the government decide to select one 

organization over the other organization or one organization 

over many organizations in this province that represent the 

livestock producer? 

 

I simply ask that question, Mr. Speaker. There could be a 

legitimate reason for it. And I would hope the government 

would have a legitimate reason. And I would hope the 

government would come forward with that information and be 

able to satisfy my curiosity, but more importantly to satisfy the 

questions being asked by livestock producers across this great 

province of ours as to why, why the government has made that 

decision and why the government decided that they would pick 

winners and losers, why they would, without fully consulting 

those people in the industry. 

 

And I say that, Mr. Speaker, with a degree of authority because 

I believe, I believe that this government has failed to properly 

consult with the individuals involved in the industry. I say that 

simply because on my limited ability to do research at this point 

in time, simply haven’t had the time to do it to the degree that I 

would feel comfortable with, but from the limited research I 

have been able to do, I’ve discovered that some producers are in 

favour of the proposed changes in this Act, some producers. I 

also find probably an equal number of producers are not 

satisfied, are not satisfied with the proposed changes in this Act. 

But what really bothers me is the large, large number of 

producers that had no idea, that had no idea that these changes 

were contemplated. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, then raises the question as why is the 

government proposing these changes? Why is the government 

proposing these changes? Why is the government proposing 

these changes without first having done a reasonable job of 

consulting with the industry? A reasonable job of consulting 

with those producers out there and asking them for their input 

into making these changes, making the change to move the 

collection of the check-off fees from the responsibility of the 

Department of Agriculture to the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association. That’s basically what it is. That’s the major 

changes that’s taking place here, Mr. Speaker. And the question 

I have is, why is the government doing this? Who asked the 

government to do this? What was the consultation process they 

used with the industry, the producers who are paying this bill? 

Did they talk to them? If they did, who did they talk to and what 

was the response? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see no evidence. I see no evidence of that being 

put forward to provide simple answers, simple answers . . . 

question to simple questions. So we wonder, we wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, why is the government doing this? Why is the 

government doing this? Why is the government doing this? 

Who is it that has lobbied the government and asked them to 

make these changes? Who is it that lobbied the government to 

ask to make these changes, and what was their reasonings 

behind the changes? Why were they asking? What was the 

reasons that they wanted these changes to take place? 

 

And my question is: how did the government decide to take this 

one organization and give it the authority to collect the fees? 

Why is it that one organization? Why wasn’t it another 

organization? Why didn’t they say, well, no we’ll pick A 

instead of B or B instead of C. But why did they pick this one 

organization? What was the reason? They may be good reasons. 

They could very well be good reasons, and I would hope that 

the government would come forward with those reasons so that 

they could be able to justify the reasonings that they picked for 

the choosing the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association to be 

the collectors and the holders, and those would disperse the 

funds that are being collected through the check-off fees. Why 

them? Why that organization? Why not some other farm 

organization? Why not some other livestock organization? So, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s quite simple questions that I would think 

would be readily able to be answered if there’s a good reason 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4251 

for making these changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another question I suppose that comes to mind is 

what does, say for an example, the Saskatchewan Egg 

Producers and the Saskatchewan poultry producers, who pay 

fees and levies into the same revolving fund that the 

Saskatchewan agriculture is paying into, think of having the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association becoming a 

self-regulating. Has this consultation taken place? Has the 

government talked to these various other farm agency 

organizations in regards to their proposed changes under this 

Act? Have they talked to the Saskatchewan Egg Producers? 

Have they? I don’t know. There’s no indication in this Bill that 

they have. Certainly no indication in any information that’s 

been provided to us in regards to this Bill. Certainly was not 

mentioned in the minister’s speech, second reading speech. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, my question is the same for the 

Saskatchewan poultry producers. Were they consulted? Were 

they consulted? They pay fees also, and they pay levies also. 

So, Mr. Speaker, were they consulted as to have their input into 

the decision to make these changes as affected in the Bill? If 

they were, then my question is, how does this affect them? How 

do these changes affect their operations? How does this affect 

the operation of the Saskatchewan Egg Producers? Or does it? 

Maybe it doesn’t. Or how does it affect the operation and the 

programs of the Saskatchewan poultry producers? Maybe it 

doesn’t. But I don’t know that. That’s the question I ask, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I wish that the government would have been forthright 

enough to supply us with that information so that we would be 

able to, be able to make a decision unto whether or not to 

support this Bill, make a decision as whether or not this Bill is 

credible, whether or not this Bill is doing good work for the 

livestock producers of this great province and to the agriculture 

industry as a whole. These changes may be good. These 

changes may be good. There’s no evidence of it though, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I am suspect to when a change is coming about, being 

proposed by government, when it’s a change for the sake of 

change, then that scares me. It scares me because my experience 

in government is that when you change any part of a Bill, it has 

a domino effect. It has effect on other Bills. It has effect on 

other pieces of legislation. It has effect on other regulations. 

And you don’t want to have those effects to be negative effects 

on the industry, whether it be the livestock industry, the poultry 

industry, or the economy of this great province of ours. 

 

I would hope that government’s changes would be that to be a 

positive change. I would hope that the government would want 

to make those changes to have a positive effect on the livestock 

industry, have a positive effect on the agriculture industry of 

this great province of ours, to have a positive effect on the 

economy of Saskatchewan. That, Mr. Speaker, I would hope is 

the underlying thought process of this government. It’s just I 

don’t see it. I just don’t see it, Mr. Speaker. It may be there. I 

haven’t seen it. It’s certainly not indicated in the Bill. It’s 

certainly not indicated in the information the government has 

provided, certainly not indicated in the minister’s speech. 

 

There’s no indication, Mr. Speaker, that the due diligence has 

been done by this government to ensure that these changes are 

going to have positive changes on the industry, have a positive 

effect for the producers within that industry. There is no 

evidence at all, Mr. Speaker, that this government has done due 

diligence, that this government has done any degree of 

consultation. Certainly they haven’t listed who they have talked 

to and what the . . . provided us that information as to who 

they’ve talked to and what was the result of those discussions 

and what was the input, what was the suggestion by the various 

organizations. Mr. Speaker, it’s simply not there. 

 

[16:30] 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, then immediately raises the question why. 

Why? Why has this government not ensured, through its Bill 

and its proposed changes to this Bill, why it has not assured that 

these changes would be changes that would be positive changes 

to the industry and to ensure that the producers out there would 

benefit in a positive way and that their industry would be an 

industry that would grow stronger in time as a result of these 

changes. That hasn’t been. We haven’t received that assurance, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

That is why it’s so important to have control over those who are 

disbursing the funds that are being collected through the 

check-off funds, that are being collected each and every day, in 

this great province of ours, through our marketing agencies. 

And that is the $1 non-refundable national fee that’s being 

collected, as well as the $2 refundable provincial fee that’s also 

being collected at the marketplace on cattle that are being sold 

in this great province of ours. And that fund, that money goes 

into a fund that is designed to be supportive of the industry. 

 

And that fund in the past was a fund that was held in a 

revolving fund. It was held by the Department of Agriculture, 

would only be disbursed after the department received advice 

and direction from a board that was made up of producers who 

knew what the industry needed. That, Mr. Speaker, we have no 

suggestion and no evidence that that principle is going to 

continue under the new proposal of having the Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen’s Association collecting the funds and disbursing 

those funds. We have no assurance that those funds will be 

disbursed only after, only after the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association receives advice from a board that is made up of 

producers, livestock producers in this great province. We have 

no assurance of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have no assurance of how those funds will be used. We 

have no assurance, Mr. Speaker, that those funds will not be 

used for day-to-day operation of the Cattlemen’s Association. 

We have no assurance of that. We don’t know. Perhaps the 

money that’s being collected from the producers across this 

great province of ours that was initially intended to be funds 

that they’d use to support the industry, to broaden the industry, 

to strengthen the industry to be used by reinvesting into the 

industry . . . We have no assurance that, once the system 

changes and the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association collect 

these fees, that these fees will still be used in that same way. 

We’re assuming they would be and we hope they would be, but 

we have no assurance of that, Mr. Speaker. We have no 

assurance that those funds will be used in the same way, or 

perhaps some of those funds being used to support the 

day-to-day operation of that particular organization. We have 



4252 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

no assurance of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that is just one of the many gaps, I guess you would say, 

that we have identified in this Bill. This Bill is the sort of a Bill 

that says, trust me. You know? Give me your money, and I will 

spend it in your best interest. Trust me. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a problem suggesting that this 

government can be trusted with spending anybody’s money. It’s 

interesting that the people across this great province is now 

starting to realize the same, starting to realize that this 

government maybe can’t be trusted in spending their money. 

We’re seeing most recently a government decision to take $200, 

taxpayers’ dollars, per every man, woman, and child in this 

province, and plunk it back into the potash industry. So, Mr. 

Speaker, that causes a lot of people to wonder if they can trust 

this government in spending their tax dollars. 

 

So when this government says, well we’ll introduce a Bill to the 

producers, livestock producers here, that will cause the 

collection of their fees that they are already used to being 

collected and they have always in the past gone to good 

purposes, these fees now being collected and being given to an 

organization that really we have no assurance of how those fees 

are going to be disbursed and whether or not they’re really 

going to be disbursed in the best interest of the producer or best 

interest of the industry as a whole . . . We have no assurance 

from this government that that will happen. We have no 

assurance from this government that those fees won’t be simply 

used to cover the costs of operation of the agency on a 

day-by-day basis. 

 

So there’s a lot of questions, Mr. Speaker, that will come about 

as the deeper we look into this Bill and the deeper we dig into 

this Bill. I suppose another question that comes to mind is that 

what other producer organizations want to be self regulated as 

well? What other producer organizations that are existing in this 

province today and have operated perhaps quite well under the 

old system are going to say, well if you’re going to allow the 

Cattlemen’s Association to cut these fees and sort of become a 

self-regulated organization, then perhaps our organization 

would want to move in that direction. 

 

And is the government prepared to approach the other farm 

organizations and work with them to facilitate that particular 

purpose? After all, that’s what the government seems to have 

done with the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association in regards 

to the collection of the fees in this system that they are now 

proposing here, Mr. Speaker. So you can’t help but wonder 

about all the questions that are being raised from this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And again I go back to the principle of government. The 

principle of government is to (a) make changes to have the best 

effect for the people of this province, to make changes to 

strengthen industries, to make changes to strengthen 

organizations, to make changes to strengthen the economy so 

that individuals can enjoy a reasonable prosperity in this great 

province of ours. And that should be the role of government. 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that is the desire by any 

government of any political stripe. And I think that’s what any 

government would desire. 

 

The question here, Mr. Speaker, is how do you go about 

achieving that? Which road do you use to achieve that? I think 

the goals are pretty well all the same. It’s the matter of what 

road do you use to achieve those ends. What method do you use 

to provide that opportunity of prosperity. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we had in the past, in this particular case, a 

past system that was proven, a system that worked quite well. It 

was proven that the Department of Agriculture, through its 

officials and through its inspectors across this great province of 

ours, would be able to collect a check-off fee from livestock 

producers who sold their livestock within our marketing system. 

That fee of course was a $1 national fee, an non-refundable 

national fee, and a $2 refundable provincial fee. 

 

And that money was held in a revolving fund in the Department 

of Agriculture. And that money was held there to be used to 

strengthen the industry, to be reinvested in the industry, to be 

reinvested in a way that would strengthen the industry. And that 

was the guiding principle of the board that would make the 

advice as to the dispensing of those funds. 

 

That board, Mr. Speaker, was made up of livestock producers 

from all corners of this province. And that board was made up 

of livestock producers from all corners of this province and it 

was the livestock industry as we know it in Saskatchewan. And 

they would make advice . . . and they would give their advice, I 

should say, in to the Department of Agriculture in a method that 

would ensure that the distribution of the funds from that fund 

would result in nothing but a positive effect on the industry. 

 

There was times when the industry needed help. There was 

times when the industry needed bridging. There was times 

when the industry would need a lobby, and those funds were 

available there to meet those needs. And those individuals 

sitting on that board would make those decisions, and they 

would make those decisions so that the industry would be able 

to survive the tough times, would be able to prosper in the good 

times, but would be able to strengthen itself to be a strong 

industry and be a key part of our economy. 

 

But it would be an industry that would be able to attract new 

people to it because you can’t have an industry that doesn’t 

have the ability to rebuild itself. And that rebuilding has to go 

on on an ongoing basis. In order to do that, you have to have 

young people coming on stream each and every year as 

producers move along. As producers retire, some simply sell 

out their operations. Others pass it on to their younger 

generations. That attracts young people into the industry, and 

that’s what keeps the industry young and strong. It keeps young 

people coming in, a good mixture on an ongoing basis at any 

time. 

 

If you took a cross-section of the industry, you’d see on the 

outside you have a lot of youth that are full of enthusiasm and 

vigour and determination for the future. You see in the centre a 

very mature group of individuals who have had a lot of 

experience in the industry. And they have experienced the good 

times; they’ve experienced the bad times. They’ve come 

through them both, and they are much better off for it. 

 

Then you have the seniors who’ve been there a long time. 

They’re looking at getting out of the industry. They’re retiring. 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4253 

Not necessarily dispersing of the herd because they’re passing it 

on to other generations to take over the farming operation and 

the livestock operation. So, Mr. Speaker, and in some cases, 

yes; in some cases, Mr. Speaker, it is a dispersal. They simply 

don’t have family to pass it on to, or the family perhaps isn’t 

interested in pursuing the livestock industry. So it is a dispersal. 

 

And usually what you would find in any given normal 

circumstances when a herd, a breeding herd is dispersed, it 

would of course, it would be the cull cows, the old ones that, 

you know, have survived or have gone through their productive 

years and are certainly getting up to the point where they’re no 

longer as productive as they were. So they’d likely go on to 

slaughter. 

 

But the young, solid breeding stock would usually be going 

back into the cow herd, and back into the cow herd of the 

province to continue to maintain a strong and growing cow 

herd. That, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t seen. We haven’t seen that 

in the last couple of years. And we’re seeing producers, rather 

than getting into the industry, we’re seeing producers moving 

out of the industry. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is very, very important, very important that 

we ensure that we have a mechanism here in place that we will 

make the right decisions to ensure that our industry, our 

livestock industry will continue to survive. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a saying that when things are going 

good, you can afford to make a mistake; when things are going 

real good, you can afford to make a bad mistake. Mr. Speaker, 

today in our producer and our agriculture economy and in our 

livestock industry, things are not as good as they once were. 

 

We’re seeing our livestock industry here that is under stress and 

has been under stress for some time. And therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, we don’t dare make a bad decision. We don’t dare 

make the wrong decision because our livestock industry is very 

sensitive right now and it is tentative. And a wrong decision 

could be disastrous for the economy, for the industry. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we want to do is ensure that the 

government — in its process, in its decision to make changes 

according to Bill 97, to make these changes — we want to 

ensure that the government has made the right decision, and not 

the decision that is going to hurt the industry. Presently the 

industry is sensitive to changes. It is sensitive. It is tentative 

because of a long period of time that they’ve gone through 

some tough economic situations. The prices simply haven’t 

been there. 

 

As a result of that, we’re seeing, we’re seeing producers leaving 

the industry. We’re seeing, in some cases, Mr. Speaker, 

producers are getting out of the industry simply because it’s 

time for them to retire. And they don’t have anybody to pass on 

their operation to, or those who are taking over their operation 

certainly aren’t interested in continuing in the livestock 

industry. 

 

And though they’re making that decision to disperse their cow 

herd, and to do so, in some cases, this winter. And when that 

happens, Mr. Speaker, we see that most of those cows are going 

to slaughter. Most recently some have simply gone back into 

the cow herd because they’re close to reproducing, and that’s 

certainly opportunity there to our producer, who is the business, 

to be able to take off a few extra head and maybe make an extra 

dollar or two this fall. And that’s good and we’re pleased to see 

that. And we hope that more cows would go into the cow herd, 

and we would see a stop to the declining cow herd that we have 

in this great province, although unfortunately that hasn’t been 

our experience over the last two or three years. 

 

It’s been simply a steady downturn or decline of the cow herd 

population in Saskatchewan. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why it is 

so important, so important that these changes, Mr. Speaker, 

don’t have a negative effect on that industry. It’s why it’s so 

important that the funds that are being collected here through 

the check-offs — the $1 that’s being collected as a result of the 

federal check-off and the $2 that’s being collected as a result of 

the provincial levy — that, although refundable, I don’t think 

too many producers have ever really applied to have it 

refunded. 

 

[16:45] 

 

It’s so important that these funds, Mr. Speaker, are used in the 

best interests, in the best way possible to support the industry, 

to support the industry. The time when the industry has gone 

through a long period of tough times, it’s very sensitive, very 

fragile. And what we need to do is be assured that we have the 

ability to support that industry so that it continues to survive 

this downturn in the economy, like stock prices, so it survives it 

in a way that will allow those producers to continue to exist and 

allow the industry to continue to exist and to come out of this 

downturn in the agricultural prices and livestock prices, come 

out of this. And I believe it will. I believe it will come out of it, 

and I think, I’m hoping that we’re closer to coming out than 

we’ve ever been. 

 

But when it does come out, that we want to ensure the decisions 

that are being made today are the decisions that will best 

support that industry to ensure that that industry comes out of it 

stronger, comes out of it stronger than it was when it went into 

it. 

 

We want to ensure that there’s opportunity there, for young 

people who would like to get involved in the industry, the 

opportunity for them to get involved in the industry. But an 

opportunity for them to even see a profit, a way of making a 

profit in the industry — not just a living, not just being able to 

survive in the industry and to do a lot of work and a lot of 

investment simply to survive. We want to see the ability for 

individuals to be able to get involved in the industry and be able 

to enjoy their time in the industry because they are making a 

profit. They’re making a reasonable living. 

 

I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, if you’ve already talked to a 

cattleman anywhere in this province, or a cattleman anyplace, 

that they will suggest for one moment that many of their friends 

or their colleagues in the industry have ever become 

millionaires because I don’t think that’s the case. But I do think 

that it’s fair and reasonable to expect that if you’re in that 

industry that you should be able to make a reasonable living, 

make a reasonable living. 

 

And you do so because it is not handed to you. It is not 



4254 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

something that you just do by pushing a button. It takes a lot of 

hard work, a lot of commitment, a lot of wise decision and good 

management decisions to be able to ensure that your operation 

is that of a strong operation that produces a profit. 

 

Profit is required. You have to make a profit because that 

money has to be reinvested in the industry. It’s no different than 

anything else. It’s no different than running a hardware store or 

running a grocery store or gas station. You have to make a 

profit. You have to make a profit to pay the bills. You have to 

be able to make a profit to be able to pay your own wages. You 

have to be able to make a profit in order to reinvest it into the 

operation to keep it up. And there’s nothing wrong with making 

a profit, Mr. Speaker, okay? 

 

Like I said, I don’t think that there’s too many producers out 

there that complain at all about the check-off fees. I have yet to 

hear a producer complain about the check-off fees, to complain 

about the dollar that’s being taken off on the national levy or 

the $2 that’s refundable under the provincial levy. They don’t 

complain about it. 

 

But they do want to know though, they do want to know that 

their money — because that’s what it is; it is their money — 

they want to know that their money is going to be spent wisely. 

They want to know that their money is going to be spent in a 

way that is going to support their industry. They want to know 

that their money is going to be spent in a way that’s going to 

strengthen their industry. They want to know that their money is 

going to be spent in a way that’s going to cause the industry to 

survive and to be a strong and a prosperous industry for them 

and for the future’s generations who, they hope, will be 

attracted to the industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that that’s too much to ask. I don’t 

think that that’s too much to ask at all. I think, Mr. Speaker, 

though that it’s fair to say that the experience of the former 

mechanism of handling the check-off fees was a positive 

experience. It was an experience where the Department of 

Agriculture collected the fees. The Department of Agriculture 

held it in a revolving fund. And that money was disbursed from 

this fund only after, only after the Department of Agriculture 

received advice from their advisory board that was made up of 

livestock producers. 

 

Livestock producers from all corners of this province sat on that 

board. They would discuss the issues of the day. They would 

discuss the issues facing the industry. They would have access 

to information. They would have access to advice, to market 

trends, advice to economic changes in other countries that were 

major importing countries that imported our product. And then 

they would make decisions as to what would be the best 

expenditure of these funds that would support our industry; how 

could these funds best be used to support the livestock industry 

here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Once they reached that decision, they would take that advice 

and they would pass it on to the Department of Agriculture. 

And they’d say, this is what we recommend. This is how the 

money is to be spent. This is how the money is to be disbursed. 

The Department of Agriculture will simply follow their 

recommendations, will simply take the advice of the people 

who know the industry, the advice of the people who know the 

province. 

 

And they would use that advice to disburse the funds that would 

then be, would then have a positive effect on the industry, 

would be used in a way that would support the industry, be used 

in a way that would cause the industry to, in tough times to 

survive, but in more prosperous times to grow, to become 

larger, to become stronger, to become more efficient and more 

effective and to be attractive to the younger producers and 

therefore have younger producers joining the industry. 

 

And when younger producers join the industry, you have 

renewed enthusiasm, you have renewed strength, you have 

renewed vision. You have hope and hope springs eternal. And, 

Mr. Speaker, you have a strong industry because you have a 

good mixture. You have a good mixture of people involved in 

the industry. Young, enthusiastic, vibrant, vigorous. 

 

You have more mature people who have been around a while, 

have some experience in the industry, still have the desire, still 

have the strength and the willingness to see that the industry is 

an industry of growth. And they have the experience of the past. 

They know the mistakes they’ve made and they’re prepared to 

share that with others in the industry so that often we don’t have 

to repeat the same mistake over and over again. 

 

And then you have those who have been in the industry a long 

time, who are looking at retirement and are looking at being 

able to pass on their operation that they’ve spent a lifetime, 

they’ve spent a lifetime of commitment to building that 

operation. They’ve put their heart, their soul into it. It’s been a 

labour of love. And they now see a nice operation that’s very 

efficient and very effective and been able to adapt to the 

changing times, and they’re seeing the ability now in many 

cases, looking at the ability to pass this on to future generations 

in their family who are taking over and who are going to be a 

part of that operation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s a reward in that in itself. It 

may not be a financial reward, but certainly a reward to be able 

to spend a lifetime working in an industry, building up an 

operation — an operation that is quite efficient and quite 

effective and very smooth and a very, very well run operation 

— and have the ability to pass that on to your son or your 

daughter or some other relative within the family who has 

certainly showed the interest and the desire to keep it up and to 

move forward with it. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, there’s a reward in that in itself. And in 

some cases you’ll find that, you know, the producer has now 

reached the age of retirement, and he’s looking at the ability to 

retire and perhaps retire in some degree of comfort, and doesn’t 

have the ability to pass it on because there’s no one in his 

family who is interested in continuing on in the livestock 

industry. And that’s the case. Not always do we have an 

automatic passing on from generation to generation. It’s no 

different in the livestock industry than in any other thing. Our 

sons and daughters all develop their own interests and their own 

ideas and their own desires, and they go off on their own way 

— most of them quite successfully, I might add. 

 

So you see, the producer then simply puts his livestock herd up 

for dispersal. Usually what will be done is that the producer 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4255 

himself will cull the herd, will take out those older animals who 

are past reproductive cycle, will take out those who are perhaps 

experiencing some health problems or may not be as strong as 

they should be, and disperse them as cull animals, and save the 

bulk of the breeding stock that are good quality animals that 

have the ability to produce and produce for a number of years to 

come. And these will be put into the system, whether it be 

usually purchased by locals through the auction ring and put 

back into their own cow herd, expanding the cow herd or 

perhaps replacing culls of their own. 

 

But it’s gratifying to see that those animals go back into the 

productive cycle and not gone off to market someplace because, 

having been involved in that industry for some time it’s a little 

hurtful to see good, solid, young cows that have years of 

production ahead of them and can bring you a good quality 

animal, and that quality animal could then be sold into the 

marketplace and the fees could be collected from that animal to 

go to support the industry. Those fees of course being the fees 

that would be collected by the federal check-off fee, a levy of 

$1 or the levy of $2 being collected by the province that is now 

going to be, as a result of this Bill, will be collected by the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association. 

 

And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the government has 

decided to go in this direction. I really wonder, what was the 

motivating factor behind that government’s decision? I wonder 

what was the . . . who was the organization that approached the 

government and asked for these changes? Or was it an 

organization or was it individuals or was it a group of 

individuals or was it a group of organizations that wanted these 

changes? 

 

I’m not saying these changes won’t in the long run be good. 

They could very well be good for the industry. I don’t know. 

And I don’t see any evidence either in the Bill or in the copy of 

the minister’s speech here in the House that would indicate that 

the government has been lobbied by any particular group or 

individuals that would cause such changes to take place. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is I think beholden upon government to be 

able to answer some of those questions, some of the very simple 

questions that we’ve put forward and those questions simply 

being, you know, why is the government making these 

changes? Who asked for these changes? What was the purpose 

of these changes? And, Mr. Speaker, who was the driving force 

behind making these changes? And what research did the 

government do to ensure that these changes are positive 

changes and are positive on behalf of the industry? And I’m 

sure many of my colleagues across the way would like to ask 

their minister that very same question too, is who was it that 

wanted these changes? What was the motivating factor behind 

the government’s decision to bring these changes through on 

this particular Bill? 

 

Because as you note by the title of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, it has a 

wide-ranging effect. I mean it affects a lot of Acts. It affects The 

Agri-Food Act of 2004 and the repeal Act of 1998 and the 

marketing deductions regulations of 2004. So it affects a wide 

range of Acts. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there’s certainly many, many more questions 

that I would have of the government on this particular Bill, and 

I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s safe to say that the government has 

been reluctant to come forward with a lot of the answers that I 

would have hoped the government would have used to support 

their argument for these changes. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think that many of my colleagues might 

also have questions that they would like me to ask and I think 

that we will need to certainly ask those questions in order to 

ensure that the government has done its due diligence. And I 

don’t believe that this government has done its due diligence. I 

don’t believe this government has done a reasonable job of 

consulting with the industry or the stakeholders within the 

industry. And we would like to have some assurance, Mr. 

Speaker, that this government has done its due diligence, that it 

has talked to the producers out there, and that there are good 

reasons behind their wanting to make the necessary changes 

here as outlined in Bill 97. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of those questions that the 

government has failed to provide answers for, whether that be 

in the Bill itself . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. It now being 5 p.m., this Assembly 

will stand recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4223 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4223 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4223 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4223 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4223 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4223 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4224 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4224 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4224 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4224 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4225 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4225 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4225 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4225 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4225 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4225 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4243 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4244 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4225 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4226 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4226 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4226 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4226 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4226 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4226 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4227 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4227 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4227 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4227 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4227 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4227 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4228 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Saskatchewan Paralympian Wins Silver 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4228 

 Agricultural Safety Week 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4228 

 100th Anniversary of International Women’s Day 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4228 

 Good Economic News 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4229 

 United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4229 

 Issues Facing Livestock Producers 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4229 

 Last Year’s Budget 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4230 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Chiropractic Services 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4230 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4230 

 Funding for Health Care Facilities  

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4231 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4231 

 Support for Northerners 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4232 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4232 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4232 

  



 

 Forthcoming Budget 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4233 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4233 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan Expansion 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4235 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4235 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4235 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 97 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4235 

  D’Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 4236 

  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 4236 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


