




















































Hansard: November 16, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 11A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6053 

 November 16, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

Clerk: — I wish to inform the Assembly that Mr. Speaker will 

not be present to open today’s sitting. 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister for advanced 

labour and immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 

a couple of introductions. To you and through you to all 

members of the honourable Assembly, I’d like to introduce to 

you, to begin with, the grade 7 classes from Greystone Heights 

in Saskatoon. Their teachers are Michelle Pantel, Deanna Fast, 

and Jamie LeMay. They’ve also been accompanied by 

chaperones Michael Diakuw, Ruth, McKeown, Ray Sperling, 

and Wes Walker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students embody the great spirit of 

Saskatchewan, and already they’re on their way as far as taking 

up leadership positions right across their community. And 

we’re delighted to have them join us in their Assembly, and I’ll 

have the opportunity to meet with them just after we’re through 

in the Chamber today. 

 

I’d also like to, if I could, Mr. Speaker, introduce some 

individuals that are here with us celebrating International 

Education Week, celebrated in more than 80 countries around 

the world. I’d like to introduce Veronika Mueller, Robert 

Helmich, Philipp Galewski, Javier Sanchez, Victor Guredam 

who is at once both a poet and an engineer as he demonstrated 

today over lunch. We also have Dupindra Rai and Satoshi 

Shibata. A representation of a few of those thousand students, 

almost 4,000 this year, studying from around the world here on 

our campuses in Saskatchewan. 

 

I’d also like to add to that representatives that will be familiar 

to many if not all in the Assembly: President Kyle Addison, 

president of the University of Regina Students’ Union; Chris 

Stoicheff, the president of the University of Saskatchewan’s 

Students’ Union; as well as Tyler Willox, the vice-president for 

student affairs at the University of Regina; and a number of 

others that have joined us from both institutions. 

 

We appreciate those that are studying in Saskatchewan and 

those that are supportive and engaged in international 

education. We know that the goal here is to ensure that they 

enjoy and profit from their studies. But we also want them to 

consider not just studying in Saskatchewan but staying and 

succeeding in the new Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I will ask all 

members of the Assembly to join me in welcoming both groups 

to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming these guests to the Assembly. To 

Tyler, Chris, and Kyle, thank you for the work that you do on 

your respective campuses in representing students’ concerns in 

your own area and then of course in the broader Saskatchewan 

scene. To the international students who are guests here today, 

thank you for all that you do here in Saskatchewan while you 

are studying, and thank you for how you enrich our campuses 

here in our province. So I’d ask all members to once again 

welcome these guests to the Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In the gallery 

today we have representatives from Wawota save our beds 

committee as well as representatives from rural administrations 

and communities around Wawota. I would like to welcome 

them to the legislature today. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to introduce to you and through you to all members 

of the House, seated in the west gallery, a constituent from the 

city of Weyburn. George Kalman is with us today. Mr. Speaker, 

George is a retired RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 

officer and a former city councillor from the city of Weyburn. 

And so I would like all members to welcome George to his 

Assembly. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to take a moment to also introduce two very special guests that 

travelled a long way, so please bear with me. I’ll quickly 

introduce them. 

 

In your gallery is Senator Pat Campbell, and with Senator Pat 

Campbell is Ray Campbell, and they’re from the English River 

First Nations which is known as Patuanak. And they come 

today as Johnny Cash and Waylon Jennings. That’s how they 

want to be introduced here in the Assembly, but I want to 

welcome them here today. 

 

It’s always very special to have visitors that come a long ways, 

and they’re here as part of a justice symposium, and also to give 

the Minister of Highways some grief over their road. 

 

But I want to say that two people spoke Cree in this Assembly 

before me, one being Keith Goulet and the other being 

Lawrence Yew. But I think I was the first MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] to speak Dene. So I want to try my Dene 

with them, saying . . . 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Dene.] 

 

So please welcome our great guests from English River, known 

as Patuanak. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



6054 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2010 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to introduce to you, through you, and to all members of the 

Legislative Assembly someone that’s seated in the Speaker’s 

gallery. She’s with the international students. It’s someone I 

have known for many, many years. Her name is Melissa 

Berwald, and perhaps you could stand and give a small wave. 

Thank you, Melissa. 

 

Melissa is a proud graduate of the Regina German Language 

School in Regina, of which obviously I am very proud of as 

well, and currently has her young son enrolled in the brand new 

preschool class which is seeing its initiative year in the German 

Language School. So I want to welcome her to the legislature, 

thank her for putting her faith once again in the German 

Language School in Regina, and ask all my colleagues to 

welcome her here today as well. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m here to present 

a petition protecting renters from unreasonable increases in 

rent. Mr. Speaker, the prayer goes that: 

 

To cause the government to consider enacting some form 

of rent control with the view to protect Saskatchewan 

renters from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed the petitions are 

all from throughout the Saskatchewan cities, towns, and 

villages. And I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan, 

concerned over the deterioration of our highway system as well 

as the safety factor. And I’ll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and 

the junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety 

for Saskatchewan’s motoring public. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from Fort 

Qu’Appelle, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today to 

present yet another petition on behalf of the citizens of Wawota 

and surrounding areas, and: 

 

The undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that the Deer View Lodge long-term care 

facility provides a valuable and vital service to the 

community of Wawota and surrounding area by ensuring 

the physical health and emotional well-being of the senior 

citizens of Wawota and surrounding area; and that the 

Wall government’s closure of three long-term care beds 

and two respite beds at the Deer View Lodge is negatively 

affecting the entire region by putting unnecessary 

emotional and physical stress on long-term residents, their 

family, and loved ones, by forcing them to be separated; 

that the closure of these beds will increase the already 

long-standing wait-lists for placement in the Deer View 

Lodge; that to build new spaces in other communities in 

the region is far more costly than to use the already 

available spaces in Wawota. 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: to cause the government to immediately 

and without delay recognize the harmful emotional and 

physical stress the closure of these five beds at the Deer 

View Lodge is causing to the people of Wawota and 

surrounding area, and to immediately understand the 

importance of properly caring for the senior citizens of 

Wawota and surrounding area; and in doing so, to cause 

the government to commit to reopening the three 

long-term care beds and two respite beds at the Wawota 

Deer View Lodge. 

 

These over 1,000 signatures are from the communities of 

Wawota, Kipling, Kennedy, Maryfield, Langbank, Kenosee, 

Kenosee Lake, Carlyle, Manor, Invermay, Markinch, Arcola, 

Stoughton, Redvers, Whitewood, Fairlight, Rocanville, 

Wapella, Fleming, Welwyn, Kelso, Moosomin, Glenavon, 

Regina, Humboldt, Windthorst, Muenster, Esterhazy, Fort 

Qu’Appelle. I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty 

here in Saskatchewan. And we know that citizens living in 

poverty have identified affordable solutions that can work. 

Recent national and provincial initiatives, including the 

Saskatoon health disparities report and the Canada Without 

Poverty, Dignity for All campaign, all call for a comprehensive 

poverty elimination strategy that includes income, food, and 

housing security. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people signing this petition come 

from Hepburn, Saskatoon, Regina, and Meadow Lake. I do so 

present. 



November 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6055 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of expansion of the graduate 

retention program, Mr. Speaker, a program that currently 

excludes master’s and Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] graduates. 

The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are 

from the city of Regina. I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present yet another petition from the good residents of Furdale. 

The government ministry has directed SaskWater to cut off 

supplies of water for domestic use to Furdale customers. This 

same government ministry has directed that customers may no 

longer treat non-potable water using methods approved by Sask 

Health. Now the Furdale residents, in dealing in good faith with 

SaskWater for over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their 

domestic systems and in-home treatment equipment as well as 

for livestock and irrigation lines. 

 

The alternative water supply referred to by the government 

ministry is a private operator offering treated, non-pressurized 

water at great cost, with no guarantee of quality, quantity, or 

availability of water, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Saskatoon and Corman Park. I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today and 

present a petition in support of occupational health and safety. 

Mr. Speaker, the government allows fines levied against 

companies for violations of The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act to be treated as tax deductible expenses. This allows 

companies to treat such violations and the fines levied for them 

as the regular cost of doing business. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to amend the law so companies will not be 

allowed to get a tax deduction for fines levied against 

them under The Occupational Health and Safety Act and 

regulations, and to remove the existing cap on fines levied 

against such companies. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by residents of Davidson, 

Sovereign, and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned 

residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the 

unprecedented mismanagement of our finances by the Sask 

Party. They allude to the two consecutive deficit budgets and 

the billions of dollars of debt growth projected under this 

government. And what’s of huge concern is that Saskatchewan 

people are being asked to pay the price for this government’s 

mismanagement. I might reference a community like Wawota 

who now has five beds that have been cut as a result of this 

government’s mismanagement, Mr. Speaker, all at a time of 

record highs in revenues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by good folks and concerned citizens 

from Assiniboia, Moose Jaw, Macdowall, and Regina. I so 

submit. 

 

[13:45] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Louis Riel Day 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 

opposition, I am proud and honoured . . . Louis Riel Day and 

the life of Louis Riel. Especially in 2010, Year of the Métis, 

Saskatchewan citizens and all Canadians should celebrate the 

courage of Louis Riel and the Métis people. 

 



6056 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2010 

In both Manitoba in the 1870s and in Saskatchewan in the 

mid-1880s, he demanded that Western concerns be addressed. 

Mr. Speaker, we see today that little has changed over the 

years. Mr. Speaker, Riel was one man who took up the cause of 

the Métis people. He fought and died for his beliefs. My 

colleagues and I here in the Chamber can learn a great deal 

from his examples of dedication, self-sacrifice to one’s people. 

Our constituents rely on us to advocate for them in this 

Chamber, just as Riel’s people relied on him to fight for the 

Métis homeland years ago. 

 

Although we celebrate his life today, we must also realize that 

125 years ago he was executed for asking questions of 

authority, for standing up for his people. Mr. Speaker, we must 

do the same today. We demand a level playing field for the 

Métis people of Saskatchewan and Canada. This still endures us 

more than 100 years after Riel’s death. We must learn from our 

ancestors. We should celebrate and learn from the life and times 

of Louis Riel and his people. If we learn these lessons, we may 

also reveal much about ourselves. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

International Education Week 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 

to rise today as we join with 85 countries around the globe in 

celebrating the 11th annual International Education Week. 

 

In Canada, Building a Society for the 21st Century is this year’s 

theme. In Saskatchewan we are taking action to internationalize 

our campuses, export Saskatchewan’s educational expertise, 

and increase the mobility of our students. We have established 

the International Education Council to build international 

education opportunities in Saskatchewan. The council works on 

developing strategies to identify more study-abroad 

opportunities for Saskatchewan’s students and improve 

international student recruitment in efforts to make 

Saskatchewan campuses more diverse. 

 

Just this morning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of 

Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration announced 

changes to its Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program that 

will help international graduate students trained in 

Saskatchewan stay and succeed in the province. 

 

In addition, the program student category will allow master’s 

and Ph.D. graduates who studied in Saskatchewan greater 

opportunity to successfully apply for permanent residence to 

stay in our province. This is an excellent opportunity for 

Saskatchewan to retain more of the bright minds that we have 

helped foster at our own institutions, who are now ready to 

contribute to Saskatchewan’s vibrant economy and move our 

province forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Louis Riel Day 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When I think of 

Riel and the fact that we’re celebrating Louis Riel Day, I feel 

great pride in my heart. I am proud, Mr. Speaker, because we 

are recognizing a person who fought for his people and many 

others. 

 

Times were much different back then. Frontier days for many 

on the Prairies involved invasion and colonization of Métis, 

First Nations, and others. Rules and laws were written by 

people wearing suits and ties living many, many miles away. 

These same people tried to rule and run affairs in our Western 

land. 

 

Louis Riel and others stood up and resisted in Manitoba. He led 

a provisional government, was convicted a criminal, and then 

won election to the Canadian House of Commons twice — 

sworn in, but never seated. 

 

He went into exile, was persuaded to return to Canada and 

Batoche to lead the community. The eastern march continued 

into the West as surveyors would change land holdings. Métis 

and First Nations were ignored and oppressed. A major army 

was sent from the East, and the people fought back nobly. But 

in the end, modern weapons of the day and numbers won out. 

The resistance was lost. Louis was captured, tried, found guilty, 

and hung a few short miles from here, Mr. Speaker. And many 

times, many central Canadians cheered. 

 

Louis Riel has not been forgotten, and it’s the duty of all 

Canadians to continue to share his story of rebellion on behalf 

of those he fought for. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw North. 

 

Habitat for Humanity in Moose Jaw 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I recently had the 

pleasure of participating in the official sod-turning ceremony 

for the first Habitat for Humanity home in Moose Jaw. Habitat 

for Humanity is a successful program to give a helping hand to 

individuals in need of housing. The program provides an 

opportunity for people to own their own home where they can 

work, build dreams, and raise their families in our friendly 

community. 

 

This is a tremendous partnership that will not only put 

affordable home ownership within the reach of a Moose Jaw 

family in need, but will also help to revitalize the 

neighbourhood. 

 

Habitat For Humanity is one of the best examples of 

communities coming together to provide home ownership 

opportunities for deserving families. 

 

Lee and Taryn Guse were selected as the new recipients of this 

first home. Over the course of the next six months, they will be 

part of the construction process, dedicating their time and 

donating their labour under the careful watch of site supervisor 

Fern Paulhus. Congratulations to Lee and Taryn Guse. Their 

children, Carson, Hunter, and Giles will hope to be settled in 

their new home sometime in May or June of next year. And 

thank you to the Habitat For Humanity for beginning of the 

construction of the very first home in Moose Jaw. Thank You. 

 



November 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6057 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Concern for Assyrian Christians 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This past 

Saturday over 150 people marched to the Saskatoon city hall in 

memory of 58 killed in a Baghdad church this past October 

31st. They demanded action be taken to protect Assyrian 

Christians who have faced horrible atrocities since the 

beginning of the Iraqi war. 

 

The people marching were of Assyrian Christian descent and 

are deeply concerned for their loved ones left in Iraq who are 

now being terrorized for religious reasons. Sixty-six churches 

have been bombed, and tens of thousands have died. In one 

night alone, 500 businesses were torched. And women 

especially are being targeted in these acts of genocide. 

 

Today there are now over 1,000 Assyrian Christians who call 

Saskatoon home, and they’re asking for our help and support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Assyrian Christians are the original indigenous 

peoples of Iraq, having ties to northern Iraq that go back to 

5000 BC. They make up about 8 per cent of the Iraqi population 

— some 1.5 million people — but since the war began, about 

50 per cent have found it necessary to flee the country. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Martin Luther King warned us that, and I 

quote: 

 

We will have to repent in this generation not merely for 

the hateful words and actions of the bad people but for the 

appalling silence of the good people. 

 

Indeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is time we stand and speak with 

our new neighbours as they urge our leaders at home here and 

in our province and in our country’s capital to heed their call 

for action for peace in their homeland, Iraq. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Yorkton. 

 

Aviation and Aerospace Week 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As a 

member of the aviation community, it brings me great pleasure 

to announce that this week has been named Aviation and 

Aerospace Week in Saskatchewan. This week marks an 

opportunity to reflect upon the significant contributions of the 

aviation and aerospace industry in our province. 

 

From the community regional airports to larger urban centres, 

the aviation sector helps to link businesses and tourism quickly 

with provincial, national, and international markets and clients. 

Airports also have a role in sustaining our quality of life, such 

as supporting policing, firefighting, and air ambulance services. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to recognize the 

Saskatchewan Aviation Council, who since 1989 have been 

improving aviation in Saskatchewan. What began as a small 

group of pilots has grown to include members from all facets of 

aviation and today is the province’s single most influential 

voice of aviation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I did not mention the 

Saskatchewan Aerial Applicators Association. In conjunction 

with Agriculture Saskatchewan, they operate an aerial 

applicator training program that ensures present and future 

applicators are well qualified. The SAAA [Saskatchewan Aerial 

Applicators Association] brings aerial application to a new 

level of professionalism, efficiency and effectiveness, 

stewardship, safety, and recognition. 

 

The Canadian Business Aircraft Association also plays a role in 

our province by acting as a common voice for business aviation 

and by representing and promoting Canadian business aviation 

interests as well as advocating safety, security, and efficiency 

around the world. 

 

I would like members of this Assembly to join me in 

recognizing the hard work done by our aviation section. Thank 

you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Allen Sapp Gallery Curator Retires 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Dean Bauche 

has retired as the city of North Battleford’s director of galleries 

and as the curator of the now world-renowned Allen Sapp 

Gallery. 

 

Mr. Bauche has been with the Sapp Gallery for 22 years. He 

was there at the very beginning of this very unique gallery, the 

only public gallery named after a living artist in Canada. In his 

own words, Bauche says: 

 

Our motive isn’t to sell art. Our motive is to actually take 

the profound insights, the extraordinary vision that this 

man, Allen Sapp, brings and the cultural history that he 

depicts through his work and share it with all Canadians. 

 

And Dean Bauche has certainly been successful, most notably 

with the exhibition Though the Eyes of the Cree, which has 

travelled across Canada, including a showing at the Canadian 

Museum of Civilization in Ottawa.  

 

Originally from Australia, Bauche came to The Battlefords in 

the 1970s to follow his wife who was completing a psychiatric 

nurse training program at the Saskatchewan Hospital. He got to 

know Allan Sapp and Dr. Allan Gonor, and through that 

relationship and his own art, Bauche won a competition to take 

on the director of galleries position. He tackled the job with the 

determination that built cultural bridges and took the little 

prairie gallery to the world. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I call on all members of the Legislative 

Assembly to help me recognize the outstanding contribution 

made over the years by The Battlefords’ own Mr. Dean Bauche. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 



6058 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2010 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Support for Low-Income People 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier is failing 

Saskatchewan families. This morning Food Banks Canada 

announced the number of people using food banks in 

Saskatchewan has increased by 20 per cent in the last year — 

the second worst rate of any province in Canada, nearly 23,000 

people. Most Saskatchewan food banks have reported an 

increase. The Door of Hope food bank in Meadow Lake for 

example reports a shocking 60 per cent increase. 

 

To the Premier: how can he claim that people have never had it 

so good when the numbers clearly show that more and more 

families are unable to make ends meet? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I think everyone in the 

province finds it distressing and heartbreaking when there is 

need for any food banks in Canada. Unfortunately food bank 

usage is up right across Canada. And although there has been 

an increase here in Saskatchewan, we still compare favourably 

to other jurisdictions. 

 

The national average for food bank usage is 2.6 per cent of the 

population, and in Saskatchewan we’re below the national 

average at 2.2 per cent. Mr. Deputy Speaker, demand at 

Manitoba’s food bank is two and a half times higher than in 

Saskatchewan, and the population is about the same. And 

Saskatchewan’s demand ranks behind Alberta, BC [British 

Columbia], and Quebec. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I remember when Premier Romanow declared that 

the NDP [New Democratic Party] was going to end poverty and 

make food banks unnecessary. And what really happened? The 

percentage of population in 2006 living in poverty reached its 

highest peak in the decade, and food bank usage peaked in 

2006. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that minister can 

hide behind stats. I’m not sure how accurate they are, but we 

know what social assistance caseloads are today. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier yesterday said that he needed to 

get the product right for his new ad campaign. Well let’s look at 

his failed policies and what they’ve produced. Ten thousand 

children are now using Saskatchewan food banks. Ten thousand 

children, and more than 15,600 children are on social 

assistance. That’s higher than the national average. And the 

Humboldt food bank, whose MLA was the former minister of 

Social Services, says the number of children they’re serving is 

rising. And one in seven people, more than 3,000 people, have a 

job yet they still can’t make ends meet without relying on a 

food bank. 

 

To the Premier: will his new ad campaign include the fact that 

thousands of people with jobs have to rely on the food bank to 

survive? Is that his idea of getting the product right? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

talked about the children that have to use the food bank. And 

we know that Saskatchewan’s population has the highest 

proportion of children of any place in Canada. And I know that 

we need to do better, Mr. Speaker. I know that, but we are 

making progress. 

 

After peaking in 2006 under the NDP at 14.6 per cent of the 

children living in low-income families, that number has now 

decreased to 9 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s 12,000 less 

children living in families struggling financially than there were 

under the NDP in 2006. Children in low-income single family 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I will ask the members 

to come to order so I can hear the answer. I recognize the 

Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, children living in 

low-income, single-parent families have decreased from 37 per 

cent to 20 per cent since the number peaked in 2006. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes there’s more to do. We know there’s more to 

do. We’ve initiated a number of issues like reducing the 

provincial income tax, and we removed 80,000 low-income 

people from the taxes. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I’d like to see the proof on the 80,000. I would 

really like to see the proof for that. 

 

Well we know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a recent study found that 

the cost of providing nutritious food for a family of four in 

Saskatchewan ranges from $185 a week in Regina or Saskatoon 

to more than $250 a week in northern Saskatchewan. But we 

also know, according to CMHC [Canadian Mortgage and 

Housing Corporation], the average rent for a two bedroom 

apartment in Saskatoon is now more than $900 a month and 

rising fast. It’s obvious what’s happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

thousands of families in our province are cutting back on food 

in order to pay their rent. 

 

To the Premier: why are more people, more families than ever 

before forced to choose between a roof over their heads or 

food? Is this his idea of getting the product right? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many, 

there are many issues that we are dealing with as the 



November 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6059 

government. And I know that actions on poverty and people 

that are needing affordable housing is an issue that we’re 

dealing with. And we know there’s more to be done, but we’re 

dealing with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to talk about the job that we are doing 

and the people that have been helped. We’ve doubled the 

low-income tax credit in this province. We’ve nearly doubled 

the number of seniors eligible for benefits under the seniors’ 

income plan. We’ve doubled the amount available to 

low-income seniors through the seniors’ income plan. We’ve 

increased the amounts paid for utilities for the TEA [transitional 

employment allowance] clients. We’ve doubled the caregiver 

tax credit. We’ve increased the disability tax credit. We’ve 

introduced a low-income senior drug plan. We have increased 

the minimum wage three times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a lot to be done in this area, and that’s 

because the members opposite ignored the issue for 16 years. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, even the Sask 

Party’s own candidates know that the government hasn’t quite 

got it right. The CEO [chief executive officer] of the Saskatoon 

Food Bank and Learning Centre, who’s also the Sask Party’s 

candidate in Saskatoon Sutherland, says, and I quote, “Times 

are very difficult for those who do not have a living wage. 

Affordable housing is at crisis levels, and this is definitely 

affecting our clients.” 

 

To the Premier: even his own candidates call it a crisis. So why 

has his government failed these families by freezing the 

minimum wage until after the next election while refusing to 

even consider options for keeping rents affordable? Why does 

everyone see this as a crisis except for the Premier? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I think that people in this 

province know that Saskatchewan is the best place in the 

country to live. We know that we have great numbers, and 

we’re proud of it. Have we got more to do, Mr. Speaker? We 

definitely do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the affordable housing issue is something that 

we’ve been looking at since we’ve been in government. We’ve 

increased funding for our housing programs by 45 per cent. 

We’ve opened over 700 affordable housing units. We’ve got 

1,250 more units that are under way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re looking at our students as well. I think it’s 

interesting, and the members opposite should understand, that 

the funding for student housing projects has increased by 3,000 

per cent since we became government. Mr. Speaker, there’s a 

lot to be done in this area. I’m proud of the work that we’re 

doing, and I know there’s more to be done. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facilities 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this government has 

signed a $27 million loan guarantee with Amicus in a desperate 

attempt to hide and take debt off the provincial books. But, Mr. 

Speaker, if you co-sign a loan, you’re still responsible for 

paying it, and it affects your credit rating. It’s treated the same 

as debt. 

 

This is understood by families, companies, farms, banks, credit 

unions, and bond rating agencies, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: 

why did this government think they have a different set of 

rules? Debt is debt. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, stemming from the Patient First Review when the 

commissioner, Tony Dagnone, said that we needed to look at 

different funding options to deliver health care in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, this is one example that we have chosen. We’ve 

entered into a partnership with the Catholic Health Ministry to 

put together this possible long-term care facility. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we’ll take no lessons from the opposition 

now. When they were in government, when they went into 

partnership, I believe they went into a public-private 

partnership, about 1996, on something called SPUDCO 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company], Mr. 

Speaker. The only difference between that public-private 

partnership and this public-private partnership is the private 

sector’s putting all the capital up. In that, the private sector put 

up zero, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our priorities are on seniors in this province. Their 

priorities were on potatoes. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the only thing creative 

about this project, Mr. Speaker, is its financing. Debt is debt, 

and that government’s hiding it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government has signed an agreement that if either Amicus 

or the government decides to terminate the contract, the 

government will, I quote, “pay to Amicus the amount required 

for Amicus to repay the outstanding balance.” 

 

We know this government has signed a $27 million guarantee 

with Amicus. It’s right there in the FOI [freedom of 

information] request, spelled out in black and white: 

“Saskatoon Regional Health Authority loan guarantee.” What 

we don’t know is how much this could end up costing 

taxpayers. 

 

To the minister: how much taxpayers’ money has this 

government put at risk while short-sightedly cutting beds in 

Wawota to save a measly $100,000? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this is a new financing 



6060 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2010 

arrangement with the Catholic Health Ministry. The Catholic 

Health Ministry has been in the health care business within 

Saskatchewan for decades, Mr. Speaker, absolute decades. 

They have done a very good job. 

 

But the member opposite poses an interesting question: what 

could be done or how much will it cost for the $27 million? My 

question back to him . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask the opposition, 

they asked the question, I would hope that they would want to 

hear the answer. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what I would say to 

those members opposite, what would $37 million in 1996 

dollars do for long-term care in this province today, Mr. 

Speaker? It would build about five Amicuses around the 

province, Mr. Speaker. We’re getting it done; they never did. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people 

don’t trust this deal. It’s inequitable. It’s unfair. It’s untendered. 

It utilizes creative financing, and it’s full of conflicts of interest 

. . . [inaudible]. 

 

So let’s review the facts, Mr. Speaker. The lawyer for Amicus, 

Rod Donlevy, is the brother of the Premier’s chief of staff, Joe 

Donlevy. The CEO of Amicus is on contract with the minister’s 

own ministry. A major Sask Party donor received the 

untendered contract to build the facility. And the government 

guaranteed a $27 million mortgage without stating how much it 

could cost taxpayers. At the same time it’s cutting five beds in 

Wawota and shelving 13 long-term care projects, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: why is this government cutting beds in rural 

communities like Wawota to save $100,000 while cutting 

sweetheart deals and signing $27 million loan guarantees with 

Sask Party insiders? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this deal that will have 

seniors aging in place, that will have seniors aging with their 

spouse, Mr. Speaker — something that was never done under 

the opposition, Mr. Speaker — is a good deal.  

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at some seniors right now in 

Saskatoon are living in acute care settings. Absolutely 

inappropriate. That was fine under the NDP. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, for 16 years . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask some members on the 

opposition to listen to the answer. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, in 16 years under the 

NDP government, they never built a new long-term care bed to 

add to the complement of long-term care beds in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re getting it done. But not only did they not 

build any new long-term care beds, they closed 52 hospitals 

across this province, Mr. Speaker, one of them in Wawota. And 

what they also did is close 136 beds, long-term care beds, in the 

last five years of their government. We’ll take no lessons from 

those members opposite. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. While the 

minister talks about closing beds, they’ve closed 88 in six 

months. So they haven’t learned much. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the gallery today are members of the 

Wawota save our beds committee and rural administrators from 

the Wawota area. They’re here representing hundreds and 

hundreds of people who have attended town hall meetings and 

signed petitions and written letters to the minister to ask him to 

keep the five beds open at the Deer View Lodge in Wawota. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what does the minister have to say today 

to senior citizens in Wawota who can’t age in place with their 

spouses and their families? They’re being separated from their 

spouses and their children and their grandchildren and their 

friends because his government is closing five beds at the Deer 

View Lodge in Wawota. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, let’s start by correcting 

some of the inaccuracies in her first question, Mr. Speaker. 

Number one: 88 beds were not closed by this government in the 

last six months. That’s absolutely false. I’d love to know where 

she got those. As the former questioner said, I don’t know 

where she ever got those statistics from, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the issue of Wawota, it is very disconcerting, 

Mr. Speaker, absolutely. I’ve had the opportunity to meet with 

representatives from Wawota here in the legislature. I can tell 

you unequivocally that the member from Cannington has been 

in my office on a number of occasions, Mr. Speaker, lobbying 

for the Wawota . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. There’s been increasing 

number of remarks, mostly from the backbench of the 

opposition. I would ask that they allow the minister to give an 

answer. Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the 

member from Cannington has been in my office raising the 

concerns of the people from Wawota. It is very concerning. I 

had talked to the group, and one of the things they wanted me 

to do is try and get them a meeting with the health region 

sooner. I phoned CEO, or the Chair of the health region, Mr. 

Speaker, to see if that could happen. 

 

But what it boils down to, Mr. Speaker, is ultimately it is the 

health region’s responsibility to deliver care in that area, Mr. 

Speaker. And we have to listen to what they say, the direction 



November 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6061 

they want to go, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the case in this 

situation. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — To the minister’s first comment about where are 

the 88 beds, I can think of 50 or 60 of them off the top of my 

head: 30 in Muskeg Lake, 5 in Wawota, 15 in Melville, 13 in 

Canora, and 5 in Esterhazy. Just off the top of my head, those 

are closed. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Sask party underfunded the health 

districts, which caused cuts to health services and long-term 

care. Now they have no money left, and people are suffering for 

the Sask Party’s fiscal mismanagement. 

 

When the people of Wawota raised the Deer View Lodge bed 

closures with their MLA, the member from Cannington, he 

said, “People complained about highways and now they’re 

complaining about these beds. Which do they want — 

highways or health care?” 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, does the minister agree with the member 

from Cannington? Do the people of Wawota need to choose 

between highways and health care? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, I’m very 

aware of the situation in Wawota. I have spoken to the CEO 

and the board Chair on the situation. The member from 

Cannington has raised the question, Mr. Speaker. I have met 

with people from Wawota, in the legislature, in my office, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m very aware of that situation. 

 

But the delivery of health care is the responsibility of the 

regional health authorities. Well I’m hearing all sorts of 

laughing and everything else from the members opposite. I 

would ask the members opposite, who set up the regional health 

authorities? It was under an NDP government that set the health 

authorities up, the regional health authorities. Now if they set 

them up and not expecting to take any advice from them, that’s 

very . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member from 

Regina Walsh Acres, who seems to be entering debate quite a 

bit, and I would ask that, listen to the Minister of Health. I 

recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the regional health 

authorities are responsible for the day-to-day delivery of health 

care in this province as set up by the former government. I 

would be very interested if what they’re lobbying for now is 

that it should be all directed out of the Minister of Health’s 

office. Is that where the health care decisions should be made, 

directly out of my office? That’s what she’s implying. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister picks and 

chooses what decisions he wants to step into. But he can’t 

forget that he appointed the health boards. They are the ones 

making the decisions, but he appointed them, and he funds 

them. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is an obvious need for these 

beds. Right now there’s a constant wait-list to get into Deer 

View Lodge. And as a result of the bed closures in Wawota, 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region is experiencing an influx of 

patients, causing them to open beds in Broadview to make up 

for the closed beds in Wawota. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The bed closures in Wawota are causing a rippling effect into 

the Regina Health District. Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the 

minister cut lab services in Nokomis and ambulance services in 

Neilburg, people in those communities wrote letters and 

publicly opposed the decision. Because of the public pressure, 

the minister saw the light and changed his mind. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the minister: the people of Wawota 

have signed petitions, attended town hall meetings, met with the 

health region, and now come to the Legislative Building to 

oppose these cuts. Will the minister change his mind and 

reopen the beds at the Deer View Lodge, or doesn’t he have any 

money left? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the 12 health regions 

along with the Cancer Agency make decisions on a daily basis 

regarding day-to-day delivery of health care services. Sun 

Country is no different, making decisions that they’ve made, as 

has Saskatoon Regional Health Authority, as has P.A. [Prince 

Albert] Parkland or Prairie North, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those decisions were made by the health regions. If they decide 

to put some of those decisions on hold, it isn’t through the 

directive of me. It’s through the decision of their board and 

their management team, Mr. Speaker. That’s who decided to 

put the situation in Neilburg on hold or change the decision on 

other facilities around their health region, Mr. Speaker. It is the 

health region that makes those decisions, Mr. Speaker, as in 

Sun Country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes those boards were appointed by our 

government, just as the boards previous were appointed by the 

former government. Those boards closed 136 beds in the last 

five years, Mr. Speaker. Did they pull back those boards? No 

they didn’t. You have to allow those boards to make their 

decisions. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Support for Post-Secondary Students 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a bit rich for the Minister of 

Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration to claim at 

a news conference this morning the Sask Party government 

wants to ensure international master’s and Ph.D. graduates will 



6062 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2010 

stay in Saskatchewan. After all, this is the same minister who 

has steadfastly refused to fix the Sask Party’s flawed graduate 

retention program in order to ensure that it benefits master’s 

and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

My question for the minister is this: does he finally recognize 

the error of his ways and will he fix the flawed program once 

and for all? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to provide an update to the people of this province, 

not just regarding the graduate retention program — the most 

aggressive youth retention program in the country — but the 

level of support that we’ve offered to students right across the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in fact what we’ve seen is recently a student 

leader refer to our funding post-secondary education as 

generous. That’s why you’ve seen a 5.1 per cent increase in 

post-secondary education funding over the course of the last 

year, the second highest, Mr. Speaker. All the member opposite 

needed to do was read the Speech From the Throne, Mr. 

Speaker, and see specific reference to graduate students and 

new supports that are going to be coming shortly, Mr. Speaker, 

to this province. 

 

What we see, student loans are cheaper now, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve taken vehicles out. We’ve made sure that the repayment 

plan is easier. We’ve taken away some of the limitations on 

hours of work, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to be moving forward 

on a scholarship. 

 

The member opposite can pinpoint a couple of specific 

questions that he has, but the people of this province know that 

we support post-secondary education. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, one thing is certain in this 

province, and that’s life for Saskatchewan students is much 

more expensive now under the Sask Party government. We 

know the Sask Party loves to hold big events and have balloons, 

cut ribbons and eat cake. They love the pomp and circumstance. 

But there’s more to that than being government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Even Enterprise Saskatchewan has told this government to 

extend the graduate retention program to master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates because it just makes sense. So if the Sask Party is 

really serious about keeping master’s and Ph.D. graduates in the 

province after their studies are done, will they do the right thing 

today and extend the program so it benefits these graduates? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for 

Advanced Education and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite relates 

a question about affordability and post-secondary education. 

While the NDP ruled for 16 years, Mr. Speaker, they saw, 

students in this province saw their tuition go up at the 

University of Saskatchewan by 99 per cent, at the University of 

Regina by 88 per cent, and at SIAST, 263 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, are record investments in 

post-secondary education, more than $2 billion in 3 years, Mr. 

Speaker. And the graduate retention program, yes, Mr. Speaker, 

graduate students are enjoying it because as they’re graduating 

from their undergraduate degree, whether from institutions 

within our province or around the world, they’re entering 

graduate school and they’re able to benefit as graduate students, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we continue to invest in post-secondary education 

in record amounts. As the member, as my colleague has said, 

more than 3,000 per cent increase in student housing, Mr. 

Speaker. The member opposite ought to look elsewhere for 

questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s argument is flawed. 

The international students that are in the gallery today, Mr. 

Speaker, did not do their undergraduate degrees in 

Saskatchewan, so they would not benefit from the program. It’s 

clear the Sask Party is not one bit concerned with doing the 

right thing and fixing their flawed program so it benefits not 

only undergraduate students, but also master’s and Ph.D. 

students. Contrary to everything the minister said this morning 

at his press conference, the Sask Party is not concerned about 

keeping master’s and Ph.D. graduates here. They just like to put 

on a show. 

 

So my question to the minister is this: will the Sask Party’s new 

marketing campaign tell viewers that master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates need not apply because they are simply not valued by 

the Sask Party government? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, not only are we supporting 

more students, Mr. Speaker, we see enrolments going up. We 

see that the prospects for the future are going up with record 

population of 1.045 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regarding the specific question, the member 

opposite has probably missed along the way. He missed that we 

actually expanded the parameters, Mr. Speaker, and that is we 

recognize programs from not just across the country, but around 

the world, Mr. Speaker. I’ll send him the press release, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 158 — The Correctional Services 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Policing 

and Corrections. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 



November 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6063 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 158, The Correctional Services 

Amendment Act, 2010 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Corrections and 

Public Safety has moved first reading of Bill No. 158, The 

Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 144 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 144 — The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

today to speak to Bill No. 144, The Litter Control Amendment 

Act, 2010. I have read some of the comments that have been 

made previously by members of this Assembly, and I think 

some of them bear some repeating just for a historical 

perspective. 

 

And what I’ve found when researching the Act is that originally 

it was passed in 1973, and it was passed with the purpose to 

provide the provincial government with authority to address 

litter-related issues. And certainly I think the entire Assembly 

can agree that that’s a good thing and that we should do all that 

we can to ensure that we’re being responsible with respect to 

the environment and litter-related issues. 

 

It was also created at that time . . . and created with it related 

regulations and established a provincial beverage container 

collection and recycling program. And again I think that we 

would all recognize that those were important measures and 

that it showed a serious amount of foresight in 1973 to create 

this legislation, to introduce it and pass it, and to look forward 

with respect to the environment. 

 

Additionally if we look a little further ahead, there were 

changes again made, this time in 1988, where The Litter 

Control Act was amended to create a program for recycling 

designated containers. These containers will include most 

common containers that you will find in any grocery store 

including drink containers, water, tea, juice containers, etc. 

 

Now the program at that time imposed an obligation to pay and 

collect a refundable deposit and an environmental handling 

charge on any designated beverage container. And the money 

that was then collected through the program became a funding 

source for the administrators of the program, which has been 

operated for many years by the folks who operate SARCAN. 

 

And I think again that each of the members of the Assembly 

will agree that SARCAN’s done a tremendous job with the 

program and that the foresight shown in 1988 and the work that 

was done in 1988 to create this legislation was forward-looking 

and thinking and welcomed, and we certainly enjoy the benefit 

of it today. 

 

But if you look, there are some additional issues that have been 

introduced in the 2010 version of this Bill that cause the 

possibility for some concern. 

 

If you look at what has happened with an issue related to a 

claim made against the government for the collection of the 

handling fees that are to go to SARCAN, a piece of litigation 

has been brought against the government that would see the 

middle person so to be speak — i.e., somebody that buys a 

beverage container for resale only — has been charged when 

the legislation would only allow currently that the end user be 

charged solely for the use of the container at the time of 

purchase. And so what we have currently is an issue related to 

that lawsuit that the government wants to clean up. 

 

And well, while I’m not going to prejudge the value or the 

validity of their concern, the concern of the government, you 

certainly have to take great care when you are creating — as is 

done in this case — a piece of legislation that’s retroactive. And 

this legislation is retroactive, to my understanding, back to 

1998. So it will erase 12 years of history for the government. 

 

Now we certainly will, as an opposition, do our job to consult 

with the people with respect to the removal of certain rights of 

Saskatchewan citizens when they lose their right to bring 

litigation against the government. Certainly as an opposition, 

you will have a good deal of concern and should have. And so 

we’ll consult with people with respect to that issue and bring 

some questions to committee with respect to that. 

 

Certainly the Bill in its origin, in its changes in 1998 and some 

of the changes currently, that we would agree with many of 

them. Because the Bill, again going back to 1973, has been an 

important piece of legislation to help curb issues related to 

litter, to help control problems with respect to the environment. 

 

[14:30] 

 

And if you have done any travelling throughout — well, 

somewhat in Europe but certainly in certain parts of the United 

States where they don’t have the legislation with the strength 

that this legislation has — you will note recyclable beverage 

containers that are littered amongst the streets and thrown away 

as refuse. When you don’t create provisions that would charge 

up front a fee that can be recovered later, you need to provide, 



6064 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2010 

as this legislation had originally and continues today, that 

encourage people to recycle, to make their environment a better 

place to be and certainly work together to control litter. So there 

are certainly parts of this legislation that we would find to be 

palatable and good for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now in terms of the retroactivity of the Bill, I can’t remember a 

specific case where that’s happened in the three years, off the 

top of my head, in the three years that I’ve been here. It’s 

certainly something that’s quite rare in terms of the legislation 

that’s brought before the Assembly, so again another one of the 

reasons why we must strongly consider the implications of 

bringing forward a Bill that’s retroactive for 12 years. 

 

And so with the many questions that we’ve got with respect to 

that, I would move today to adjourn the debate. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 144, The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 148 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Bjornerud that Bill No. 148 — The 

Animal Protection Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

extremely pleased this afternoon to stand and enter debate on 

this very important piece of legislation. I have to say up front 

that we support this Bill. The concept is one that I think every 

Saskatchewan citizen does support. We all do, and should, 

support the concept of protecting animals from abuse, Mr. 

Speaker. So in doing so we, as members of this legislature, 

should step forward and try to enhance the provisions within 

legislation to prevent abuse, whether it’s from the owner of the 

particular animal, Mr. Speaker, or from others who maybe in 

some way have them in their charge, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the concept is one that seems fairly simple to 

understand, Mr. Speaker, and is one that makes sense for our 

province and for the livestock producers in our province, Mr. 

Speaker, and for other agencies that have a responsibility for 

ensuring that animals within our province are protected. 

They’re not abused, are treated in a humane manner, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It does, however, raise a number of questions about particular 

situations and circumstances, Mr. Speaker, and what distress 

would mean in a number of various circumstances and what the 

government may consider as abuse. But those are the types of 

questions that need to be asked in committee. There needs to be 

detail that . . . normally asked of officials and those who will be 

responsible for implementing the legislation and regulations 

that come into effect with the legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So at this time, because our real concerns, if any, are those that 

would be asked in committee, are detailed to make sure that 

there is clarification for the producers in Saskatchewan and for 

the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, at this time we’d 

move this Bill to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is Bill No. 

148, The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 2010 be now read 

a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I designate that Bill 148, The Animal Protection 

Amendment Act, 2010, be referred to the Standing Committee 

on Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 147 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 147 — The 

Public Interest Disclosure Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it is a 

pleasure to enter into this debate. You know, the title of the Bill 

of course is public interest disclosure, and that’s a very 

important concept particularly in the modern-day era where we 

have such a professional civil service who really do have our 

interests, I believe, our interests at heart. And it is important 

that we understand that there is a very important relationship 

between the public, who have a right to know about how things 

are going in the internal workings of the government . . . 

Because the government is there to represent their interests — 

both because that’s the way our democracy is set up, and we 

have elected people to assure that our hopes and our dreams are 

carried out. But the problem is in the reality often that 

something is lost. 

 

And that’s why we have civil servants who have that sacred 

trust to do the right thing about the issues at hand. But 

sometimes that doesn’t always happen. And we know that it is a 

good thing that there can be a public disclosure without penalty 

or fear of reprisal, because then if you have a civil service that 

is afraid of its political masters, then things can really go off the 

rails pretty darn quick, and that’s unfortunate. 



November 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6065 

So we are interested in this issue. We’re interested in this Bill. 

But really I do have to agree with my colleagues who have 

talked about how it seems to lack a lot of teeth. It lacks the teeth 

to make it really meaningful. When you bring things forward 

like this there can be a lot of misunderstanding. And for 

example when the Bill talks about you can only report if a law 

is broken — and that’s fair enough — but it may be a lot of 

people think, well what about policy? Where does policy fit 

into this as well? 

 

Because when the government comes forward with a stated 

intent of what they are about to do — and they have been 

elected and it’s their duty to carry out their mandates and they 

have a policy — and yet if for some reason that is not being 

carried out or it’s being carried out in a way that is wrong or 

unethical, then I think there should be some way of correcting 

this. And so this doesn’t address that policy issue. That’s a real, 

a real concern for our side, a real concern. 

 

And another concern I would have, Mr. Speaker, is, how did 

this Bill come about? I don’t know if this government did hold 

some hearings or any kind of discovery process about how can 

they make a public disclosure really work. Or was this 

something that was carried out at the ministerial level, at the 

executive level within the government? Who was actually 

involved in this? Because I think it’s important to have all 

players come forward, not just the political players, the MLAs 

here, who sometimes receive this information. We know the 

media receives this information as well. We know other people 

receive this information. So there’s a real concern. Were those 

people consulted? 

 

I mean, we know this government’s track record in terms of 

consultation is one that lacks real credibility because we’ve 

seen issues where — there was labour issues, environmental 

issues, wildlife protected lands — they seem to want to consult 

after the fact. This is a very important issue. And I think once 

we’ve opened this up, we should really talk to people out there. 

Because I understand what they want to do is to create another 

position within . . . an officer reporting to the legislature. And I 

think that on one hand we have to ask, is that the best place? Is 

this something that should be going to the Ombudsman? Or is 

this something that we have . . . Are we going to have a whole 

host of officers reporting to the legislature, or is there a limit to 

how many you should have? I mean, can we have 10 or 20 or 

30? Will there be one for each department? 

 

I know at one point I was really hoping that Environment would 

have an environmental commissioner reporting to this 

legislature, but that never came about. So I think we have to be 

careful about when we get down the path to officers of the 

legislature because we have really created some very good 

positions now, and I would hate to see that kind of go off the 

rails as well. So, Mr. Speaker, I do have some concerns about 

this. I don’t know if it’s as well thought out as it should be, it 

doesn’t go as far, doesn’t have the teeth it needs to have. 

 

And then when they talk about an officer of the legislature, I’m 

not sure if that’s been explored as well, and particularly, 

particularly when one side brings it forward but doesn’t involve 

the other side. I think that really to be meaningful and to have a 

strong foundation, both sides should have been part of that 

process and said, listen, we think we need another officer for 

the legislature. 

 

But when the government brings it forward, that tends to be 

one-sided. Do they have somebody already in mind? Do they 

have somebody . . . How will that process be in terms of hiring? 

I think that this will be one that I think we have some real 

questions about. 

 

We know for example in Public Accounts, the Chair for Public 

Accounts is a member of the opposition, and I think that adds 

an air of credibility because you can say this is well balanced 

— the Chair is a member of the opposition, clearly, how can 

you have questions about conflict of interest? But when you 

have the government proposing an officer of the legislature and 

bringing it forward without any prior consultation, I do have to 

ask some questions about whether that is the best plan. 

 

And we know that there have been some examples here of 

people who have come forward, and some who haven’t come 

forward, who brought issues forward to the opposition. There’s 

been a recrimination against them, and we don’t know if that’s 

been appropriate. I’m thinking of the situation, Corrections, 

Public Safety, where there was somebody who was fired for 

what was believed to be whistle-blowing, but it really wasn’t 

the case. In fact they were incorrectly fired. But I think this was 

a real issue for this government because they have put down a 

real air of fear within the workplace. We think we see it 

because I think that things aren’t as best as they could be. 

 

So I have a lot of questions about this. We know that this . . . 

what the title says and what is actually happening, there’s a big 

difference, a big gap between the two, and why this should be 

more than just window dressing for the Public Service 

Commission. I mean if this is a real issue, then they need to 

involve a lot more people, bring forward meaningful 

legislation, involve everyone who might be involved in what 

happens when whistle-blowing takes place. 

 

As I say that it’s unfortunate that, you know, it’s like in a 

workplace where the boss often thinks they know best. They 

can figure it out. But you know, really, a good boss will say to 

the workers, what do you think? What should we do here? You 

know? And they might even ask their customers, what do you 

think? What should we be doing here? Not after the fact. Not, 

how do you like it now? But, what could we do better? And I 

think that we’ve seen that good workplaces really do well 

because of their engagement with people. 

 

We rely so much on our public civil service that it’s very 

important that we continue to maintain that trust. In fact the 

best thing that could happen with this is that people feel that 

they are trusted and valued enough in the workplace that they 

can come forward at any time. But if there is a problem, that 

they do have protection of the law. And I’m not sure this covers 

this. In fact I am concerned that actually it doesn’t and a lot of 

people may be under the false impression that in fact it’s a good 

thing. 

 

And I do have some questions and concerns about what this 

will be because there will be government on one hand saying, 

hey listen, we have guaranteed the rights of people who work in 

the public sector, where really they haven’t because they’ve 

only focused on the law aspect of it. And of course we know 



6066 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2010 

the law. We have actually police officers who can deal with that 

part, I assume. I mean obviously if it’s a law, it’s the police we 

deal with. But if it’s policy, that’s where we get the civil service 

really involved. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate this would be, this is 

going to be one that I think we’re going to talk an awful lot 

about. Because especially if we involve, as I said, a new officer 

of the legislature and because it’s only come from one side — 

there hasn’t been a suggestion from both sides — I think there’s 

some real concerns here that it won’t have the credibility that it 

should have. 

 

And I think that this has come out . . . You know, when I read 

some of the comments here of the minister in the Regina 

Leader-Post, November 10, 2010, she talks about, and I quote, 

“There won’t be a large budget requirement, she said, noting 

there are three other provinces with similar offices and they 

sometimes field just a few complaints a year.” 

 

Well I think . . . I don’t know if the minister is anticipating that 

there will only be a few because there’s only a few that need to 

come forward, or that the system will stop it before it gets to 

that point, or what will be the actual need. So I think that in her 

own comments, it seems very evident that more work needed to 

be done. 

 

I mean she does go on to say she’s considering having this as a 

role within the existing Office of the Ombudsman. If that 

happens, then we need to make sure the Ombudsman’s budget 

is bounced up because we’ve seen that issue around the Health 

budget, the Health ombudsman idea, where we see a 

government that has been really dragging its feet around 

increasing funding for our legislative officers and yet they’re 

adding more and more work to them. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think that I would take my seat 

now, and I’d like to move to adjourn debate on this Bill. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 147, The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 149 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 149 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure today to stand on Bill 149, which is An Act to amend 

The Income Tax Act, 2000. Bill 149 was announced December 

3rd last year in a Government of Saskatchewan press release 

that I have in my hand, dated that day, and it is a press release 

touting the value of this income tax amendment. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the news release is short on some of the details. We 

have some concerns. In opposition, we have some questions. 

 

I want to say at the outset, we welcome any effort to bring new 

jobs into Saskatchewan. There’s what, 10,000 more people 

unemployed today than there was a year ago in Saskatchewan, 

and that just tells us that though there are a few more jobs in 

Saskatchewan today than there was a year ago, they seem to be 

going further and further behind. There’s much more need for 

good incomes today than there was even a year ago. And 

certainly the 10,000 new people on the unemployment lines 

would certainly appreciate job opportunities and particularly, 

good job opportunities. 

 

The mining industry, Mr. Speaker, went . . . A little history, one 

of the joys of being a senior MLA here is I can give a little mini 

history lesson. In 1991 Saskatchewan was the fourth largest 

mineral producing province in Canada — that is we produced 

the fourth largest dollar value of minerals — and we, the New 

Democrat government of the day, introduced some measures 

and encouragements to incent mineral exploration, mineral 

development in Saskatchewan. And we worked very hard on a 

relationship with the Saskatchewan Mining Association, and we 

were able to move it successfully from Saskatchewan being 

fourth to being firmly in third place right across Saskatchewan 

in terms of total value of mineral production. 

 

So the proof of the pudding is that we have a commitment to 

the mining industry and the good jobs that go there. We have a 

commitment to the environment. Every mining activity had to 

meet the rigorous environmental standards that we had 

imposed, and it’s a record, frankly, Mr. Speaker, that we’re 

very proud of. 

 

In this Bill 149, clearly it talks of a need for an investment by a 

mining company, an investment in Saskatchewan. And it 

guarantees 75 jobs or, I believe, the income tax incentive would 

not exist. 

 

One of the questions I have, Mr. Speaker, is, if a milling 

operation, because I’m pretty confident that that’s what this is 

all about, is a milling operation . . . a mining operation mines 

the mineral outside of Saskatchewan, brings the raw ore into 

Saskatchewan and mills it, but what if that mill has 60 

employees? Then no tax incentive. 

 

And these are the questions that we look forward to asking and 

getting the direct answer when we get into committee, Mr. 

Speaker, because it makes quite a difference. This speaks of the 

Bill implementing a five-year tax holiday for mining 

corporations that make an investment in Saskatchewan and 

maintain at least 75 full-time employees. And again I say, on 

the surface of it, we welcome 75 jobs. But we want to know, 

what happens if a promise is made by a mining operation and 

they fall short of that promise? 

 

I look at the recent history where we’ve had Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan with promises of head office jobs in 

Saskatchewan, having senior management in Saskatchewan. As 



November 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6067 

recently as certainly in October if not also this month of 

November, full-page ads by Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan touting that they were going to have its senior 

management team in Saskatchewan. And not to denigrate the 

management folks that are located up in Saskatoon right now, 

but they’re considerably short of having the full senior 

management team at Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 

 

So we want to make sure, Mr. Speaker, that when we’re doing 

this Bill 149, The Income Tax Amendment Act, that in fact we 

have some clear agreement what can be expected from both 

parties. Indeed we want to head off concerns at the outset, as I 

spoke a few moments ago about our relationship with the 

Saskatchewan Mining Association and our proud history of that 

relationship. And indeed we’ve got friends throughout the 

mining industry, right from the depths of the potash mines to 

the office towers. And we’re very proud of all of that and what 

mining can do. 

 

So some of the questions we have is, how much is the benefit to 

Saskatchewan? How many tax dollars will be spent in this tax 

expenditure? Because . . . Well I want to be very clear about it, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’re proposing or what’s being 

proposed in Bill 149, is a tax expenditure. 

 

Governments can collect tax from its various sources, and they 

can do tax expenditures, in this case a tax expenditure to 

encourage a new operation, a new milling operation in 

Saskatchewan and to encourage, incent some jobs for 

Saskatchewan. But the question is, how many millions of 

dollars is going to be spent in that tax expenditure? Is it the best 

tax expenditure to spend perhaps hundreds of millions of 

dollars? 

 

I don’t know what the dollars are. Is it tens of millions of 

dollars, or is it $3 million? If it’s $3 million, Bob’s my brother 

and away we go. I know the saying is, Bob’s your uncle, but in 

my case, Bob is my brother. The point is we need to know what 

is the best expenditure of the money, so to decide that we need 

to know how much is likely to be spent in drawing this milling 

operation to Saskatchewan. 

 

We also would like to know, Mr. Speaker, if this Bill actually 

has an inadvertent problem in that does it incent a mining 

operation to mine the raw ore outside of Saskatchewan to 

actually . . . I’ll use an example that comes to my mind. And 

I’m not trying to suggest that someone might, but if the dollars 

are right they just might. 

 

Potash goes at a depth of roughly 3,000 feet, and I know it 

varies, but it actually crosses the provincial border. So my 

question would be, is this legislation incenting, incentivizing a 

mining operation to in fact mine the potash on the Manitoba 

side of the border and then transport it to the Saskatchewan side 

of the border and thereby get a five-year tax holiday for the 

mining corporation? Would it in fact be doing that, Mr. 

Speaker? Because I don’t think the government’s intention is to 

incentivize any corporation to actually do the mining outside of 

the province and then draw the minerals here. 

 

This Bill I believe is . . . There is one, what I’ll describe as a 

unique geographic challenge, a unique situation where they can 

actually put the workers up in a Saskatchewan community that 

is fairly close to the border. And this can work. But again my 

question is, what is it that we’re giving away in terms of tax 

incentives to get that mill in Saskatchewan? So, Mr. Speaker, 

again I say that on the surface of this we are not displeased with 

the proposal, but there sure are a lot of questions. 

 

It looks right now like it’s a blank cheque, an open-ended 

cheque, and that’s just not the way that New Democrats operate 

in opposition nor in government. We’ve had to watch the 

dollars, the taxpayers’ dollars far too closely to just let this slide 

because it’s, again as I say, the way it looks right now to me, 

it’s just an open-ended cheque. If it’s a fair value expenditure 

for fair value, then away we go and we would very much look 

forward to it. 

 

Perhaps I’m overly sensitive about it because, as one of my 

colleagues just pointed out, PotashCorp just had its best third 

quarter ever. And yet I see most of the senior head office jobs 

are still just out of Chicago, not here, not in Saskatchewan, not 

in Saskatoon or any other place in Saskatchewan. And yet it 

was crystal clear what the intent of previous legislation was 

surrounding that. 

 

So we’re looking for some clear indication of the number of 

jobs, of the dollars involved. And we need to have a clearer 

understanding that there’s a clear benefit to the people of 

Saskatchewan, to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, and that 

there’s not just a six-month benefit but a long-term benefit to 

our great province. I think the people of Saskatchewan have 

earned that right and deserve it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, respecting the Act to amend The Income Tax 

Act, 2009, this Bill, which would implement a five-year tax 

holiday for mining corporations, because we have so many 

questions around it and because we want to do a little further 

research before we allow this Bill to move on to committee, at 

this time I move to adjourn debate on Bill 149. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation Park 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill 149, The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 150 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 150 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join in on the debate here today in discussion on Bill 

150, the superannuation Act, Mr. Speaker, An Act to amend The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act. 



6068 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2010 

Now this Bill has basically two provisions to it, Mr. Speaker, 

and we want to understand both those intended consequences 

and the unintended consequences as a result of those two 

provisions. 

 

The first provision as we interpret here, Mr. Speaker, is that 

there’s some clarification of how spousal survivor benefits are 

to be calculated in the case of a person who may have been 

married more than once, Mr. Speaker, and who may have both 

current and former spouses who claim to be qualified to receive 

some type of survivor benefits. So this would appear to be some 

changes here to the Bill that responds to some needs to provide 

some clarity, Mr. Speaker. And on the face of it, Mr. Speaker, 

we would support the merit of what the government is 

proposing within this specific provision. 

 

We want to make sure we have a better understanding of what 

the potential impact is on individuals, Mr. Speaker, on families. 

We want to make sure we understand specifically how it may 

impact vulnerable people, Mr. Speaker, and we want to do 

some consultation to make sure that all the understanding of the 

unintended consequences of these changes have been 

contemplated. And of course we’re going to be doing that with 

our stakeholders, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But on the base of it, this first provision as it relates to spousal 

survivor benefits, Mr. Speaker, it’s something that we see some 

merit in and likely support, Mr. Speaker. We just want to make 

sure we understand all the potential impact though, Mr. 

Speaker, and to make sure that the consultation that is required 

to make these sorts of changes has occurred, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that this government has failed time and time again to 

consult with the meaningful stakeholders for whom are affected 

by legislation. We want to make sure that’s not the case in this 

piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now moving on. So on the first provision there, I think we see 

some merit in that. We want to make sure we’ve gotten it right, 

Mr. Speaker, and we want to make sure that it doesn’t have 

unintended consequences that aren’t helpful to Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

But on the second provision, we see some troubling, a troubling 

aspect of this Bill, Mr. Speaker. We see a continuation, Mr. 

Speaker, of the pattern of hiding information from the public 

under this government, Mr. Speaker. We see that trend 

continuing, Mr. Speaker. Of course we see that on so many 

fronts. 

 

We see that in having inappropriate accounting processes to 

account for our provincial finances, the only province, Mr. 

Speaker, that is out of line with public sector accounting 

standards, Mr. Speaker. A black eye, Mr. Speaker, for this 

province, and something that this government has its heels dug 

in on and is not willing to change. 

 

We see it on many other fronts, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s a 

freedom of information request, Mr. Speaker, where 

information should be available to the public to understand the 

decisions of government, to seek clarity, Mr. Speaker, and we 

don’t see that. 

 

So when we’re looking at a Bill like this, we’re concerned that 

in fact we’re erasing transparency and accountability that 

Saskatchewan people deserve, Mr. Speaker. And as a result, 

Mr. Speaker, we don’t support the second aspect of this Bill, 

this second provision. 

 

And just to be clear what this second provision does, is the 

government is proposing to remove from public reporting the 

amount of money paid in benefits to individual superannuates, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what we believe, Mr. Speaker, is that we’re best served 

when the Saskatchewan public, when our accounting 

organizations and others across this province, are engaged and 

can understand where their dollars are flowing, Mr. Speaker. To 

be moving backwards on the front of reporting to the public to 

whom and what individuals are receiving payment from 

government, Mr. Speaker, we see that as a step backwards. We 

see it stepping away from transparency and a step away from 

accountability, Mr. Speaker. And we see it holding with the 

pattern of a government that is continuing to hide more and 

more information from the Saskatchewan public that they are 

served best by having accessible and available to them, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we can’t support this aspect of this Bill. We can’t support 

this provision. And we’re going to seek clarity on through, 

certainly through committee, on where, how this was derived, 

why it was derived. But we’re skeptical, Mr. Speaker, and we 

are concerned. And we want to state our position outright that 

we don’t support this provision. 

 

This government should know full well that any amounts of 

$50,000 and over paid to an individual, whether that’s through 

a ministry or through a Crown or through Executive Council, 

are disclosed to the Saskatchewan public, Mr. Speaker. And we 

think that that’s something that’s important for the 

Saskatchewan public to have available to them. It’s simply . . . 

It’s not a costly process to make this available. In fact it 

wouldn’t cost any extra dollars to make this information 

available to the Saskatchewan public. We see no use to go and 

remove this information from the purview of the Saskatchewan 

public. 

 

And so a question would be if we believe, and certainly we do 

believe, that the information of who’s on the payee list, who’s 

being paid more, paid sums larger than $50,000 in a given 

calendar year . . . We believe certainly this should apply as well 

to superannuates, Mr. Speaker, to those that have retired and 

left the civil service, Mr. Speaker. Why we would want to black 

that out or not disclose that information, Mr. Speaker, I think is 

a problem, something that we’re going to make our point. And 

I’m certainly doing that here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Every other employee of the public service knows full well that 

if they earn more than $50,000, that amount is going to be 

documented and available publicly. It should just simply be the 

same for those that have retired, Mr. Speaker. And this kind of 

accountability and transparency is important to the public. It’s 

important for good management and allows a participatory 

democracy where organizations, individuals can participate in a 

meaningful way and understand how their dollars are being 

expended. And it also fights, Mr. Speaker, against corruption, 



November 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6069 

Mr. Speaker. It fights against questions as it relates to ethical 

decisions as to who’s receiving dollars. And this information 

rightfully should be made available to the public. 

 

What could result from this, Mr. Speaker? Well for example, if 

we don’t have those dollars documented as to who is receiving 

those sums over $50,000 from a retiree, we don’t know where 

those dollars have been spent. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the government can enter back into a 

contract with those individuals. Might be the term . . . 

Double-dip would be a term that many individuals would 

associate here, double-dipping, Mr. Speaker. And that could 

occur here, Mr. Speaker, and no one would be the wiser. And 

it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that we are fully aware of who this 

government is contracting under its services. We need to 

understand what amounts they are paying to an individual in 

entirety. So we need to know that as it relates to a retiree or 

superannuate, and we need to know that any additional 

contracts that they might receive down the road. 

 

It really begs to question, why would you make this change? 

Why would you go in the wrong direction as it relates to 

transparency and accountability? Why would you hide this 

information? Why wouldn’t you just make it clear to the public, 

Mr. Speaker? And we’re talking about hundreds and hundreds 

and in fact thousands of individuals, Mr. Speaker, who are 

receiving these dollars. And these are dollars, Mr. Speaker, that 

taxpayers across Saskatchewan have put into our collective 

pool, whether it’s through running their business or doing their 

hard work, Mr. Speaker. And they deserve to be able to 

scrutinize it in a meaningful fashion, Mr. Speaker. To do that, 

they need to have the information available to them. To step 

backwards here, we see is a shame. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, we see this Bill, in many ways it’s a sort 

of a re-entry of a Bill that was failed by this government, that 

they put forward right out of the gates of their new election. 

That was a Bill 9. It was known as the double-dipping Bill, Mr. 

Speaker. And it was defeated and taken off the order sheet, Mr. 

Speaker, a Bill that never succeeded. But this Bill in effect does 

basically the same thing, Mr. Speaker. It allows individuals to 

come back in and be contracted by government and to receive 

those dollars but not to have that accounted back to the public. 

And we’re talking about retirees who are already receiving a 

pension, Mr. Speaker, and then coming back in and contracting. 

 

And by removing this transparency and accountability, no one 

would be the wiser. And anybody who’s trying to keep an eye 

to the finances of this province and trying to make sure that the 

dollars are being expended in an appropriate way — that 

contracts are tendered in appropriate fashions, that individuals 

are hired following the best practice in professional civil service 

are applied, Mr. Speaker — this really defeats those purposes, 

Mr. Speaker. And it’s a Bill that really reflects a government 

that’s lost its way as it relates to accountability and 

transparency. 

 

And really on these fronts, Mr. Speaker, at all levels, at all 

jurisdictions, transparency and accountability as it relates to the 

spending of dollars, Mr. Speaker, is something that we need to 

have more of, that we need to be providing more information, 

be more open and transparent and allow individuals to 

scrutinize the spending of government in as meaningful a 

fashion as they can. 

 

Because these are their dollars, Mr. Speaker. The people from 

across the province will have collectively pooled their tax 

dollars through their business and through the profits that they 

pay tax on, Mr. Speaker, or the income tax that they pay 

through their salary. And we need to make sure that we have 

the best stewardship as possible overtop of those public monies, 

Mr. Speaker. And this is certainly a step in the wrong direction. 

It certainly points to a government that on many other fronts is 

not being accountable, is not being transparent. 

 

We see specifically . . . And we talked about it here today in 

question period, Mr. Speaker. And of course this is a big issue 

that is going to be talked about in many, many more question 

periods and on many different fronts, Mr. Speaker, because 

there’s so many aspects to study what we’ve now come to know 

as this sweetheart deal on this long-term care, Mr. Speaker. Up 

in Saskatoon, we see a $27 million project that has been 

untendered. Mr. Speaker, untendered, going to a company, Mr. 

Speaker, who is a major donor of the governing Sask Party. Mr. 

Speaker, untendered money: $27 million. This is the public’s 

money untendered, Mr. Speaker, and we can’t get the 

information on this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That kind of project needs to be tendered. And we’re going to 

fight like heck, Mr. Speaker, to stand up for Saskatchewan 

taxpayers as it relates to making sure those kind of projects, and 

in fact basically all spending of money, is tendered, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s a shameful departure, Mr. Speaker, from best 

practice in good stewardship of the public dollar, Mr. Speaker, 

and we’re going to fight that. 

 

But further to that, there’s all sorts of conflicts of interest, Mr. 

Speaker, in this sweetheart deal, $27 million untendered project 

in Saskatoon. Conflicts of interest that are of huge concern, Mr. 

Speaker. And there’s so many different angles to continue to 

look at this deal from, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s just from the 

unfair and inequitable treatment that is being received by those 

rural communities that have had their projects shelved or that 

are still fundraising 35 per cent as a local portion, where this 

deal up in Saskatoon of course was funded fully, Mr. Speaker: 

loan guaranteed, fully backstopped by government, an 

untendered project, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what we know is that we need to, when it relates to 

spending of government dollars — public dollars, people’s 

dollars, Mr. Speaker — we need to have all the protections built 

in to make sure that we’re getting best value for our dollars, that 

we don’t have processes that are suspect to corruption, Mr. 

Speaker. That we don’t have processes that are suspect to 

abuse, Mr. Speaker, that we don’t have processes that allow for 

the wasteful use of public resources, Mr. Speaker. And we see 

this provision within this Bill as a harmful departure to ways 

that are totally outdated as it relates to modern governance and 

making sure that the public resources are protected, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We know that we’re best served by being more accountable, 

more transparent, by providing as much information as the 

public needs, Mr. Speaker, to understand the financial welfare 

of their government, to understand the choices that government 



6070 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2010 

makes and the processes that government makes as it relates to 

tendering and contracts. Mr. Speaker, to see this government 

deliberately, through this Bill, driving those kinds of 

protections and safeguards and accountabilities and 

transparencies underground, Mr. Speaker, hiding more 

information from the Saskatchewan public is hugely 

problematic, Mr. Speaker, and hugely concerning. 

 

It suggests certainly, you know . . . One of the themes that we 

hear so regularly from Saskatchewan people is that they don’t 

trust this government with their resources, their financial 

resources, with the finances, Mr. Speaker. And we see . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . And I hear the member from Regina 

South here, heckling here, Mr. Speaker. But I know what the 

member from Regina South should be aware of, Mr. Speaker, is 

that in this Bill right here, in the second provision . . . And here 

we are, a reasonable opposition saying we support the first 

provision as it relates to the changes and addressing the needs 

of spouses. 

 

But on the second piece here — and I suspect the member from 

Regina South may not even understand what’s going on in this 

Bill — but what it does is it takes away information that allows 

accountability and transparency to the Saskatchewan public. It 

takes away the reporting of dollars that are provided to 

superannuates or retirees, Mr. Speaker, that’s been provided to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

[15:15] 

 

This is an important thing. We believe that the full disclosure of 

government is an important thing. We believe that we’re best 

served when we understand where our dollars are being 

expended. And certainly it fits the theme that we hear 

everywhere we go, Mr. Speaker, is that, where did all the 

money go? And they count the billions of dollars. They look at 

the billions of dollars that were left to this government with the 

booming economy. They look at the fact that the revenues are 

at all-time highs. And I regularly, Mr. Speaker, sit down with 

business leaders across this province, with financial officials 

across this province. And we sit down and we break down 

basically where all the money went. And it’s a hugely 

problematic exercise. 

 

What this government wants to do is it wants to hide more 

information, Mr. Speaker, and it wants to make information less 

available. What it wants to do, Mr. Speaker, is to allow them to 

contract to individuals to have double-dippers, Mr. Speaker, 

making extra contracts and receiving services. Mr. Speaker, 

receiving payment from this government without allowing the 

public the ability to scrutinize that . . . at least be aware, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we believe, and we’re going to stand up on a very 

principled debate on this front here, that the public is best 

served when they can engage in their democratic process in a 

meaningful fashion. And in large part, Mr. Speaker, they need 

to know where their tax dollars are being spent. To hide more 

of that information and drive it underground is representative of 

a government that has lost its way, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

accountability and transparency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I provide the Amicus example, Mr. Speaker, where really it has 

nothing to with Amicus as an organization, Mr. Speaker. It has 

everything to do with some Sask Party insiders, Mr. Speaker, 

whose fingerprints are all over this deal that’s been untendered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, $27 million that’s jumped the queue ahead of 

other projects, Mr. Speaker. And that when we’ve sought 

clarity, Mr. Speaker, when we’ve asked questions, Mr. Speaker, 

and we’ve put in a freedom of information request, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve received basically no information back from 

this government. Hundreds and hundreds of pages received all 

blacked out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We think that’s the wrong direction to go, Mr. Speaker, and I 

know the Saskatchewan public doesn’t trust this deal. And the 

Saskatchewan public doesn’t trust a government that’s going to 

be providing less information to them as it relates to the 

expenditure of their taxpaying dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we see that this pattern of secrecy and lack of accountability 

and transparency continue. We now see a specific Bill put 

forward by this government, Mr. Speaker, to do just that, at a 

time where at every jurisdiction at all levels of government, Mr. 

Speaker, should be seeking more accountability, more 

transparency, more understanding of where our dollars are 

being expended, Mr. Speaker. We see wanting to make sure 

that protections are in place to protect the taxpayers, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We know that we have a government in power that has been 

very willing to reward its political friends. Now we see, Mr. 

Speaker, them putting, by way of Bill, measures in place to 

prevent the opposition and the public from actually being able 

to scrutinize and understand where those dollars are being 

spent. This government, from the moment it was elected, was 

very willing to find ways to get money back into the hands of 

those closest to them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We saw massive increases in the positions of chief of staff, Mr. 

Speaker, at a time where Saskatchewan people are fighting to 

receive very modest increases in their collective bargaining 

agreements, Mr. Speaker. Chiefs of staff under this government 

have received 100 per cent increases in some cases. Mr. 

Speaker, 100 per cent — a doubling of their salary from what 

they were under the former New Democrat opposition, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And recent information that we’ve had released from Executive 

Council highlights that many individuals who are in fact 

lifelong friends of this Premier, Mr. Speaker, have received 

massive increases, Mr. Speaker. In the case of the Premier’s 

lifelong friend, Mr. Speaker, received a $20,000, almost 

$20,000 increase, Mr. Speaker, at a time where the government 

is working to collective bargaining agreements with individuals 

that barely, barely, in fact doesn’t reflect the rate of inflation in 

this province. So $20,000 for select friends of this Premier, Mr. 

Speaker, and not even the cost of living for everybody else, Mr. 

Speaker. Two standards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then we see a Bill introduced in this legislature, Mr. 

Speaker, that serves one purpose, and that’s to eliminate the 

information provided to the public as it relates to those being 

paid by government. It eliminates the pensions, Mr. Speaker, 

the payments to retirees and superannuates, Mr. Speaker, 



November 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6071 

opening up an opportunity if an individual wanted to abuse it. 

Mr. Speaker, and we don’t trust this Premier on this front, if an 

individual wanted to abuse it to then contract those individuals. 

A double-dipping-type circumstance, Mr. Speaker, and the 

public wouldn’t be any the wiser. 

 

And what we say, Mr. Speaker, is if you want to make those 

kinds of decisions, the public needs to be fully aware of what’s 

being paid to one individual whether they’re retired or whether 

they’re a civil servant, Mr. Speaker. We’re just best served by 

having as much information as we can. 

 

So we see the gravy train as it relates to the friends of the 

Premier, Mr. Speaker, receiving massive salary increases. 

Twenty thousand dollars, Mr. Speaker, in one year, which is 

absolutely ludicrous when you look at the many across this 

province who can’t even keep pace with wage increases that 

reflect cost of living. We see contracts, Mr. Speaker, that seem 

to always be available to the very close and select friends of 

this Premier, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see a deal, Mr. Speaker, with a sweetheart deal on this 

long-term care facility in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, $27 million 

that went untendered. Mr. Speaker, that’s unfair and inequitable 

as it relates to the circumstance and how long-term care is 

funded in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we see 

conflicts of interest all over that project, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 

going to be an ongoing discussion for some time with many 

more details to be exposed. 

 

And I hear the member from Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, 

heckling. But what he should be aware and what he should be 

standing up for, is he should be informing his caucus that he 

doesn’t support this Bill, Mr. Speaker, because this Bill is a Bill 

that takes away information of where dollars are being spent, 

taxpayers’ dollars are being spent, Mr. Speaker. And this is 

information that doesn’t cost the government any more to 

provide to the public, and it simply allows them to put a system 

in place that is less transparent, less accountable to the public, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And unfortunately that’s the consistent pattern under this 

Premier, Mr. Speaker. And it allows the potential for abuse, Mr. 

Speaker. It allows the potential for corruption, Mr. Speaker. 

From a perspective of good governance, you need to have 

systems and legislation that, at the very core, promote best 

practice, and best practice, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 

management of our public resources — the taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

The many individuals who contribute and pay taxes across this 

province need to be able to be in good stead as it relates to 

understanding that there’s processes in place to protect their 

dollars, Mr. Speaker. And they need to be able to have that 

information available to them to understand where dollars are 

being expended, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So from those very specific reasons I’ve cited, certainly we 

don’t support this second provision within this Bill. We see it as 

a reckless Bill, Mr. Speaker. We see it going in the wrong 

direction as it relates to good, accountable government. We see 

it removing important transparency, Mr. Speaker. We see it as a 

Bill that is not consistent with public finance across Canada, not 

consistent with public financing across international 

perspectives, Mr. Speaker, and being able to make sure that 

individuals have the information they need to be able to 

participate and understand where government dollars are being 

expended. 

 

To take and remove from the payee list all the superannuates, 

Mr. Speaker, is something that we oppose. We need to make 

sure that Saskatchewan people are able to understand where 

their dollars are going. It puts at risk the individuals who are 

receiving contracts by this government, Mr. Speaker, and to not 

have that full disclosure. 

 

We say, the more information the better, Mr. Speaker. Let’s 

make that information public to Saskatchewan people. They can 

evaluate it and engage with it in a meaningful way, Mr. 

Speaker. If a government’s making certain decisions as it 

relates to contracts or hirings, we would fully expect, Mr. 

Speaker, that they’re following best practice in civil service, 

Mr. Speaker, and best practice to protect the public dollar. So 

that would mean that they should be able to defend any time 

that they had an example where there was dollars being 

provided to an individual. 

 

To take away that protection and safeguard to Saskatchewan 

people from their hard-earned money, Mr. Speaker, is 

something we fully don’t support. It’s a regressive step, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s consistent with a government that has consistently 

moved in a direction of being less transparent, less accountable, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s the wrong way to go, Mr. Speaker, and we’re 

going to oppose that. We’re going to call on the government to 

explain their position, but secondly to make the changes 

required to make sure that the taxpaying public of 

Saskatchewan are served well by the processes and legislation 

within their province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Any time you weaken these transparencies and accountabilities, 

Mr. Speaker, any time that you’re hiding information from the 

public, the potential is there for abuse, the potential is there for 

corruption, the potential is there for waste, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We talk about that deal up in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

concerned about all of those aspects, Mr. Speaker, as it relates 

to payees and who’s receiving money from this government. 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to call on this government to continue 

to provide that information. And at this point in time, Mr. 

Speaker, we do have more questions on this front. We want to 

get into further dialogue and discussion with stakeholders, Mr. 

Speaker, for whom it impacts. 

 

As I’ve said, we support the first provision, Mr. Speaker, as it 

relates to spousal changes, as it relates to the spousal benefits, 

Mr. Speaker, and some clarity on that front. But the second 

provision, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to hiding the information or 

no longer disclosing the information, Mr. Speaker, of 

superannuates and retirees and what they’re being paid, Mr. 

Speaker, we don’t support that regressive step that goes against 

best practice in government, Mr. Speaker, that goes against 

having systems in place to safeguard public dollars, Mr. 

Speaker, and that opens up systems that are easily suspect to 

abuse, corruption, and waste, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to fight 

this kind of legislation every chance we get, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At this point in time, I will move adjournment of debate, Mr. 



6072 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2010 

Speaker, and look forward to having further discussion as we 

move forward. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 150, The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 153 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 153 — The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to join the 

debate on Bill 153, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, and 

to give a few comments about the Act. And I guess we 

definitely . . . There’s some changes being proposed. Some of 

these seem very worthy, Mr. Speaker, and I think we can see 

that. Others have serious questions and require more 

information, I think more debate, more discussion, making sure 

that we talk not only to the government staff but we also talk to 

people outside of government as well to make sure where are 

we going with legislation. 

 

And, you know, when you look at making these changes . . . I 

think before we could support this, Mr. Speaker, we’d have to 

make sure that it’s very clear who’s going to be impacted and 

who will benefit. There are some questions. Who’s asked for 

the changes? And some of my colleagues have spoke on this 

previous Bill and I know they brought up some good issues and 

debate. And it’s good to get into debate, Mr. Speaker, to discuss 

some of the, I guess the questions, or I guess some of the 

questions that need to be asked, and make sure it’s very clear. 

So if we’re going to support this on behalf of the people of our 

province, Mr. Speaker, we have to make sure that Bills that 

come through this House are debated properly, those questions 

are asked. And I think we all have an obligation, Mr. Speaker, 

to do that. 

 

The Bill repeals the civil division of the Provincial Court and 

transfers some of the responsibilities to a Justice of the Peace. 

Now we’re not sure exactly what type of situations will this 

encounter using provincial, I guess, justices of the peace versus 

a provincial judge. There are many questions, and I know we’ll 

have time to discuss that and we’ll have time to ask. And I 

think it’s an opportunity for the opposition to make sure we go 

through and ask the questions, making sure that any Bill that 

goes through this House is debated, talked about. We make sure 

it’s clear and I know there’s a process to do that. And I say 

again, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to join the debate and discuss 

and try to have some clearing. 

 

So if you’re going to change the civil division and allow, I 

guess, justices of the peace to deal with some of the matters and 

moving our provincial judges away from civil matters . . . And 

it sounds like there are those questions, and they’re dealing with 

that. But having said that, at the end of the day I think the 

people that we represent, whether they’re dealing with the 

justice system or not, have a right to a fair hearing, a right to be 

heard. 

 

And, you know, Mr. Speaker, these people appear in court, and 

I guess we’re asking a new process to go through and ask the 

justices of the peace to deal with some of the matters, whether 

they’re civil. And I understand. But we’re not sure and I guess 

exactly we need to find out more details. Who will be 

impacted? Which communities will these justices of the peace 

be dealing with? All communities, or it’s only where there’s 

provincial judges right now currently hearing cases? 

 

[15:30] 

 

Or will this be opened up and they’ll have an opportunity to go 

everywhere and deal with some of the concerns and some of the 

civil matters that affect some of the northern communities, the 

isolated communities where we have the fly-in justice go in 

there and deal with that? 

 

Will a community member, a Justice of the Peace that is a 

Justice of the Peace, have a right, an access to hear civil cases 

and make decisions on that? We have to look at the different 

people and how many justices of the peace are out there. Does 

this Act change anything? Does it actually give opportunities 

for, I guess, a speedier way of dealing with the justice system? 

And we’re hearing different things. You look at the arguments. 

 

And we need to find out exactly what are the caseloads. And 

we’ll ask those questions. Who’s being impacted? And I guess I 

sometimes wonder, you know, the cases that’ll be handled by a 

Justice of the Peace, will people feel like they have a fair trial? 

And are their rights being impacted? And if their rights aren’t 

being impacted, then I think we have to watch this closely. And 

it should be watched closely. We’re changing the way we 

normally do business, having a judge hear civil matters. All of a 

sudden you’re going to a Justice of the Peace, and I think for 

some people it may raise concerns. 

 

But for others that are out there dealing with this, they may say 

this is a tool that will help them and help the justice system 

move along. We know there’s a backlog of cases, and we 

understand that. And I don’t know if that’s a cause of this 

government’s not putting enough finances in place because of 

some of the mismanagement of the finances and the priorities 

that this government has seen. Maybe that’s impacted this as 

well, and not giving a fair shake. 

 

And I don’t know if crime’s going up, whether it’s civil matters 

or criminal charges. I don’t know if that’s going up. But I do 

know that they’re asking for a total change. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s fine if this is going to help out sometimes. But we’ll have 

to make sure that before a Bill passes that we make sure we 

have an opportunity to ask the questions, seeing who’s going to 

be impacted. 

 

We have an obligation to the people back home. That’s who 

elects us. They ask us to make sure that when we’re passing 

Bills and we’re going to amend a Bill like this one, Bill 153, we 

have to make sure that we’re amending this . . . We have to 



November 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6073 

understand as best we can, representing those individuals, Mr. 

Speaker, and make sure we ask the questions, and we debate 

them properly. That we make sure the people feel comfortable 

that as official opposition — and I know myself, as a member 

of the official opposition — we have a role to do and we will do 

that role. 

 

And we try to ask those questions and make sure that we go 

through a process. But we don’t try to do it . . . And I have to be 

very clear, Mr. Speaker. We try to do that in a very positive 

way, in a respectful way, that we know that the business of the 

day of this House and this legislature has to be done. But we 

have to make sure we do our job, and our job is debate Bills and 

law that are coming into effect to make sure that there is a good 

understanding. 

 

We don’t want to get in the way of that. We don’t want to hold 

things up where we can move it forward. But sometimes we 

have concerns, and we have to make sure that we ask the 

questions. 

 

And I think we’re fortunate here to all get an opportunity to 

debate any Bill that comes up, as official opposition to have a 

chance. And when I saw this one coming up, northern 

Saskatchewan and northern people, we have a lot of cases 

amongst our community members. We know that. And maybe a 

lot of them are civil, and they could be dealt with a Justice of 

the Peace. Isolated communities, remote communities, you 

know, there are many issues that will be, you know, could be 

addressed. And the amendments that we’re looking at, they 

might do some good things. But I know there’s serious . . . 

Some questions that we have require more information and 

making sure that it’s very clear there, Mr. Speaker, on where 

we’re going with this. 

 

I want to emphasize the rights of individuals to a fair trial. We 

want to make sure that that’s happening, that nobody’s rights 

are in jeopardy or anybody’s rights are not being dealt with in a 

proper manner. Any Saskatchewan resident that comes before 

the court system should have a right to fair trial. And I think 

that’s very clear. We want to make sure that people feel like 

they’re getting a fair trial and they’re being dealt with fair. 

 

And I say fair because we want to make it very clear we say 

that — fair. And I think this could help the justice system. If it 

is truly seen as a fair process and you’re using justices of the 

peace to deal some of the matters and they know some of the 

civil stuff that’s out there, maybe some of them will personally 

know what’s going on in the community and have a better 

understanding of it to deal with that. I’m not sure. I hope that’s 

the case. 

 

But we’ve got to make sure that when we’re bringing Bills 

forward like this one, like I said, Mr. Speaker — we’re dealing 

with Bill 153 — that we’re dealing with it and asking the 

questions. And I’m not sure at this point who’s requested the 

change, whether it’s the justice system, whether it’s concerns 

that have been in a discussion, whether it’s based on with all 

provincial judges, the chief judge. I don’t know who’s asked for 

this Bill and who’s brought it in. Is it the minister on request 

from lawyers, individuals, community leaders, members? We 

don’t know. But I mean, I think at the end of the day, you 

know, it’d be nice to know who’s requested this change. And 

maybe we’ll find out. 

 

So we talk about impacts of people and the rights and privacy. 

And all these things are coming into play these days with 

privacy. And if you’re going to, say, a Justice of the Peace — 

and we place a lot of trust and work in those individuals — I 

guess the privacy thing can come up too on some of the stuff 

that they will be hearing, and that they adhere to that. And I 

think those concerns have to be addressed, and I hope they will 

be addressed in this Bill. 

 

And those are some of the questions, Mr. Speaker, that we have 

with this Bill, and some of the concerns that may arise, and they 

may not. But I think overall I see this as maybe a good Bill 

going forward, moving it. The justice system is struggling. I 

know there are many questions that will need to be answered, 

and we’ll bring those questions forward. 

 

I know for northern Saskatchewan we want to make sure that 

the people in the North have a fair share and a fair deal on 

justice as well. We want to make sure if a provincial judge 

needs to hear a court case, and there might be criminal matters 

. . . And I understand that it sounds like that’s not what’s being 

asked here. It’s truly a civil division, and that’s being asked so 

that justices of the peace can deal with those matters. 

 

And I’m hoping that at the end of the day, after all of the debate 

and the discussions, this Bill will pass and it will go forward 

and do the work it’s required to do. But having said that, Mr. 

Speaker, we wanted to make sure . . . And I’m pleased to have 

an opportunity to get into the discussion to make sure that I’ve 

done my duty and my role to debate a Bill that’s coming in 

here. 

 

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn debate on 

this motion. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 153, The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 154 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 154 — The 

Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010/Loi de 

2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. With pleasure I join the 

debate on Bill 154, The Provincial Court Consequential 

Amendment Act, and to give a few comments on it. 

 

My comments on this Bill will flow from my comments on the 

previous Bill, Bill 153. But I guess it’s asking for amendment 



6074 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2010 

to The Small Claims Act and to allow the government to repeal 

the civil division of The Provincial Court Act and transfer 

certain responsibilities again to justices of the peace versus a 

provincial judge overseeing this. And, you know, you go 

through it and some of the questions I previously have asked 

and I guess debated, it’s an opportunity to discuss and ask some 

clarification. 

 

And I think some of the comments that I had in the previous 

response I made to Bill 153 will come in line with 152 and it’s 

a process . . . 154, and it’s a process, Mr. Speaker, to deal with. 

You know, who’s going to be impacted by these changes? 

Who’s requested it? I think we’ve asked that. Are rights going 

to be dealt with fairly? And I believe we’ll get those answers 

and we’ll move forward on this. 

 

But it’s, you know, using provincial judges or versus using 

justices of the peace, that is the question that people have to 

make sure that they’re getting a fair trial. And I go back to, 

who’s requested this? And it’s probably just following through 

with Bill 153. So at this time, at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’m 

prepared to adjourn debate on Bill 154. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 154, The Provincial Court 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 155 — The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to enter into the debate on Bill No. 155, An Act to 

amend The Natural Resources Act. And this is a very important 

piece of legislation, and so we’ll have some questions and some 

concerns about this. 

 

On one level it seems relatively straightforward, but we do have 

some questions because for many people this is a very 

important fund, the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund. It’s 

one that hunters and anglers and fishers are aware of, but a lot 

of people in Saskatchewan may not be aware of the fund 

because it isn’t one that gets a lot of media, a lot of press unless 

you’re following the kind of things that is funded out of the 

Fish and Wildlife Development Fund, which really is making 

sure that there are ample stocks of fish and that there’s the 

environmental projects that promote biodiversity here in 

Saskatchewan. 

This fund does really good work, exceedingly good work, and 

it’s an important fund that we make sure is managed well. It 

was a visionary piece of legislation that was put forward many 

years ago, and we think that we have to make sure that we are 

good stewards of this kind of initiative. And so when we bring 

forward things about the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund, 

again there are some concerns that we have. 

 

And as my colleague last night actually gave a very good 

speech about some of those concerns, particularly when it talks 

around how the government funds are going to be spent, the 

whole issue about accountability, that we make sure not only is 

there internal accountability to the stakeholders that are 

involved, those groups such as the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation, Ducks Unlimited, Nature Conservancy of Canada, 

the different fishing groups. All of those groups are very 

important and I know that the minister actually I think gave a 

list, read the list into the record. So it was a good thing to do. I 

won’t repeat that list today, but it’s in the record. 

 

But it’s important that those people, those groups, they do good 

work. And as the voluntary sector when they do things, it’s not 

easy to do that kind of work because we know that it’s not just 

for the pay, not just for the wage, but clearly those 

organizations have a vision about what kind of province we 

want to have in Saskatchewan. And biodiversity and the ability 

to hunt, fish is a clear important role within that. And so we 

want to be on the record and I know that we will be on the 

record of supporting those groups and the work that they do, 

day in and day out. And they do look at this kind of legislation 

to see what kind of roles do we have here. 

 

But we also have to think about the other people in 

Saskatchewan too who often aren’t fully engaged in the same 

way around the legislation because they’re not paying attention 

to it in the same way. They’re not sure what’s happening every 

day in terms of the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund. They 

may have never heard of this, but they do appreciate the good 

work that organizations do and the good work that the Ministry 

of Environment does every day to make sure that it’s 

administered well and it’s fully accountable. 

 

So that’s our role as MLAs — to make sure that we represent 

their views and how that money is spent. So we do have some 

questions about the accountability of the fund and what will be 

happening there and of the decisions that will be made. 

 

[15:45] 

 

I do want to go into two specific . . . well three specific areas, 

one being, of course, the whole funding aspect. And I know 

others will speak to it more fully. But the one, the second issue, 

I think it’s very, very key that we talk about this. And in the 

explanation notes, they talk about amendments to section 11, I 

believe, where they talk about including the addition of two 

new subsections to allow the fund and advisory council to 

contract services that are deemed necessary for the management 

of the fund. These services could include contracting expertise 

from groups such as the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, 

Nature Conservancy of Canada, or Ducks Unlimited for 

management of land within the fund. 

 

And also I’ll get into reading the actual legislation so we have 



November 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6075 

the wording, and maybe I’ll do that now, Mr. Speaker. But what 

talks about the acquisition, and this is section 20 or 11(1)(b) 

being amended, repealing the clause and substituting the 

following: 

 

“(b) the acquisition, by purchase, lease or otherwise, of 

any equipment or materials or the retention of any 

services that the minister considers necessary to restore 

degraded fish or wildlife populations for fish or wildlife 

habitat, to create new fishing, hunting or trapping 

opportunities or to manage fish, fish habitat, wildlife or 

wildlife habitat”; 

 

So it’s more than just land. Talking about the actual things that 

happen within all those environs. And so that’s that. And then 

they also go on to (e): 

 

“(h) the assessment, evaluation, or management of any 

waters in Saskatchewan with respect to their fish or fish 

habitat potential or any land for its wildlife or wildlife 

habitat potential”; and 

 

(f) by adding the following clauses after clause (i): 

 

“(j) the engagement of any services that the minister 

considers necessary to manage the fund; 

 

“(k) the payment . . .” 

 

Well I’ll leave it at that because I think those are the key parts, 

bringing in the expertise from non-governmental organizations, 

often referred to as NGOs, or some even call them 

environmental non-governmental organizations, ENGOs. 

 

I just want to say that these folks have great knowledge, great 

expertise, but I think often on our side we think of strong 

partners. And what that means by having strong partners and 

strong partnerships is that internally each of those partners have 

strength and capacity. We know Ducks Unlimited and Nature 

Conservancy and the Wildlife Federation are very capable 

groups with very capable staff, and so we’re not worried about 

their expertise. And in fact if there’s opportunities, I think it’s 

good to work with them. 

 

I am worried with what happens within Environment. Are we 

going down a dangerous trend of hollowing out the capacity 

with Environment, and this is the first step on a slippery slope? 

Because if we turn over some or a lot or all of the expertise to 

manage this fund, what happens internally within the ministry? 

And I think this is a dangerous slope because we know when 

the folks opposite brought forward legislation last year, they 

talked about the lack of capacity within the province, within 

young people, to get work within those environmental areas, 

and this would be a prime one. Biologists, people who are 

experts on biodiversity, where are they going to get work? Well 

they’re not going to be looking in the civil service now. They’re 

going to be looking at the NGOs. 

 

And I think there was a good partnership before. I would hate to 

see one tip more towards the other, and especially away from 

the civil service, because I think we need good people in our 

civil service. We need good long-term people in our civil 

service who have the vision about what it means to have a 

healthy environment in Saskatchewan which includes fish and 

wildlife. And this fund is just one component of it. But that’s 

what I mean. Are we on a dangerous slope here? 

 

The third part I wanted to talk about, Mr. Speaker, and I found 

it very interesting, new sections 20.1 and 20.2. 

 

20.1 talks about “No member of the public service is eligible to 

be appointed as a member” of the council. I’m worried about 

that because I’m not sure why that’s important, why that’s in 

there. Not even just for an oversight purpose to have one person 

there . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. Yes. So I think that 

it’s important that we have some oversight. 

 

I know on many of the councils we often have somebody from 

the civil service on the board. Often it’s the deputy minister or 

somebody at executive level, as an oversight. Because we have 

public funds invested and there needs to be somebody on the 

board or on the council to ensure that there’s public oversight. 

We know, and I’m fairly well aware of this . . . We know on the 

Sask Housing board there is somebody from the government. 

And so I’m very worried about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I also go on and I read the next one: “A majority of the 

members appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council 

must be members of the organizations that represent hunting, 

fishing and trapping interests.” The key word there is majority. 

If they’re not all from those groups, well who else is on there? 

You aren’t going to have anybody from the civil service. You 

have a majority from the hunting and fishing groups, the 

wildlife groups, but who’s going to be the other one or two 

people? What are they going to bring to the table? 

 

So I have a question for the minister there. I’m not sure what he 

means by this when he says a majority from the stakeholders; 

no civil servants. That sounds like there’s a gap. So I need to 

know, we need to know who’s on this council, because they’re 

expanding their services, they’re doing a lot more, they have 

more control over the money. But we need to know what 

they’re going to be doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I talked about a sea change last year, worried 

about the kind of changes this government is bringing forward, 

and I continue to have that concern. And I think this is a 

dangerous first step. We need to hear some answers to these 

questions. And so with that, Mr. Speaker, we’ll look forward 

. . . I know many people on our side will want to engage in this 

debate so I will now move to adjourn debate on this Bill. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 155, The Natural 

Resources Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave of 

the Assembly to move a substitution on the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 



6076 Saskatchewan Hansard November 16, 2010 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Government House Leader has 

asked for leave to move a motion to change the makeup of the 

standing committee. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Substitution of Member on the Standing Committee on 

Human Services 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 

 

That the name of Gord Wyant be substituted for that of 

Joceline Schriemer on the Standing Committee of Human 

Services. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I’ll ask the House to come to order to deal 

with the motion before the Assembly. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The motion before the 

Assembly is the motion presented by the Government House 

Leader, by leave: 

 

That the name of Gordon Wyant be substituted for that of 

Joceline Schriemer on the Standing Committee of Human 

Services. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this Assembly do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:54.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6053 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6053 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6053 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6053 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6053 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6054 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6054 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6054 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6054 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6054 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6055 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6055 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6055 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6055 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Louis Riel Day 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6055 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6056 

 International Education Week 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6056 

 Habitat for Humanity in Moose Jaw 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6056 

 Concern for Assyrian Christians 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6057 

 Aviation and Aerospace Week 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6057 

 Allen Sapp Gallery Curator Retires 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6057 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Low-Income People 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6058 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6058 

 Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facilities 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6059 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6059 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6060 

 Support for Post-Secondary Students 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6061 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6062 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 158 — The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6062 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6063 

 Bill No. 148 — The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 2010 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6064 

  Bjornerud (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 6064 

 Bill No. 147 — The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6064 

 Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6066 

 Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6067 

 Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6072 

 



 

 Bill No. 154 — The Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010 

 Loi de 2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6073 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6074 

MOTIONS 

 Substitution of Member on the Standing Committee on Human Services 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6076 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


