




















































Hansard: May 18, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 63A  TUESDAY, MAY 18, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5605 

 May 18, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to this Assembly it’s my pleasure to 

introduce in the west gallery a group of 34 grade 4 and 5 

students from Eston Composite School. I had the opportunity to 

meet with them this morning, had just a great conversation and 

they’re just a fantastic group. It’s a pleasure to have them here. 

Also with them there’s a number of chaperones I’d like to 

mention that are here as well: Verna Robinson, Nancy Powers, 

Kevin Fox, Christina Hewlitt, Christie McIvor, Shawna 

Cumiskey, and Larry Betts. 

 

Also with the group are a couple of staff members: Tawna 

Hansen and also teacher Jodi Bjornerud. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

you’re probably wondering about that last name, and you’re 

right. The very proud father of Jodi is our own Minister of 

Agriculture, and I do know from conversation that Jodi is also 

very proud — and justifiably so — of her dad. In fact I’m pretty 

sure, Mr. Speaker, that he is her second favourite MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly]. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d again, I’d like to welcome the 

classes and ask all my colleagues in the Assembly to please 

give them a warm welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 

rest of the Assembly, I’d like to recognize or introduce the 

members in your gallery, members, Mr. Speaker, from CUPE 

[Canadian Union of Public Employees] Local 5111, the Prairie 

North Health Region. Their names are Marilyn Goll — she’s 

supervisor of housekeeping; Pauline Schwartz, cook; Vivian 

Lavallee, special care aide; Cindy Albers, activity worker and 

special care aide. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are all members of the Meadow Lake 

constituency and they have travelled here today to meet with 

their MLA who so far has refused to meet with these 

constituents. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’d like to introduce 

members of CUPE Local 4777, the Prince Albert Parkland 

Health Region. Mr. Speaker, in your gallery, the president, 

Carol McKnight from CUPE Local 4777. She is a special care 

aide and she is here to meet with her MLA from Saskatchewan 

Rivers constituency and who has also refused to meet with her 

to this date. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these folks are just some of the people 

trying to meet . . . They are part of the countless health care 

providers who are so far been unsuccessful in obtaining 

meetings with their government MLAs and who would 

appreciate the opportunity to meet with their elected 

representatives. I ask all members to welcome these people to 

their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you 

an individual who has just moved into the Douglas Park riding, 

a young fellow by the name of Levi Cordick who is with us 

today; works for Oxfam. I want to welcome him here to the 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I would also like to welcome 

all the visitors here, many who came for a special rally to 

express to the government their opinion on many different 

issues including SCN [Saskatchewan Communications 

Network], buildings trades, a lack of contract in health care, and 

other issues. They’re here to watch and observe question period 

and I’d like to welcome them all here today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Visitors in the galleries 

realize it’s a privilege to come and sit in the chambers. And I’d 

ask members to observe the rules of the chambers and not to 

participate in any form of the debate. I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

join the members opposite in welcoming members of organized 

labour and trade unions to their Assembly. Obviously we know 

how important these members are to contemporary 

Saskatchewan. And I would like to welcome all members on 

each side of the House to join me in welcoming these 

individuals to their Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, it gives me 

great pleasure to introduce Heather Malek with SCN Matters. 

She and many others today were out front concerned with 

decisions that this government has made. And Heather and her 

group is concerned with the privatization of SCN and the 

manner in which the government has gone about doing it. So 

with that, I ask us to welcome Heather to her Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’ve already asked the members 

to be mindful, the visitors in the gallery, of the rules of the 

Chamber. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They don’t know what you mean, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I’ve asked . . . Order. Okay. For the sake of 

members, members in the gallery, visitors are welcome to 

attend the galleries but they’re not to participate even through 

clapping of any of the debate in the Chamber. I recognize the 

Minister of Agriculture, the member from Melville-Saltcoats. 



5606 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2010 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the members, I want to take 

this opportunity and — mainly because I don’t get this 

opportunity very often — I want to join with the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose and introduce my favourite daughter and my 

favourite granddaughter, Lauren. Why I can get away with that 

today, Mr. Speaker, is because I don’t think any of my other 

granddaughters are watching, and I hope not. Anyway I would 

ask all members to join with me and welcome them to their 

legislature, along with the rest of the class and chaperones. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you many of the folks who were 

outside on the lawn, part of the Red Tent campaign calling for a 

national housing strategy, and what this province could be 

doing to be part of that. And I know they’re starting to come in; 

they were a little bit late. So I’d like to ask all members to 

extend a welcome to their legislature, Mr. Speaker. So I’d like 

everybody joining me welcoming them to their legislature. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Kindersley, the 

Minister of Energy and mines. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to join with my colleagues and welcome the group from 

Eston School today to the legislature. It’s a rare occasion when 

a group from Eston attends the legislature. It’s quite a distance 

to come down to the capital. I represented Eston through the 

constituency of Kindersley from 2001 for three terms, Mr. 

Speaker, and then the boundaries were redrawn after that, and 

then they were stuck or they were . . . Then they’re now 

represented by my colleague. But nevertheless I want to extend 

my voice of welcome to the group from Eston, and we look 

forward to seeing you later. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I’d 

like to introduce an individual that’s here. He came to support 

the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations], their 

very clear message, that were here to express their disapproval 

of what’s going on as far as the duty to consult. And he’s here 

from Montreal Lake. He’s with the Montreal Lake Cree Nation. 

He’s on the council as one of the band . . . [inaudible] . . . Jarret 

Nelson. I would just like to welcome him to his legislature and 

hope he enjoys the proceedings today and thank you for being 

here on behalf of your reserve. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the House — we’ve saved the 

best for almost last — is a group of 37 schoolchildren from 

Cardinal Leger School. And the chaperones are Dianne Lowes, 

Tammy Sonstelie, and Trish Cheveldayoff. Thank you and 

welcome to your legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, in 

your gallery, I’d like to introduce Terry Parker, director of the 

Saskatchewan Building Trades, to his Legislative Assembly. I 

would ask all members to welcome Terry Parker to his 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs, the Minister Responsible for Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise and to introduce guests in your 

gallery — my son Carter, a grade 7 student at Cardinal Leger, 

and my wife Trish who’s a chaperone there. So I’d ask all 

members to help me in welcoming them. And I’d like to remind 

them that when they look at the legislative proceedings, they’ll 

see that I’m one of the best behaved members so I hope that 

Carter is one of the best behaved members of grade 7 and that 

Trish is a well-behaved chaperone as well. So if I could ask, if 

they agree, I’d ask all colleagues to help welcome Trish, Carter, 

and Carter’s classmates and all students in the gallery to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, if I may, I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members, Mr. Michael 

Fougere, Regina city councillor, a well-known individual here 

in Regina involved with the construction association and also an 

Enterprise Saskatchewan board member. So to you and through 

you, all members, please welcome Michael Fougere to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to join 

my colleague from Cumberland in welcoming the councillor 

from Montreal Lake. And very quickly, in Cree: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

And translation in Cree: I’m very glad he arrived here and to 

visit us. And I also want to welcome the ladies from Meadow 

Lake, from the northwest corner of Saskatchewan, the beautiful 

part of our province. A long ways to travel here to bring the 

argument to the Assembly but the wonderful ladies from 

Meadow Lake, welcome to your Assembly. It’s great to see you 

here today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, in your 

gallery I would like to introduce six students from Swanson 

Christian School from Delisle. They are grade 7, 8, and 9. And 

accompanying them today are teacher Rosalyn Wiggers and 

chaperones Jay, Ruby, Arlen, Jody, and on the floor Mona and 

Darrel Wohlgemuth. And I’d just like everyone to join me in 

welcoming them to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

members of the Legislative Assembly I would like to recognize, 



May 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5607 

in your gallery, three individuals: Gord Campbell, president of 

the CUPE health care workers; Barb Cape, president of SEIU 

[Service Employees International Union]; and Donna 

Fredrickson, president of SGEU [Saskatchewan Government 

and General Employees’ Union]. I ask you to welcome all these 

members to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to the Assembly I would like to introduce two 

guests sitting very high in your gallery, Mr. Speaker: Lieutenant 

Gillian Dulle and Major Brad Hrycyna. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Lieutenant Dulle has been in the forces for the 

past seven years as a proud member of the Saskatchewan 

Dragoons army reserve in Moose Jaw, and last week she just 

returned from her first international tour where she was 

deployed to Afghanistan. She started off as the tour leader, but 

midway through she was placed in command of psychological 

operations which consisted of three Canadian units, three 

American units, and British units. This is a rank that’s usually 

held by a major, but because of her outstanding efforts she was 

given the position. 

 

Lieutenant Dulle is originally from Coronach and presently 

resides in Saskatoon with her husband and daughter where she 

was attending the University of Saskatchewan before being 

deployed. I understand that she will be starting her 

post-deployment leave and this fall will be returning to the 

Saskatchewan Dragoons in Moose Jaw as duty battle captain. 

 

Major Hrycyna is the commanding officer of Saskatchewan 

Dragoons in Moose Jaw and in June will be celebrating his 35th 

year in the military. 

 

Members, will you please help me congratulate both of these 

exceptional Canadian residents for their accomplishments and 

welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to the Assembly, I want to join with my 

colleague from across the floor to welcome Lieutenant Dulle 

back to Canada and back to her station with the Dragoons, and 

also Major Hrycyna. I was sitting here, noticed him in the 

gallery, and was going to introduce him, but I was trying to 

figure out how I was going to explain to Hansard how we spell 

his name. That could be a problem. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, Major Hrycyna does a great deal of work 

with the Dragoons. He’s evident at and present at all events that 

are held, is very active, sends out an update to many of us in the 

community as to the activities that are going on. 

 

And I know Lieutenant Dulle is one of many that have served 

overseas through the Dragoons and we’re very pleased to 

welcome her home. And best wishes on wherever your life and 

adventures and career may take you in the future, and thank you 

for being here today. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with members in welcoming Marilyn Goll and the other 

health care workers who’ve driven down from Meadow Lake. 

It’s good to see you, and I look forward to our previously 

scheduled meeting at 3:30 in room 25. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned 

over the conditions and the safety of our highways. This 

petition pertains to the calls for the improvement to Highway 

No. 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and the junction of Highway 

1. The petition states that this portion of the highway is a main 

traffic route to year-round tourist destinations, as well as this 

portion of highway serves three major grain inland terminals. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and 

the junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety 

for Saskatchewan’s motoring public. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from Fort 

Qu’Appelle, Kelliher, Moosomin, and Ituna, Saskatchewan. I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of the protection of wildlife habitat 

lands. And, Mr. Speaker, this speaks to the issue that The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act protects 3.4 million acres of 

uplands and wetlands or one-third of all wildlife habitat lands in 

Saskatchewan in their natural state, and that the government 

currently has amendments tabled in this Assembly repealing the 

schedule listing of these designated lands, and these proposed 

amendments will endanger protection and designation of said 

lands. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follow, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately and 

without delay recognize the importance of the protection 

of wildlife habitat lands and immediately withdraw 

proposed amendments that will negatively affect the 

protection of wildlife habitat lands; 



5608 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2010 

And in so doing cause the provincial government to 

commit to meaningful and adequate consultations with all 

stakeholders that will be affected by future legislative 

changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of concerned Saskatchewan 

citizens. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

from people supporting maintaining quality health care services 

and that want the Government of Saskatchewan to know that 

they ought to recognize the essential role of all health care 

providers as valued members of the health care team, and that 

such promotion and recognition can only be achieved through 

the commitment of adequate funding and the installation of 

good faith in the provincial collective bargaining process. 

 

And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining quality health 

care services and job security for all public health care 

providers. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petitions are signed by people from Saskatoon, Unity, 

Wilkie, Watrous, Nokomis, Semans, Drake, Govan, Vanscoy, 

Warman, Rosetown, Zealandia, Humboldt, Bruno, Creighton, 

LeRoy, Regina, Esterhazy, La Ronge, Shaunavon, Eastend, 

Cudworth, Wakaw, Duck Lake, Martensville, North Battleford, 

Battleford, Meota, Cochin, Meadow Lake, Swift Current, Cabri, 

Kyle, and Moose Jaw. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

several petitions calling for protection for renters from 

unreasonable rent increases. And we know that Saskatchewan 

renters are facing a dangerous combination of rising rents and 

low vacancy rates in many communities, for example here in 

Regina less than point six per cent. And the majority of 

Canadians now live in provinces with rent control guidelines, 

some 80 per cent. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

consider enacting some form of rent control with a view to 

protecting Saskatchewan renters from unreasonable 

increases in rent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these people signing the petition come from 

Regina, Estevan, Moose Jaw, Swift Current, and Saskatoon. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — I rise today to present a petition in support of 

Highway 915. This petition addresses concerns of 

Saskatchewan people about the quality of Stanley Mission road. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to upgrade and repair Highway 915 as 

soon as possible. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed and supported by the leadership and 

community members from Stanley Mission. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for university students 

here in Saskatchewan. It’s a petition that calls for the expansion 

of the graduate retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition for financial assistance to the town of Duck 

Lake water project. The petition is being circulated and signed 

by residents because of the exorbitant amount that Duck Lake 

citizens are forced to pay for good, clean drinking water, and 

it’s causing them hardship and actually forcing people to move 

out of their town. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for their health and safety due to the 

exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfill its 

obligation to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today these petitions are signed by the good folks 

from Duck Lake; Grand Rapids, Manitoba; and La Ronge. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 

support of protecting the South Saskatchewan River and the M1 



May 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5609 

canal. The undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan wish to bring to the government’s attention the 

following: that the people of Saskatchewan are concerned with 

the potentially dangerous environmental hazard that may arise 

from stockpiled and unregulated manure disposal from a 

36,000-head feedlot to be located 500 feet from the M1 canal 

and three and a half miles from the South Saskatchewan River 

in the RM [rural municipality] of Rudy No. 284. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: to take appropriate actions to ensure that 

environmental requirements maintain the quality of the 

South Saskatchewan River and regulations are adjusted 

and implemented to reflect the magnitude of modern-day 

feedlot capacity. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Outlook, Conquest, Moose Jaw, Regina, Prince Albert, 

Saskatoon, Humboldt, Dysart, Balcarres, Moosomin, and 

Cupar. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask the member to wait till we’ve 

gone through the presenting of petitions. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a 

petition in support of the withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, 

we all know that members in the building trade unions have a 

proud history of craft union certification in Saskatchewan. Mr. 

Speaker, the existing construction industry labour relations Act, 

1992 has provided a stable environment of labour relations. 

And the results, we all know, of a stable labour relations 

environment is quality work with safe construction work sites, 

Mr. Speaker, and a benefit to all of us in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the existing building trades contracts support 

apprenticeship system of training which results in a highly 

skilled workforce. Mr. Speaker, the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dishonours the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by people from Aberdeen, Air 

Ronge, Albertville, Alvena, Arborfield, Archerwill, Arcola, 

Arran, Asquith, Assiniboia, Avonlea, Balcarres, Balgonie, 

Bangor, Battleford, Beauval, Bethune, Bienfait, Big River, 

Biggar, Birch Hills, Blaine Lake, Borden, Border, Briercrest, 

Broadview, Brooksby, Buchanan, Buena Vista, Buffalo 

Narrows, Candle Lake, Canora, Canwood, Crean Lake, 

Carievale, Carlyle, Carnduff, Carrot River, Central Butte, 

Chamberlain, Chich Lake, Choiceland, Christopher Lake, 

Churchbridge, Clavet, Cochin, Colonsay, Conquest, Coronach, 

Coteau, Craven, Creighton, Cumberland House, Cupar, Cut 

Knife, Dalmeny, Delisle, Dilke, Drake, Dundurn, Duval, Edam, 

Edenwold, Edgeley, Elbow, Elstow, Ernfold, Esterhazy, 

Estevan, Eston, Fillmore, Foam Lake, Fort Qu’Appelle, 

Gallivan, Govan, Grand Coulee, Grandora, Gravelbourg, Green 

Lake, Grenfell, Hafford, Hagen, Handel, Hanley . . . [inaudible] 

. . . Harris, Holbein, Holdfast, Hudson Bay, Humboldt, 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, Imperial, Indian Head, Ituna, Kamsack, 

Kelvington, Kenaston, Kennedy, Kenosee Lake, Kinistino, 

Kinley, Kisbey, Koniski, Kronau, La Ronge, Lac Vert, Lake 

Lenore, Langham, Lanigan, Lashburn, Leask, Lebret, Lemberg, 

Leoville, Liberty, Lintlaw, Lloydminster, Loreburn, Love, 

Lucky Lake, Lumsden, Macdowall, Macklin, Major, Maple 

Creek, Margo, Marquis, Marshall, Martensville, McLean, 

Meadow Lake, Meath Park, Melfort, Melville, Meota, Milden, 

Moose Jaw, Moosomin, Mossbank, Muenster, Muskoday, 

Naicam, Nipawin, North Battleford, Odessa, Outlook, Oxbow, 

Paddockwood, Patuanak, Pense, Perdue, Pike Lake, Pilot Butte, 

Portreeve, Preeceville, Prince Albert, Prud’homme, 

Qu’Appelle, Quinton, Raymore, Regina, Regina Beach, 

Rocanville, Rockglen, Rosthern, Rouleau, Saltcoats, Saskatoon, 

Sedley, Semans, Shackleton, Shaunavon, Shellbrook, Silton, 

Smeaton, Speers, Spiritwood, Spruce Home, St. Benedict, St. 

Brieux, St. Louis, Star City, Stoughton, Strasbourg, Sturgis, 

Swift Current, Tantallon, Theodore, Thunder Bay, Tisdale, 

Turtleford, Vanscoy, Viscount, Wadena, Wakaw, Waldheim, 

Wapella, Warman, Watrous, Watson, Webb, Weirdale, White 

City, White Fox, Whitewood, Willoughby, Willow Bunch, 

Wishart, Wolseley, Wynyard, Yellow Quill, Yorkton, Young, 

and Zealandia. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to rise to present petitions once again here today on behalf of 

concerned residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to 

the unprecedented mismanagement of our finances by the Sask 

Party. They allude to the two consecutive $1 billion deficits 

tabled by the Sask Party and they reference the billions of 

dollars of debt growth under the Sask Party projected by the 

Sask Party. People in this province are fed up with the deficits 

that this Sask Party has tabled and they’re sick and tired of the 

debt growth that they know jeopardizes future generations. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 



5610 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2010 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by good folks and concerned citizens 

from across Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

again today to present a petition in support of midwifery here in 

Saskatchewan. This petition is signed by residents concerned 

that despite The Midwifery Act was proclaimed two years ago, 

more than two years ago, there are only seven midwives in all 

of Saskatchewan, five of them in Saskatoon, which isn’t even 

enough to service, not even enough to service the entire 

Saskatoon Health Region. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to keep its promise to broaden the options 

for women and their families and recognize that presently 

this promise remains unfulfilled, as many communities in 

Saskatchewan still do not have midwives employed by 

their respective health regions; 

 

And in doing so, your petitioners pray the honourable 

Legislative Assembly cause the government to support 

midwifery in Saskatchewan by making funding available 

for additional midwife positions in Saskatchewan’s health 

regions as well as independent positions; 

 

And, furthermore, the honourable Legislative Assembly 

cause the government to encourage an increase in the 

number of licensed midwives in Saskatchewan by 

extending the liability insurance, thereby making it 

possible for prospective midwives to achieve the number 

of births required to successfully apply for a licence with 

the newly formed College of Midwives. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents in Brock, 

Kerrobert, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Fairview 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

asked leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly, in your gallery, I’d like to introduce 

three individuals: Randy Nichols, president of the building 

trades, Chuck Rudder with the insulators, and Tom Graham, 

president of CUPE. I ask all members of the Legislative 

Assembly to welcome these trade unionists to their Assembly. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre on his feet? 

 

Mr. McCall: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre 

has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you two individuals 

seated in your gallery. I’m speaking of Vice-chief Lyle 

Whitefish with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 

and his aide-de-camp, Chris Laplante. 

 

They were here today to see the proceedings and participate in 

the proceedings, make a strong statement on The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act on the lawn of the legislature today 

together with hundreds of others, of citizens in the province of 

Saskatchewan. It’s good to see them here today in their 

Legislative Assembly. And I see that they’re also being joined 

by another worker for the FSIN, Danette Starblanket. Please 

join me in welcoming these individuals to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

The Battlefords Business Excellence Awards 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the legislature 

today to acknowledge and congratulate the winners of this 

year’s Battlefords Business Excellence Awards that took place 

on Tuesday, May the 4th. It was a great evening overall as one 

of the outstanding recreational and tourist destinations, Table 

Mountain Regional Park, was named Business of the Year. 

 

There were of course other winners this year. The Heritage 

Business Award went to Glanvilles Mens Wear, a business 

started in North Battleford in the 1930s. The Customer Service 

Award went to Blue Rentals. The Community Contribution 

Award winner is Innovation Credit Union. The Export 

Achievement Award winner, Battlefords Airspray; the 

Marketing Award winner, Anderson Pumphouse; and the 

winner of the New Business Venture Award, Mr. Ribs 

restaurant. 

 

The 17th annual business awards program sponsored by The 

Battlefords Chamber of Commerce also featured the 

introduction of the Stan Wychopen scholarship, dedicated to the 

internationally known master craftsman who passed away last 



May 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5611 

year after handcrafting the BBEX [The Battlefords Business 

Excellence] Awards for the program’s first 13 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I take this opportunity to ask all members of the 

Assembly to join me in congratulating this year’s winners and 

the organizers of The Battlefords Business Excellence Awards, 

BBEX 2010. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

New Ward Opens at Royal University Hospital 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 

here today to share an outstanding story about health care 

improvements in our province. On May 13th, I had the pleasure 

to represent the Minister of Health and the Government of 

Saskatchewan at the opening of a new six-bed oncology, 

hematology, blood and marrow stem cell transplant ward at 

Royal University Hospital in Saskatoon. 

 

This specialized ward is the result of a 2007 commitment of our 

government to fund the $2.7 million project. This is the first 

unit of its kind in Saskatchewan. In the past, patients had to be 

sent out of province and sometimes out of country. Patients are 

now able to stay close to family and friends, thus enabling a 

more supportive and comfortable recovery. 

 

A patient’s immune system is fragile during this treatment and 

consequently a cold or a flu could cost them their lives. To that 

end, a specialized positive-pressure HEPA [high efficiency 

particulate arrestance] filtration system is needed to keep the 

rooms free from dust, mould, and bacteria. This summer, the 

transplant team will have a full complement of doctors. 

 

Transplant patient Patty and her husband Ernie told their story, 

which highlighted the dramatic improvements to care that this 

unit will provide Saskatchewan residents. Mr. Speaker, our 

government continues to move forward in improving health 

care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

The Great Wall 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 

Premier has jetted off to China on the taxpayer dime hoping to 

make himself a national attraction, hoping to make himself the 

new Great Wall of China and, Mr. Speaker, in some ways he’s 

well on his way. After all, the Great Wall of China is so huge 

you can see it from space, just like this government’s 

ballooning debt, deficit, and incompetence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Great Wall of China is a reminder of something that we 

have all seen before. Something may be slightly polished, given 

a new logo, and renamed, Mr. Speaker. Sometimes people who 

didn’t witness the disaster of that era wouldn’t even recognize 

the new wall. But it’s still the same old wall, Mr. Speaker, not 

very good at its job, and ready to fall apart. Some parts of the 

wall are now in complete disarray: the wall’s savings account, 

Mr. Speaker, and the Crowns, just to give an example or two. 

 

Communication is not so strong along the great wall either. 

When you’re near the great wall at the cabinet table, there is 

just no desire to talk to anyone. Maybe you feel like you don’t 

have to. Maybe you can just say that you did some talking when 

you really didn’t. But sometimes there’s not much talking 

because of the cloud of secrecy that surrounds the wall, Mr. 

Speaker. Things just aren’t quite clear and transparent. People 

feel like they aren’t accountable for their actions there. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, no matter how long the Premier spends in 

China, how many taxpayer dollars he spends in opening a new 

office, the only true natural wonder of the world will be when 

the wall falls down. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Cystic Fibrosis Month 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May is national 

Cystic Fibrosis Month. Cystic fibrosis is the most common fatal 

genetic disease affecting Canadian children and young adults. 

Cystic fibrosis is a multi-organ disease, primarily affecting the 

lungs and the digestive system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to explain to this Assembly the plight 

of the children and young adults afflicted with cystic fibrosis. 

Children with cystic fibrosis experience breathing difficulty. 

Often this is because of severe infection in the lungs or 

progressive damage to lung tissue due to inflammation. 

Unfortunately breathing problems can be worsened by muscle 

loss in the diaphragm. 

 

At this point, Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize the 

Canadian Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. This foundation has 50 

volunteer chapters in Canada with two in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has been progress made in the fight against 

cystic fibrosis. The Canadian Cystic Fibrosis Foundation has 

developed a program called the basic research therapy program. 

Though there is no cure for cystic fibrosis, it is uplifting to see 

progress being made by our Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. 

 

I would like to ask all members of this Assembly to keep all 

Saskatchewan children and young adults afflicted with cystic 

fibrosis in their thoughts and in their prayers. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

TV Channel 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, most residents know that our 

legislative proceedings share space on the television dial with 

the Shopping Channel. Before tuning into question period, you 

might see merchandise sales instead of politics. A shared 

channel is a potential source of viewer confusion, Mr. Speaker, 

and it’s no wonder these days. 

 

Answers broadcast from the government side are making some 

wonder if they aren’t launching a new Saskatchewan Party 



5612 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2010 

shopping channel in place of SCN. This new TV enterprise, Mr. 

Speaker, is a going concern. In fact the Enterprise minister 

claims to be on the air 24/7 hawking his wares. There aren’t any 

takers so far for his 430, $5 million dome, Mr. Speaker, but his 

latest showstopper is an authentic replica of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan’s investment attraction office for six easy 

monthly payments of $15,000. 

 

The Environment minister has jewellery for sale, Mr. Speaker, 

and it’s no cubic zirconia. She’s selling off a crown jewel, 3.5 

million acres of public land. 

 

Then there’s the Health minister, Mr. Speaker. He’s showcasing 

untendered construction contracts worth millions of taxpayers’ 

dollars for a low, low party contribution of $18,000. Special 

financing terms are available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is hardly expert at adding more 

channels to the television dial, so it’s no wonder that most 

viewer are not buying what they’re selling. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

so many voters are tuning them out that the Saskatchewan Party 

shopping channel is set to go to dark on November 7th, 2011. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Easter Seals Camp Day Relay 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Saturday 

May 15th was a special day in Saskatchewan. This marked the 

Easter Seals Saskatchewan Camp Day Relay. The relay is a 

great opportunity for individuals, families and friends, and 

co-workers to celebrate Camp Easter Seal and the difference 

they make in the lives of hundreds of Saskatchewan children 

every year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Camp Easter Seal is a fully wheelchair accessible 

facility at Manitou Beach near Watrous. Easter Seals 

Saskatchewan works to ensure that no child with disabilities is 

left behind. 

 

The Minister of Advanced Education and Labour attended the 

relay, as did Saskatoon Mayor Atchison. I would like to 

recognize both Greg Donaldson and Rupen Sambasivan. These 

two children are the youth ambassadors that participated in the 

relay by walking a kilometre with the minister and the 

Saskatoon mayor. 

 

I would be remiss if I did not recognize Draggins Car Club who 

was out there showing their support with their custom cars. 

 

The funds raised from this event stays in Saskatchewan and 

supports Easter Seals Saskatchewan programs. I am proud to 

live in a province in which we strive to follow the Easter Seal 

mandate which is, no child left behind. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Mathematics 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We all 

know the Sask Party math doesn’t add up. And yesterday we 

got our latest update to the Sask Party number count. We all 

know that with the Sask Party you always get two stories for the 

price of one, and it’s your choice which to believe. 

 

As they take our protected lands from over 3 million acres 

down to zero, they’ve taken the finances from a surplus of $2.3 

billion to a deficit of over 1 billion. But when it comes to their 

friends and cronies, Mr. Speaker, the count for the freebies is in 

the millions. 

 

[14:15] 

 

And just when we thought we’d heard all the Sask Party 

numbers, the Minister of Enterprise Saskatchewan told the 

Assembly yesterday that he’s been doing consultations 24 hours 

a day, 7 days a week, 365 days of the years, Mr. Speaker, just 

like 7-Eleven, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But his stories are all buy one, get one free. And the truths are 

only 50 per cent there because when it comes to consultations, 

Mr. Speaker, we all know the Sask Party scores a big fat zero. 

Yesterday the minister said he’d even give out his phone 

number, Mr. Speaker. But I think we already have it: 

1-800-for-no-results, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

So what’s the Sask Party number count now, Mr. Speaker? One 

ballooning debt, two consecutive deficit budgets, 37 

incompetent members, and only 18 months to a change, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Saskatchewan Communications Network 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, as you know and as 

members of the Assembly know, hundreds of members from 

around the province, individuals have come here today to 

protest the government’s mismanagement and incompetence in 

many, many areas. 

 

And one of those groups represented were those people who 

were fighting to keep SCN and an organization called SCN 

Matters. And they have a Facebook group of 4,600 people, and 

tens of thousands of people have indicated that they want this 

SCN kept because it delivers service to the people of the 

province and broadcasting to many, many areas, including the 

schools in the province. It also is important to know that if that 

broadcasting licence is given up, it will mean it will be much 

more difficult to do productions and movies in the province. 

 

My question to the minister is this: in light of the fact that it will 

mean, to the people of the province, loss of many, many jobs, 

why has he chosen at this time to privatize SCN? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 



May 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5613 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to take that question. Certainly it was a decision in this 

budget that government remove itself from the business of 

being a television station owner and operator, Mr. Speaker. But 

there is work being done to see if there is interest from others to 

take over the licence, be it a transfer through the CRTC 

[Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 

Commission] and through the assets, Mr. Speaker. That due 

diligence is currently under way. A short list has been 

produced. The evaluation team has met with the short list last 

week. They will be continuing those meetings this week, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But work does continue with the industry, Mr. Speaker, through 

the task force that has been put together because obviously 

television is just one vehicle in which productions are shown. 

And obviously change has taken place in the last 20 years since 

SCN has been around. Certainly there’s change being driven by 

the Canada Media Fund itself that is driving how productions 

are paid for in this country, Mr. Speaker, and I look forward to 

the task force and their work throughout the summer. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Rental Housing Issues 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a number of groups came 

today, and one of them is the Red Tent campaign group who are 

urging the government to do something about the cost of rent 

and good quality housing in this province which is sadly 

lacking. Members will know that rent in many areas of the 

province is up by 20 and 30 per cent, and many people simply 

can’t afford to make ends meet. 

 

My question to the minister is this: when will this government 

come to its senses and do something about skyrocketing rent in 

this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, under our government, a 

family on assistance receives 100 per cent of the average rental 

rate within the community that they belong. That’s adjusted 

every six months, Mr. Speaker, to address the situation. If they 

have a disability or a family member with a disability, they 

receive 110 per cent. 

 

We’ve increased minimum wage. We’ve increased the 

Saskatchewan employment supplement. We’ve increased 

seniors’ income plan. And we’ve increased the low-income tax 

credit to help families and individuals within our province. 

 

What we do not do on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, is 

displace low-income people by having a member rent a 

low-income apartment that this government and the federal 

government is putting millions of dollars into to maintain as a 

low-income unit. And it is being displaced by one of their 

members. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Habitat Protection and Sale of Crown Land 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear that what the 

minister is suggesting, that working people should go on 

welfare in order to get their rent paid. That’s what she is 

suggesting. And that is absolutely wrong, and the people of this 

province should have none of it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, new question to the minister in 

charge of The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. We know that 

tens of thousands of people have now signed the petition and 

come forward. Of the million people in this province who own 

this 3.5 million acres, tens of thousands are concerned that that 

land is being sold without their permission and without any 

consultation. Today we saw the FSIN, we saw Nature 

Conservancy representatives in the group outside urging that, 

even at this late date, that Bill be withdrawn. 

 

Can the minister indicate that she would today, in the dying 

days of this session, withdraw that Bill so that proper 

consultation can go on and that the million people in this 

province would have an opportunity to express their opinion on 

this matter? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said numerous 

times, our government is supportive of landownership, Mr. 

Speaker. We are supportive of this Bill and it is our intention to 

go forward. And, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite want to 

talk about numbers, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities said and I quote, “SARM supports the passage of 

the proposed changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act as 

found in Bill no. 132.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities] represents hundreds of thousands of people. The 

Canadian Federation of Independent Business has said, “A 

strong majority of Saskatchewan CFIB agribusiness members 

said that they have completed or are in the process of 

completing environmental farm plans.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are people who are protecting our lands. The 

CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent Business] is 

supportive of this Bill as well, Mr. Speaker. The CFIB is 

representative of thousands . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. It seems to me there’s 

probably some people who would be interested in hearing the 

answer. I’d ask the opposition now to allow the minister to 

complete her comments without . . . Order. The member from 

Cumberland will come to order. Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we have support from 

organizations that represent hundreds of thousands of people in 

this province. Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we have 

agreed to do is to re-establish a Crown land conservation 

advisory committee, and all of these stakeholders will have a 



5614 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2010 

voice, Mr. Speaker, on conservation going forward in our 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the Minister of Labour. The Minister of Labour knows that 

before the election, commitments were made to people in the 

building trades and the building trades organizations that if the 

Sask Party was elected that changes would not be made to this 

Act that would lead us to a Bill 80. That commitment was made 

by the now Premier. 

 

The question to the minister is this: that as a result of the lack of 

consultation, and in light of the fact that the economy and the 

building program in the province was at record rates in 2007 

when this government was elected, why in the world would this 

government move to fix a problem that didn’t exist? And why 

doesn’t the minister today withdraw the Bill, do the proper 

consultation that was never done before the Bill was introduced, 

come to his senses, deep-six this Bill and get rid of it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 

the opportunity to highlight the value of Bill 80, and that is 

obviously enhancing the choice for working people across the 

province, creating greater competition right across that sector, 

Mr. Speaker, and offering greater clarity regarding 

abandonment. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, let me quote from last week, from May 8th, 

the president of the Aboriginal Skilled Workers Association 

who is looking forward to Bill 80 passing. He says, “We believe 

it’s a good . . .” 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So in addition to 

going forward with greater clarity and increasing competition 

and choice, it’s also about building greater inclusivity within 

the construction trades. 

 

The president of the Aboriginal Skilled Workers Association, 

last week in the Leader-Post says, “We believe it is a good 

thing for the people — it will create equal opportunities in the 

workforce and we believe it will help conquer a lot of issues we 

face every day.” Mr. Speaker, what we see here is increased 

inclusivity by Bill 80. Thank you, sir. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Health Care Negotiations 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, hundreds of health care 

workers came to the Assembly today, a number of them who 

are in the gallery, and want to know from the Minister of 

Health, in light of the fact that 25,000 health care workers have 

been without a contract for now going into the third year, and 

these 25,000 health care workers make up 75 per cent of the 

people who work in health care in this province, how is it that 

when he talks about patients first and their commitment to that 

program, how can anyone believe that they’re serious when 

they can’t even get a contract with the 25,000 men and women, 

largely women, who do the heavy lifting in our health care 

program? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll say at the outset that our government values all the 

workers within the health care system, Mr. Speaker, whether 

it’s in acute care centres, whether it’s in long-term care, whether 

it’s in mental health, whether it’s in public health, Mr. Speaker. 

We value all the workers. 

 

Right now there is a contract outstanding for up to two years, 

which is definitely way too long, Mr. Speaker. We would agree 

with that. But negotiations are going on between SAHO 

[Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations] and the 

provider unions, Mr. Speaker. Just following through with some 

of the discussion that’s been going on . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I’d ask the backbench of the opposition side, 

save for two members who are really paying . . . three members 

paying attention, to allow the Minister of Health to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the negotiations are 

going on right now between the employer, SAHO, and the 

employee provider groups, Mr. Speaker. I know that there’s 

been a final offer presented by SAHO and an amended final 

offer presented by SAHO, Mr. Speaker. Many of the workers 

that I talk to on an anecdotal basis say, I wish we could just 

simply vote on that amended final offer. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Enterprise Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, no one is buying the line 

that this government doesn’t have the money to do the 

programs that they’re now talking about cutting. Everyone now 

knows that the income, the revenues to the provincial 

government has gone from $7.8 billion in 2007 to $10 billion 

this year, an increase of 25 per cent. And the public is 

absolutely correct in asking of this government, where has all 

the money gone? That’s what they’re asking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that we have seen cuts to SCN, 

to kidney transplant, to West Nile mosquito programs, to Dutch 

elm disease, chiropractic services, even if you didn’t have the 

money to do all the programs and you had to make a choice, 

why would you choose to cut these programs that mean so 

much to so many and leave Enterprise Saskatchewan in place? 

That would have covered all of those cuts. Why would you go 

to that conclusion to make ends meet? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 



May 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5615 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a pleasure to answer the question. I’m pleased that 

the member mentioned Enterprise Saskatchewan because that’s 

why we’re working hard to make this economy the fastest 

growing economy in the country. It’s not only that we can stand 

in this legislature and talk about the statistics, but it’s the reason 

why the statistics are so important, Mr. Speaker. It’s because we 

want the best health care system in the country, Mr. Speaker. 

We want to be able to afford it. 

 

Having infrastructure deficits in highways, in health care, and 

education is not good enough for this government. We had 16 

years of that under the NDP [New Democratic Party]. That’s 

why people of Saskatchewan voted for a change. That’s why 

they’re getting a very different government that make 

education, health care, and infrastructure a priority, and that’s 

what we will continue to do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, well, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

we know that government’s working hard, working hard to 

reward their friends, not ordinary working people who pay. 

 

Now this government claims that it’ll be paying no more than 

$185 per patient day to purchase long-term care beds from its 

friends at Amicus. But you can’t pay off a $27 million loan over 

a 25-year period on less than $1 million a year, which is what 

this government is asking us all to believe. And the agreement 

with Amicus does make provisions for negotiations on a 

funding formula before the facility opens, after the next 

election. 

 

The reality is, Mr. Speaker, is that the debt servicing fees will 

ultimately be a lot higher than this government is letting on. So 

to the minister: how much will Saskatchewan people pay, how 

much will Saskatchewan taxpayers pay to reward the Sask Party 

cronies? 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I disagree with many of the topics brought up by that 

member opposite, but I’ll agree with one thing. This 

government is working hard. We’re working extremely hard to 

ensure that our seniors in this province have appropriate care, 

unlike under the NDP. We’re working extremely hard to make 

sure that there are 13 long-term care facilities that saw nothing 

but deterioration under the NDP . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. 

Speaker, we’re working very hard to make sure that seniors age 

in dignity, can age with their spouse, Mr. Speaker, and age . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’re working very hard 

so seniors can age with dignity, can age in place, and age with 

their spouse, Mr. Speaker, something that former government 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member from 

Regina Walsh Acres continually, continually is responding or 

trying to respond. I ask the member to join with the other 

members who are waiting to hear the response, to allow the 

minister to respond. The minister may conclude his remarks. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I will finish by saying 

absolutely this government is working very hard to ensure 

dignity for seniors in this province, to ensure that they can live 

in a place that is respectful for the work that they’ve put into 

this province, Mr. Speaker. That’s what this government is 

working on. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, well, Mr. Speaker, this 

government’s working hard all right, working hard to reward 

their friends and shaft the rest of us. Now this government can 

spin this however they like, but the numbers don’t add up. We 

already know the Minister of Health and the Premier had a hand 

in this little mess, but with such poor arithmetic, maybe the 

Minister of Finance had his hand in this big pie as well. 

 

Now I’m going to take it slow so even the minister can 

understand. The government says they’re paying an extra $29 

per patient per day in debt servicing costs. There are 100 beds 

in the facility. There are 365 days in a year. That’s about $1 

million a year. Throw in 25 years of interest costs. It doesn’t 

add up. So to the minister: why is he downplaying the true cost 

of this government’s arrangement with its cronies? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Health 

Region and the provincial government has gone into an 

agreement with a friend of this province, the Catholic Health 

Ministry that’s delivered health care in this province for 

hundreds of years. I don’t know what the members opposite 

have against the work that was done at the Grey Nuns Hospital 

here in Regina. I don’t know what the members have against 

the Catholic Health Ministry that supplies services to St. Paul’s 

or supplies services to Estevan or nine other long-term care 

facilities in this province. 

 

If I followed along with that logic, Mr. Speaker, we’d better 

cancel every contract that we have with the Catholic Health 

Services Ministry in Saskatchewan because obviously that’s 

what the NDP would do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s really simple. Public 

money, public tender equals no graft and corruption, Mr. 

Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister refuses to admit that 

the government has guaranteed Amicus’s loan, but the 



5616 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2010 

government has signed an agreement that if either Amicus or 

the government decides to terminate the contract, the 

government will, and I quote, “pay to Amicus the amount 

required for Amicus to repay the outstanding balance.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, if it looks like a guarantee, if it pays off debt like a 

guarantee, it’s a guarantee. And today’s, and today’s 

Leader-Post agrees, saying, and I quote: “ . . . this does seem to 

fit the definition of a loan guarantee . . .” 

 

So to the minister: why do Sask Party friends get loan 

guarantees while volunteers for other affiliates hold bake sales, 

walkathons, car washes, and so on to raise 35 per cent of the 

cost of building or renovating their facility? Why is this 

minister continuing the snow job? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot believe what 

the member opposite just finished saying. The Amicus is a 

subsidiary of the Catholic Health Ministry that supplied health 

care in this province . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, who have supplied 

health care in this province for a hundred years and more, Mr. 

Speaker, excellent health care. That member just finished 

saying, by entering into an agreement, it’s corrupt because it’s 

the Catholic Health Services Ministry. 

 

I would ask her then to further that. So if we enter into an 

agreement with an Extendicare that offers long-term care 

around the province, is that corrupt as well, Mr. Speaker? 

Unbelievable the accusation that member just made regarding 

the Stensrud family, regarding the Catholic Health Services, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there are long-term care operators in 

Saskatoon today that are very forward looking to this agreement 

because they understand that there is a shortage of long-term 

care beds, Mr. Speaker. And two of them are saying, this looks 

like a really good deal. This could be a new way to guarantee 

long-term care beds in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, Oliver Lodge is building 

long-term care beds in Saskatoon. And guess what? They 

tendered the construction of those long-term care beds. But not 

this deal. 

 

Now, the minister, he tries to duck responsibility by saying the 

Catholic Health Ministry owns Amicus, but as it says in the 

Leader-Post today, and I quote, “. . . this particular arm’s length 

seems a rather short one.” 

 

The CEO [chief executive officer] of Amicus is on contract 

with the ministry. Their lawyer is the brother of the Premier’s 

chief of staff. The construction company who got the 

untendered contract to build this facility has donated $18,000 to 

the Sask Party, and it was the minister’s department and not the 

health region who negotiated a deal that provides a loan 

guarantee, pays Amicus higher daily fees, and allows Amicus to 

treat its employees differently than other health facilities. 

 

So to the minister: why is he denying responsibility for this deal 

when his and his Premier’s fingerprints are all over it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, our 

government is in no way denying the deal that the Saskatoon 

Health Region and the Catholic Health Services Ministry have 

entered into because, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to ensure better 

care . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I ask members to allow the Minister of Health 

to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a good deal for 

Saskatchewan, but even more important, it’s a good deal for 

seniors in our province, Mr. Speaker. Under that former 

government, they’d far rather see people living in acute care 

centres like the City Hospital in Saskatoon, 60 to 70 beds used 

up by acute care, long-term care residents in acute care. That is 

not satisfactory for this government here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are ensuring that there are 100 long-term care beds. It’s a 

good deal for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s a good deal 

because you even, even have people that run long-term care 

beds . . . and here’s what Randy Kurtz said, “As an existing 

operator, we’re watching it. If it works, it could help us [all],” 

Mr. Speaker. That’s what Randy Kurtz has to say, Mr. Speaker, 

as well as other long-term care operations are watching this 

model, thinking this could be a real benefit for seniors, Mr. 

Speaker, in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Health Care Issues 

 

Ms. Junor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier failed to 

properly fund the health care system, forcing health regions to 

run huge deficits and to find efficiencies. And, Mr. Speaker, 

finding efficiencies is translating into staff layoffs and program 

cuts. It’s starting already. We are hearing that 28 acute care 

beds are closing at City Hospital in Saskatoon this fall and that 

layoffs will result. The Saskatoon Health Region is the largest 

health region in Saskatchewan. Closing these beds will affect 

thousands of people. The health care of Saskatchewan people is 

being jeopardized because of this government’s financial 

mismanagement. The minister has said that regions could 

manage with their funding. Is this the management he supports, 

closing beds? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, health regions across the 

province have seen a 5 per cent increase in this budget. Mr. 

Speaker, it may be a little less than status quo, so they’re going 

to have to make some adjustments. They’re going to have to 



May 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5617 

find some efficiencies, Mr. Speaker. But the issue that that 

member opposite is talking about is absolutely false. It’s 

absolutely wrong because what is happening in Saskatoon is 

Oliver Lodge is opening up, so some acute care beds will be 

taken out of service in a short term to move the members over. 

Mr. Speaker, there will be no reduction in acute care beds over 

the long term . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the opposition members 

to allow, or some of the opposition members to allow the 

minister to complete his comments in response to the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the acute care centres in 

our province will be continuing to operate. We saw very good 

news yesterday, Mr. Speaker, under the Saskatchewan Party 

government. We saw people waiting 18 months or longer drop 

by 40 per cent. Mr. Speaker, in the last two years, we saw 

people waiting longer than a year for surgery drop by 22 per 

cent. And even better yet, Mr. Speaker, even better yet, people 

that were waiting for hips and knees over the last year, that wait 

list dropped by 62 per cent under a Saskatchewan Party 

government. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 1,645 through 1,647. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the member to give me 

the numbers again, I missed them. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Table answers to questions 1,645 through 

1,647. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1,645 through 1,647 are tabled. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to order the answers to 

questions 1,648 through 1,655. 

 

The Speaker: — 1,648 through 1,655 are ordered. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 132 — The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

again my privilege to rise and speak to Bill 132, The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act that the Sask Party is putting forward 

with respect to removing the lands that are currently protected 

under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, taking them out of 

legislation, and putting them into regulation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said last evening when I was speaking 

to this Bill, this Bill in itself is of great concern to the people of 

the province for a whole host of reasons because again it allows 

the Minister of Environment the sole discretion as to which 

lands can be sold without an easement and which lands can be 

sold with an easement and which lands will be retained under 

the Crown, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But as we know, because the Sask Party government is also 

putting forward a Bill called The Conservation Easements 

Amendment Act, that even the lands that are sold with a 

conservation easement attached to them can be then applied to 

the minister to have those easements removed. And yet again 

that would be at the sole discretion of the Minister of 

Environment to remove those conservation easements and then, 

Mr. Speaker, as an added feature, it is not court challengeable. 

 

So we see here, Mr. Speaker, that people won’t find out until 

after these lands have been sold that that sale has actually taken 

place, and then we see that there will be little to no recourse in 

the event that there is serious concerns with the sale that the 

Minister of Environment has then approved. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I was saying yesterday, there is a 

tremendous amount of correspondence that I’ve received, that 

the Premier’s received, that the Minister of Environment has 

received, and that many others have received with respect to 

people who are gravely concerned with this legislation and want 

this legislation either tabled or pulled altogether, Mr. Speaker, 

because as it’s already come clear, there were little to no 

consultations done on this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the Minister of Environment again today likes to blather 

on about the fact that she may have consulted with an entity or a 

stakeholder, Mr. Speaker, but that is not a broad-based 

consultative process, Mr. Speaker, and that certainly doesn’t 

serve in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these lands that are protected under The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act belong to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — all of the people of 

Saskatchewan, every man, woman, and child. They are not 

simply the possession of the Sask Party government to do with 

as they see fit and to simply sell off as they see fit. 

 

Basically, Mr. Speaker, the only reason for it is so that they can 

find some more dollars, so that they can cover up the financial 

mismanagement that this government is foisting upon the 

citizens of this province, Mr. Speaker. We already know that 

they have spent more than they’re taking in, Mr. Speaker. We 

already know that they’ve already spent the surplus of $2.3 

billion that was left to them when they became government in 

November of 2007, Mr. Speaker. We already know that they 

have destroyed — they have actually destroyed — the good 

financial management that was taking place in the previous 16 



5618 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2010 

years before they took office in November 2007, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is something that happened meticulously and deliberately 

and carefully over those previous 16 years, Mr. Speaker. 

Because when their predecessors left office in 1991, Mr. 

Speaker, the province was left in a situation where it was 

bankrupt, Mr. Speaker — $15 billion debt with a population of 

1 million people, Mr. Speaker. And that is what the previous 

government over the previous 16 years had to deal with, Mr. 

Speaker. They weren’t left with a $2.3 billion surplus. They 

were left with a $15 billion debt that they weren’t even aware of 

in its entirety until they finally saw the books, because they 

were not transparent and accountable to the people in the ’80s 

and they’re certainly not transparent and accountable to the 

people now. 

 

In the short three years, in the short three years that they have 

been in government, we are seeing not the same habits, Mr. 

Speaker, but worse. We’re seeing worse. We’re seeing a larger 

degree of financial mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. We’re seeing 

deals that are cooked in the backroom that they will not provide 

answers for and be accountable and open and transparent to the 

people of Saskatchewan. All we get is a bunch of rhetoric and 

overblown pompous attitude, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the . . . 

instead of telling the people of Saskatchewan what these deals 

actually entail, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They are not being truthful, I mean not being open and honest 

with the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They are being 

very nefarious in all of their dealings, and this wildlife habitat 

protection Act is no better, Mr. Speaker. There is no concrete 

answer that has yet been given to all of the stakeholders that 

have the concerns that they do, to all of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan who actually own the land, as to why 

it’s so important and why it’s so important to ram this 

legislation through, without the proper consultations taking 

place with the people of Saskatchewan to ensure that the 

legislation is sound in the format that they want to put forward, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the only thing that anyone can conclude in the province, Mr. 

Speaker, is that this is something that the Sask Party 

government simply wants to ram through for its own purposes. 

And so far all we see, Mr. Speaker, is them helping themselves 

at the trough of the Saskatchewan taxpayers. All we see is them 

helping the supporters that have given them significant financial 

donations to their party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what do we see the Sask Party government doing on behalf 

of the actual citizens, of the actual citizens of the province, Mr. 

Speaker? We don’t see much. As a matter of fact, we see almost 

nothing, Mr. Speaker. We don’t see them building a children’s 

hospital like they promised. We don’t see them building 13 

long-term care facilities like they promised. We don’t see them 

building a surgical care centre to shorten the waiting lists in this 

province like they promised. All we see, Mr. Speaker, are 

broken promises after broken promises after broken promises. 

 

We see them spending more than the province is taking in, 

despite the fact that the economy is doing very well, thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. But the financial mismanagement of 

the Sask Party government is once again putting us in jeopardy, 

Mr. Speaker. Once again, the Sask Party is putting us in 

jeopardy with their financial mismanagement of the province, 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Dewdney on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — With leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has asked 

for leave to introduce a guest. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

take this opportunity to introduce a member of the building 

trades, one of their business agents, and a very remarkable 

individual who works with the carpenters’ union out of 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker — with the millwrights; pardon me — 

Mr. Clarence George. 

 

Clarence is a dynamic speaker and I have to tell you, at the 

meeting a couple of weeks ago — or about four weeks ago now 

— he got up to speak and when he was speaking I had a 

difficult time not rolling around on the floor laughing. It was a 

very good little story and I think all the members in this 

Chamber would love to hear that story. It was about Tinker 

Bell, Mr. Speaker, and I think it was a great story. And I think 

people would love it. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce 

Clarence George to this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

(Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So as I was 

saying, Mr. Speaker, the province of Saskatchewan is not 

suffering from a bad economy, Mr. Speaker. It’s suffering from 

a bad government. That’s what’s happening today, Mr. Speaker. 

So when we look at what’s going on with The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act and the amount of concerns that have come in to 

the opposition caucus office, I want to just quote from a few of 

the pieces of correspondence we’ve received, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of these is from a gentleman named James, Jim Heck, 

sorry, and it’s to the Minister of Environment. It was cc’d to me 

and to the Premier of the Province. So the Premier is well aware 

of this gentleman’s concerns as well, as were most of the 

correspondence that I was cc’d on that either went straight to 

the Premier or went straight to the minister. There were a 

couple of times, Mr. Speaker, that pieces of correspondence 

were actually sent to me, and then they were cc’d to the 



May 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5619 

Minister of Environment and the Premier, but for the most part, 

it was the other way around. 

 

So this gentleman writes this: 

 

During a time in our province’s history when many 

wildlife populations are declining at an alarming rate 

largely because of habitat destruction, I am at a loss to 

understand why you want to remove over a million more 

hectares of habitat from legislative protection. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is exactly the sentiment that we are 

hearing from everyone that’s contacting us. Everyone is saying 

the same thing — that they don’t understand why it is that there 

is this great sense of urgency for the Sask Party government to 

remove this land that’s protected under The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act and move it out of the legislation and into 

regulations where it no longer has that same protection. 

 

Now I want to make sure that anyone that’s watching 

understands what that protection actually entails. In other 

words, when that land is in legislation and the government 

decides to want to sell some of that land, that discussion has to 

come to the floor of the Assembly. So therefore there is an 

opportunity for that land sale to be scrutinized, the public will 

be aware of that land sale before it takes place, and the debate 

can happen as to whether or not it is appropriate for that piece 

of land to be sold, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That would be the proper way of dealing with any potential land 

sales for the lands that are currently protected under The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. But the Sask Party government, 

they don’t like to have to be accountable to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that the people of 

Saskatchewan are the landowners, Mr. Speaker, but they don’t 

want to be accountable to the landowners of Saskatchewan. 

They just want to be able to do whatever they want to do, 

whenever they want to do it. And they don’t want to have to 

suffer the scrutiny that would take place if a land sale had been 

discussed in the legislature before being sold, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They want to simply be able to sell off a piece of land, if that’s 

what they feel like doing, or sell it with a conservation 

easement to make themselves look like they’re being good 

stewards of that wildlife habitat land. But knowing full well that 

they’ve got another ace in their pocket, Mr. Speaker, and that 

ace would be The Conservation Easements Amendment Act 

where somebody can make an application to the same Minister 

of Environment and have that conservation easement removed. 

And then, Mr. Speaker, like I said, as an added delight, it’s not 

even court challengeable. So there is no recourse for anyone if 

they have concerns with the piece of land that has been sold. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, just as a refresher for some of the members 

opposite that perhaps weren’t listening to me when I was 

speaking last evening, the lands were protected not in the 

previous . . . I mean, there were additional lands protected, I 

should say, in the previous 16 years that the NDP was in 

government. But the lands fell into The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act originally under the Progressive Conservative 

government in 1984. And as I said last evening, Mr. Speaker, 

this would be one of those positive legacy items that a 

government can be proud of when they leave their term in 

office, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the minister at the time was Colin Maxwell. He was the 

minister of Environment at the time, and he said this in respect 

to that particular piece of legislation. He says: 

 

It was unique at the time it was passed. We were the envy 

of other jurisdictions. It was viewed as visionary. Nobody 

else had one. 

 

And he also goes on to say, “Whenever there’s a conflict 

between humans and wildlife, wildlife gets the silver medal.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, Colin Maxwell and the Devine Tories of the ’80s 

could see that it was ultimately their responsibility as the 

government to ensure that those lands were protected and not 

just protected in terms of the wildlife that existed there at the 

time, Mr. Speaker, but that those lands were protected well into 

the future for future generations. They had the foresight and 

they had the vision to know that that was something that was 

important to do and that it was ultimately their responsibility as 

a government to ensure that that was done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I’m very pleased to say that under the administration of 

the NDP, after that land was protected, Mr. Speaker, it 

continued on. It continued on that many more pieces of land 

were protected under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, Mr. 

Speaker. And that speaks again to the value of the legislation 

and the value that those lands possessed in terms of protecting 

them under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act with the Devine 

Tories, and then again adding to the inventory under the NDP 

administration that followed. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, those are positive legacies. Those are 

positive legacies by, as I said, the Devine Tories at a time when 

they introduced the legislation and put those lands under 

protection. There was, I mean, definitely a positive legacy by 

the NDP administration that followed in ensuring that the 

inventory was substantially increased, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what is the Sask Party government going to have to brag 

about as their legacy, Mr. Speaker? Quite frankly I don’t know, 

Mr. Speaker. I’m yet to understand what they’ve done that’s 

been positive for the people of Saskatchewan. They’ve certainly 

done things that they feel are positive for themselves and for 

their friends, Mr. Speaker. But with respect to what is a positive 

legacy for the people of Saskatchewan, it’s very, very difficult 

to see, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so what we’re going to see, Mr. Speaker, from this Sask 

Party government, if they don’t come to their senses and 

immediately withdraw this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is we’re going to 

see a legacy that they are going to have then the worst 

reputation in all of Canada with respect to environmental 

protection for wildlife habitat, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’re 

going to see. Because if they didn’t want that reputation, they 

would have the common sense and the sensibility to leave those 

lands protected under legislation instead of being able to do 

with those lands as they please by the stroke of the minister’s 

pen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 



5620 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2010 

It’s that simple. The Minister of Environment has full ability to 

deal with those lands as she sees fit. Once those lands come out 

of the protection of the legislation, Mr. Speaker, she can do 

with them as she sees fit. Now what’s interesting about that, 

Mr. Speaker, is this. As I said, those lands belong to the people 

of Saskatchewan. Furthermore the people of Saskatchewan 

have not been properly consulted or haven’t been consulted at 

all with respect to how they feel about this happening, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Furthermore the minister in committee mocks me when I ask 

her about the consultations that were not done with the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. She then mocks me 

when I say to her, well you haven’t had FSIN at the table. You 

haven’t had FSIN at the workshop. You clearly see that the 

FSIN has serious and grave concerns with this legislation and is 

definitely opposed and is asking for the Bill to be withdrawn. 

 

And what does she say to me? She says that “They chose not to 

attend.” Mr. Speaker, that’s what the minister’s response was to 

me in committee when I asked her about that, that the FSIN 

chose not to attend. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the FSIN has been crystal clear to the 

minister on numerous occasions. First of all, when the invitation 

came, they explained why they can’t make it to the meeting on 

such short notice — because it was less than seven days — 

because they have to receive the mandate to be able to speak on 

behalf of the 74 First Nations. 

 

And let’s not forget, Mr. Speaker, let’s not forget that the 

$300,000 worth of funding for the partnership agreement that 

had been in existence for 16 years previous was cut by the Sask 

Party government, Mr. Speaker. Now that funding went to the 

issue of the FSIN being able to do the due diligence and the 

work that is needed on behalf of the 74 First Nations, to be able 

to represent their voice in discussions with the Ministry of 

Environment. That is what happened over the years previous. 

So the Sask Party government clearly saw no value in that and 

felt that it didn’t fit their mandate in terms of duty to consult. 

 

So they felt that was an easy $300,000 that they could cut, Mr. 

Speaker. Once again, to offset their financial mismanagement, 

they were cutting all sorts of programs that had very serious . . . 

how should I say, great value and could have some serious 

financial implications going forward into the future, Mr. 

Speaker, like for instance the Dutch elm disease program, the 

West Nile virus program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we see that they cut the funding to the partnership 

agreement, so the FSIN couldn’t even do the quick and hasty 

work that would’ve been needed to be done to be able to 

contact the 74 First Nations to be able to get the mandate to be 

able to speak on behalf of the 74 First Nations in that workshop 

discussion with the other stakeholders that the minister had 

invited. Only two weeks ago, Mr. Speaker. Not even two weeks 

ago; it was 10 days ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This legislation was rammed into the legislature, has been 

pushed through like crazy by the Sask Party government. 

Consultations didn’t take place. We’ve already heard that from 

a whole host of environmental stakeholders and other 

stakeholders that were supposedly contacted by the minister, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And yet the minister doesn’t even have the understanding that 

she does have a duty to appropriately consult with the First 

Nations of the province, and then furthermore cut the funding to 

the partnership agreement that allowed the FSIN to provide that 

feedback from the 74 First Nations to the Minister of 

Environment. 

 

Now the FSIN has been very clear. In the absence of being able 

to do that, it is now incumbent upon the Sask Party government, 

it is now incumbent upon the Minister of Environment, to 

actually contact each and every one of the 74 First Nations to 

receive their feedback and consult with them, Mr. Speaker. The 

FSIN has been very clear on that. 

 

But what has the minister done to this date, Mr. Speaker? I 

haven’t heard from a single First Nation that tells me that 

they’ve been contacted. Quite the contrary, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 

heard from numerous leaders of First Nations that tell me that 

they’ve still not heard anything from the Minister of 

Environment in terms of consultation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as we saw today with the hundreds of people that were on 

the front lawn protesting the passing of The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, Mr. Speaker, whether they were environmental 

stakeholders, whether they were concerned citizens, whether 

they were members of the FSIN or First Nations, Mr. Speaker, 

everyone is concerned and everyone wants to see the legislation 

stopped, Mr. Speaker. We want to see that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to finish off my remarks because 

there are many questions that we would like to ask and so 

therefore we’re anxious to see the minister in committee with 

respect to this legislation. So I want to leave the minister with a 

few, well one quote from an article and then a few quotes just to 

add some food for thought, Mr. Speaker. So this was written on 

April 29th and it was in The StarPhoenix and the title says, 

“Short-sighted of gov’t to sell protected land.” And I’d like to 

quote this: 

 

At a time when the entire world is becoming increasingly 

aware of the value of preserving natural habitat for 

wildlife for the sake of future generations as well as our 

own, the government demonstrates a breathtakingly 

short-sighted approach to its duty and obligation to act as a 

responsible steward of the public interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think anyone could say it any better than 

was said here in this StarPhoenix article. This is exactly what it 

is. It’s a short-sighted decision to cover off the financial 

mismanagement of the Sask Party government so that they can 

make a quick buck to help line the coffers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to leave these last couple of quotes 

here. This is an American Native proverb and it is, “We do not 

inherit the Earth from our ancestors, we borrow it from our 

children,” Mr. Speaker. And that’s exactly what everyone is 

concerned about, Mr. Speaker. By removing the wildlife habitat 

protected lands out of the Act and into legislation, we are 

robbing our future generations of their legacy. We are robbing 

the future generations of their crown jewel, Mr. Speaker. 

 



May 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5621 

And, Mr. Speaker, another quote: “In nature there are neither 

rewards nor punishments; there are consequences.” And this 

quote is by Robert G. Ingersoll. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

exactly what my fear is, and that’s what the fear is of the people 

of Saskatchewan — the majority, Mr. Speaker. They’re worried 

about the consequences of the Sask Party government’s 

decision to remove the lands, the wildlife habitat protected 

lands from legislation and therefore have full discretion at the 

Minister of Environment’s whim to decide to sell those lands, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I suggest that they please look at this short-sighted decision 

that they’re making, that they listen to the people of 

Saskatchewan and their concerns, which are extremely valid 

and well pointed out and are very clear to understand, Mr. 

Speaker. I suggest that this Sask Party government table . . . or 

in my opinion, it should be thrown out altogether, Mr. Speaker. 

And that is the growing opinion of people of Saskatchewan, that 

they should kill the idea of this legislation and leave the lands 

protected under legislation and find out another way to cover 

off their financial mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that, I would like to adjourn debate. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — It’s my understanding, it’s my understanding 

that the Assembly’s ready for the question. The motion before 

the Assembly . . . Or the question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment that Bill No. 132, The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

(Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 be now read the 

second time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 15:09 until 15:33.] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The question before the 

Assembly is the motion that Bill No. 132 be now read the 

second time. 

 

Those in favour of the motion please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 32] 

 

Morgan Bjornerud Draude 

Krawetz Boyd Eagles 

McMorris Cheveldayoff Duncan 

Heppner Harpauer D’Autremont 

Harrison Norris Reiter 

Hutchinson Brkich Elhard 

Hart Schriemer Stewart 

Allchurch Weekes Tell 

Hickie Michelson Ottenbreit 

Ross Chisholm Bradshaw 

Kirsch McMillan  

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 

 

[Nays — 18] 

 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Harper Trew Higgins 

Nilson Forbes Vermette 

Broten Furber Morin 

Yates Iwanchuk Taylor 

Quennell Wotherspoon Chartier 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Mr. Speaker, 32 

for; 18 against. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask members to 

come to order. To which committee shall the Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 132, The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act be referred to the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Committee on 

the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 134 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 134 — The 

Opticians Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am very 

pleased this afternoon to stand on Bill 134, The Opticians Act. 

Mr. Speaker, this is a piece of professional legislation that 

follows the same basic format of every piece of professional 

legislation in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier when the Bill was introduced, we had 

serious concerns because the optometrists in the province of 

Saskatchewan had indicated very strongly that they were in 

opposition to this Bill, Mr. Speaker. We now have, we have 

letters from the optometrists, Mr. Speaker, saying that they 



5622 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2010 

support this legislation moving forward, and based on those 

letters, Mr. Speaker, we are satisfied that this professional 

legislation is in the best interests of the province. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 134, 

The Opticians Act, be now read the second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Government Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 134, The 

Opticians Act be referred to the Standing Committee on Human 

Services. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Bill stands referred to the 

Committee on Human Services. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that the 

House do now adjourn to allow committees of Economy to sit 

on Bill 132 and Human Services to sit on Bill 134. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

adjournment of the Assembly to facilitate the working of 

committees. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 15:39.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5605 

  Iwanchuk ............................................................................................................................................................. 5605, 5606, 5610 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5605 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5605 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5605 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5606 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5606 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5606 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5606 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5606 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5606 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5606 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5606 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5607 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5607 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5607 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5610 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5618 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5607 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5607 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5608 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5608 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5608 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5608 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5608 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5608 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5609 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5609 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5610 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 The Battlefords Business Excellence Awards 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5610 

 New Ward Opens at Royal University Hospital 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5611 

 The Great Wall 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5611 

 Cystic Fibrosis Month 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5611 

 TV Channel 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5611 

 Easter Seals Camp Day Relay 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5612 

 Mathematics 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5612 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Saskatchewan Communications Network 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5612 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5613 

 Rental Housing Issues 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5613 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5613 

 Habitat Protection and Sale of Crown Land 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5613 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5613 

 Labour Legislation 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5614 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5614 

 Health Care Negotiations 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5614 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5614 



 

 Enterprise Saskatchewan 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5614 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5615 

 Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facility 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5615 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5615 

 Health Care Issues 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5616 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5616 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5617 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5617 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 5621 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5621 

 Bill No. 134 — The Opticians Act 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5621 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5622 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


