




















































Hansard: November 25, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 17A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 25, 2010, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6217 

 November 25, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to make an 

extended introduction of guests in your gallery this morning. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Joining 

us in your gallery today are five guests. I‟ll introduce three who 

are no strangers to government in our province: deputy of 

Corrections, Policing and Public Safety, Al Hilton, has joined 

us this morning; Gerald Tegart, deputy of Ministry of Justice 

has joined us; and deputy minister to the Premier, Doug Moen, 

is here. 

 

Seated in front of them are two very special guests, Mr. 

Speaker. Assistant Commissioner Dale McGowan joined the 

RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] in 1978. He received 

his police training here at the RCMP training academy in 

Regina. Throughout his career he has served in Saskatchewan 

and in Alberta and British Columbia and all three northern 

territories. He has a wealth of operational, northern, and First 

Nations policing experience. In his time with the RCMP, he has 

served in numerous . . . and led operational units including 

general duty policing, serious and major crime sections, 

homicide units, and as a criminal operations officer. 

 

Assistant Commissioner McGowan has been involved in and 

led a number of complex and high-profile criminal 

investigations throughout his career, and has received the 

Commanding Officer‟s Commendation for Investigative 

Excellence in regards to his work on the Giant mine homicide 

task force. He is the recipient of the Queen‟s Jubilee and Long 

Service Medals. Assistant Commissioner McGowan has held 

executive positions within the British Columbia and 

Saskatchewan associations of chiefs of police, and is a member 

of various national and international associations and boards. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of a very grateful province of 

Saskatchewan, we want to thank him for the great leadership he 

has provided to our province, to the home of the RCMP, to “F” 

Division. He is leaving behind a very healthy relationship with 

respect to the government, with respect to policing partners of 

the force right across this province. He leaves behind a province 

that is safer today for his leadership and for the efforts of the 

RCMP. And we thank him now as we introduce the new lead at 

“F” Division. But if I can ask all members to join me in 

thanking the assistant commissioner for his efforts. 

 

Welcome, Chief Superintendent Russ Mirasty, to the legislature 

and to the province. Russ joined the RCMP in 1976. He served 

in six divisions in various roles including detachment policing, 

highway patrol, police dog service, and divisional Aboriginal 

policing services. He left the RCMP for a short period to work 

in the Lac La Ronge community in our province. Upon his 

re-engagement into the force, he accepted the position as the 

north district commander in “F” Division. Since 2009, Chief 

Superintendent Mirasty has been serving as the director general 

of national Aboriginal policing at headquarters in Ottawa. 

 

Russ was born and raised in Saskatchewan. He is a member of 

the Lac La Ronge Indian Band and maintains a strong 

relationship with his home community. Mr. Speaker, very 

notably, Chief Superintendent Mirasty is the first First Nations 

commanding officer in a province or territory in Canadian 

history, and we welcome him and we look forward to working 

with him on behalf of all members of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a great relationship with the Mounted 

Police. They are our provincial police force. It‟s something that 

we‟re very proud of in Saskatchewan. And as I have told the 

members, the RCMP leaders that are with us this morning, 

earlier in my office, there is only one thing that could put at risk 

this relationship that we have — if the Mounties in red serges 

present the cup on Sunday to the wrong team. We‟re hopeful 

that that won‟t happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I hope all members will join me in welcoming these gentlemen 

to their Legislative Assembly, in thanking Dale and welcoming 

Russ. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

extremely pleased to join with the Premier and, at first, 

thanking Assistant Commissioner McGowan for your 

dedication and work on behalf of all the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The work the RCMP do in our province is without doubt 

exemplary, and we all, all members of this Assembly would 

like to thank you and through you all the men and women who 

you have had the opportunity to lead on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. And your leadership is noticed and welcomed, 

and we wish you in your future endeavours great success. 

 

And to your successor — also a Saskatchewan born and raised 

Saskatchewan citizen and a very proud, I expect, successor in 

your shoes in Saskatchewan — we wish him all the success in 

the future. You can count on the support of all members of this 

Assembly in all that you do. We very much appreciate and 

cherish the work that the RCMP do on behalf of all of us in our 

province. It is a difficult job and not one that is always easy to 

do, but you can know that we, all 58 members of this Assembly, 

do respect and cherish the work that you do. And we wish you 

the very best in your endeavours. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 



6218 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2010 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like 

to join with the Premier and the member from Dewdney in 

commenting on our RCMP guests. First I‟d like to welcome 

Chief Superintendent Russ Mirasty to his new assignment as the 

commanding officer of “F” Division. I look forward to working 

very, very closely with Russ in his new position. 

 

I‟d also very much like to thank Chief Superintendent Dale 

McGowan for all of the work that he has done for this province. 

We have worked what I would say extremely close in the last 

couple of years. And we can see a huge change in the policing 

in the province over the last number of years. We‟ve got the 

police forces back up to a reasonable strength, the RCMP up to 

a reasonable strength, and that is due in a large part to the work 

of Dale McGowan. I wish Dale all the best in his new 

assignment. We hate to see him leave the province of 

Saskatchewan, but he‟s going on to bigger and better things and 

more challenges. So I would like to personally thank Dale for 

all the work that he has done, and welcome Russ. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I‟m on my feet I would also like to 

introduce to you and through you to the Assembly a constituent 

of mine who is no stranger to us in the Assembly, Mr. Dave 

Marit. Dave, as we all know, is the president of Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities. So on behalf of all of us in 

the Assembly, it‟s very nice to see you here, Dave, and 

welcome. And everybody join me in welcoming Dave to his 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I‟m honoured to join the colleagues that have gone 

before me to introduce, but I‟d like to focus on Russ and just to 

welcome Russ here. 

 

Russ is from La Ronge, La Ronge Indian Band, and I just want 

to welcome you here, Russ. You truly are an ambassador for 

Lac La Ronge Indian Band and our community. You make us 

very proud — your commitment to the North and to your 

people and your efforts you have done to try to make sure there 

is a level playing field. And I commend you. 

 

And our community, Russ, is honoured to have you. And as you 

move up, we want to congratulate you but also want to make 

sure people know we are truly proud of you. You are truly have 

the northern spirit, and you truly care about the northern people. 

Teneki, Russ. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 

want to join with the minister and welcome Dave Marit to the 

Assembly. He‟s a frequent visitor, and we‟re always pleased to 

see him in the gallery. And I know that he does a great deal of 

work with SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities] and otherwise, and it is appreciated in the 

province of Saskatchewan. So I would ask all colleagues to 

welcome him here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to join in the chorus of congratulations to our two special 

guests. Certainly to Chief Superintendent Dale McGowan, very 

thankful for the work you have done, and I wish you the very 

best in your new endeavours. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, I also want to congratulate the new 

chief superintendent, Russ Mirasty. And you should know, Mr. 

Speaker, that Russ and I have had a history, not him chasing me 

around, but meeting on a number of occasions when I was a 

mayor and certainly as the MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly]. 

 

But for the folks out there that may not know, there are different 

dialects in the Cree language. And Russ is from the La Ronge 

area and they use the TH dialect, and we in the west side use the 

N dialect. So I‟ll try my very best to tell him in our own 

language. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

. . . your new job. So I think, Mr. Speaker, in Cree I told him 

that I‟m very proud of him. He went a long ways. And all our 

people will be told of this great accomplishment. And if he does 

have some confusion on some of the Cree words I used, there‟s 

actually the difference in dialect. So as opposed to me saying 

keyah, in La Ronge I‟d say kethah. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of the concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who 

are concerned over the deterioration of our highways, and this 

particular petition applies to Highway 22. Mr. Speaker, this 

petition states that the highway has deteriorated to a point 

where it‟s a safety hazard for the residents who have to drive on 

this highway each and every day. The prayer is as follows, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway No. 22 that the people of 

Saskatchewan need. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from Earl 

Grey, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan renters who are 

facing a combination of rising rents and low vacancy rates in 



November 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6219 

many communities across the province. And many of these 

renters have suffered rent increases in the hundreds of dollars 

each, Mr. Speaker, which makes it very difficult. And we 

recognize that a majority of Canadian provinces now have rent 

control guidelines, and that the argument that the private market 

would deliver sufficient affordable housing in the absence of 

rent controls has proven to be false. And the prayer reads, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to consider enacting some form of rent 

control with a view to protecting Saskatchewan renters 

from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I present on behalf of concerned citizens. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present another 

petition on behalf of citizens who wish to bring to our attention 

that many seniors live on fixed incomes and are victims of 

physical, emotional, and financial abuse and that Saskatchewan 

seniors have a right to social and economic security and a right 

to live free of poverty, that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation: 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to enact a 

Saskatchewan seniors‟ bill of rights, which would provide 

Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic security 

and protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

The over 50 signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the towns of 

Watrous, Young, Silton, St. Louis, Chitek Lake, Milden, 

Spiritwood, Leoville, Shellbrook, Edam, and Hoey. I so present. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. And we 

know in Saskatchewan the income gap between the rich and the 

poor continue to grow and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. I‟d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

that the Government of Saskatchewan act as quickly as 

possible to develop an effective and sustainable poverty 

elimination strategy for the benefit of all Saskatchewan 

citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from Biggar, 

Estevan, Unity, Regina, and Saskatoon. I do so present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of the expansion of the graduate 

retention program, a call for fairness for post-secondary 

Saskatchewan students. Now the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition today on behalf of Furdale residents. A 

government ministry has directed SaskWater to cut off supplies 

of water for domestic use to Furdale customers. The same 

government ministry has directed that customers may no longer 

treat non-potable water using methods approved by Sask 

Health. 

 

Furdale residents, in dealing in good faith with SaskWater for 

over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their domestic 

systems and in-home treatment equipment as well as for 

livestock irrigation lines. And the alternative water supply 

referred to by a government ministry is a private operator 

offering treated, non-pressurized water at great cost with no 

guarantee of quality, quantity, and availability of water. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the 

government to withdraw its order to cut off non-potable 

water to the residents of the hamlet of Furdale, causing 

great hardship with no suitable alternatives; to exempt the 

hamlet of Furdale from further water service cut-offs by 

granting a grandfather clause under The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act, 2002 and The Water 

Regulations, 2002; and that this government fulfills its 

promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Furdale and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again here today to present petitions on behalf of concerned 

residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the 

unprecedented mismanagement of our finances by the Sask 

Party. They allude to the two consecutive deficit budgets, the 

billions of dollars of debt growth. 

 



6220 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2010 

Here just today, Mr. Speaker, we had the mid-year update 

tabled, Mr. Speaker, and our concerns are not alleviated. The 

province . . . Across this province, fair to say that green is the 

colour, but when it comes to the colour of ink, certainly it‟s red, 

Mr. Speaker, deficit red. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Now these petitions today are signed by concerned citizens and 

good folks of Sedley and Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Elimination of Violence Against Women 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 

is International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against 

Women, as designated by the United Nations. Here in Canada, 

we will also continue to remember violence against women on 

December 6th, which marks the grim anniversary of the 

massacre at École Polytechnique in 1989. 

 

November 25th marks the brutal assassination in 1960 of the 

three Mirabal sisters, political activists in the Dominican 

Republic. These sisters were dedicated to ending the brutal 

dictatorship of Rafael Trujillo. On November 25, 1960, Trujillo 

sent men to intercept the three women after they had visited 

their husbands in prison. The unarmed sisters were led into a 

sugar cane field and executed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, women around the world are subject to sexual, 

physical, and emotional violence every day. Often this violence 

goes unquestioned or unchallenged. Currently one particular 

country‟s women are facing incredible levels of violence. In the 

Democratic Republic of Congo, approximately 1,100 rapes are 

reported each month, with an average of 36 women and girls 

raped every day. It is believed that over 200,000 women have 

suffered from sexual violence in that country since armed 

conflict began. 

 

Mr. Speaker, women and men everywhere must stand together 

against those who perpetrate all forms of violence against 

women. We must never allow these atrocities to go 

unchallenged anywhere. I ask all members to join with me 

today in committing to take action to prevent violence against 

women today and every day and everywhere. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Newfoundland and Labrador Premier 

Recognized on Retirement 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this day, 

the Premier of Newfoundland and Labrador, Danny Williams, 

announced his retirement, his pending retirement — I think 

effective the 3rd of December — as Premier of that province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we would want to salute him from the 

legislature here in Regina today for his accomplishments as 

Premier and his contribution to the country. They are 

significant. They include $2 billion in a five-year infrastructure 

strategy, the largest personal income tax cuts in Newfoundland, 

Mr. Speaker, record investments in the provincial education 

system. There‟s some symmetry here in terms of what each of 

our provinces are attempting to do, I think. And he also is 

largely responsible, his leadership and the economy of course in 

Newfoundland, for transforming that province, Newfoundland 

and Labrador, from a have-not province to a have province. 

 

So on the occasion of the announcement of his pending 

retirement, we want to wish him all the best and thank him for 

his contribution to the country. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Go Riders 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition caucus is sporting 

green today in support of our Saskatchewan Roughriders this 

weekend for the 98th Grey Cup. Saskatchewan is in the Grey 

Cup for the third time since 2007 and the second time under 

head coach, Ken Miller. Mr. Speaker, the players, the coaches, 

and the administration will not be alone as they head to the 

Grey Cup because the 13th man will be out in full force, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this season has had its ups and downs, but with the 

end zone in sight, the people of this province couldn‟t be more 

excited for the Roughriders and the opportunity to catch a 

fourth cup for the franchise. Mr. Speaker, the season series 

currently stands at two games apiece with the Alouettes. And 

make no mistake about it, this truly is a rubber match between 

these two teams. They split the season series and also 

represented their respective conferences last year in this very 

same game, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Riderville has been busy preparing and celebrating for the 

Riders‟ success in returning to yet another Grey Cup match. 

Fans will make the pilgrimage to Edmonton‟s Commonwealth 

Stadium to see their team win and capture the cup for the Rider 

fans in Saskatchewan and the Rider fans all across Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last year is last year and, although we did not 

achieve the success we‟d hoped for, I know that the Rider fans 

support their team in full force. And I ask all members in 

joining me in honouring our Saskatchewan Roughriders as they 

compete for the CFL [Canadian Football League] championship 

this weekend. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 



November 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6221 

Depot Division Receives Inaugural Award 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last evening Dr. 

Vianne Timmons presented the inaugural University of Regina 

President‟s Community Award. This award was established to 

recognize individuals or organizations whose values, history of 

service to Saskatchewan, and concern for our communities have 

made a lasting impact on our province. 

 

The award is presented to an individual or organization in any 

field of endeavour who has exemplified the University of 

Regina‟s motto — as one who serves. Mr. Speaker, the 

recipient must have a demonstrated history of serving the 

provincial community as well as showing a selfless concern for 

improving the lives of others and building a stronger 

community. 

 

The first recipient of this prestigious award is Depot Division of 

the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. The RCMP was chosen 

for its 125 years of community contribution to our city, 

province, nation, and the world. The Depot Division of the 

RCMP was additionally honoured for its contribution to 

Mountie House built in conjunction with Habitat for Humanity. 

 

One of the highlights of the evening was the acceptance speech 

made by assistant commissioner and commanding officer of 

Depot Division, Roger Brown. In his speech, he gave the 

audience a brief history of the RCMP, along with his vision for 

the future of the RCMP in Saskatchewan. 

 

I‟d like this Assembly to recognize the 125 years of service to 

our province from the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and the 

U of R‟s [University of Regina] recognition of that service. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Ile-a-la-Crosse Athlete Recognized 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

honour all northern Métis and First Nations people involved in 

sport. And I think back to a former neighbour of mine, a young 

man named Kris Georges. Kris was my good friend, and Kris 

won first place in senior boys‟ shot put, Mr. Speaker, but he 

was mere inches away from a provincial record. 

 

I recognized him then for his accomplishments, and I feel it 

always necessary to bring him up as an example again in the 

Assembly because as a valued member of our community, Kris 

is somebody we‟re very proud of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I always wonder why we, as Aboriginal and 

northern people, do not celebrate our achievements enough. I 

observe other peoples, other communities, and other regions of 

Saskatchewan, and there‟s always the recognition, not boastful 

nor disrespectful, but an honest pride of what someone local has 

achieved in sport and other arenas in life. 

 

I want to recognize Kris Georges, a local boy from 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, who was a provincial champion in shot put. Mr. 

Speaker, when I last saw Kris, he was pumping gas at a local 

store and I often see him walking throughout the community all 

the time. I know that Kris does not expect a community parade 

for himself, but I want him to know that we are proud of him. I 

want him to know that we‟re proud of those that come from the 

northern communities and excel in sport and actually become 

provincial champions like him. 

 

I ask all members of the Assembly to take the time to honour 

Kris and to recognize him in our own way. I call him champ 

when I see him, and I ask him to always keep the faith as people 

do recognize him for what he accomplished. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Go Riders 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It feels like déjà vu. A year ago this weekend, our 

province went through the spectrum of emotion in the blink of 

an eye. 

 

This year our Roughriders started the football season with one 

goal in mind, and here we are, Mr. Speaker, in the middle of 

Grey Cup week, and our Riders are back in the big game. With 

a successful trip to Alberta last weekend, we know that the only 

acceptable outcome for the green and white players is a victory 

this Sunday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the heart and focus of this Rider team, there 

is no question amongst the faithful supporters that they will 

give their all to bring back the cup to Saskatchewan. After all, 

17,000 Rider plates sold can‟t be wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Rider fans from across the entire country cannot 

wait for the rematch with the Montreal Alouettes. As the Rider 

nation will congregate at the game and around TVs across 

Canada this weekend, we will all be able to agree on one thing: 

our team has done us proud once again this year. So on behalf 

of Rider supporters everywhere, I want to say that the sea of 

green will all be watching and cheering on Canada‟s team this 

Sunday. Let‟s go, Riders. Bring home the cup. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Saskatchewan Golfer Honoured 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the Assembly 

today to congratulate Battlefords resident Frank Fowler on his 

recent induction into the Saskatchewan Golf Hall of Fame. 

Frank Fowler, originally from Alberta where he started to love 

everything about golf at the age of eight years, is still teaching 

golf at the North Battleford Golf and Country Club and sharing 

his lifetime of golf knowledge and experiences with members 

and friends today. 

 

Frank Fowler won junior golf championships. He won senior 

golf championships. And in between, he played on the 

Canadian golf tour for 12 years. And he played in the World 

Golf Championship in Tokyo, Japan with another great 

Canadian golfer, George Knudson. 

 

He is already an inductee into the North Battleford Sports Hall 



6222 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2010 

of Fame, and he is only one of two recipients of the Lifetime 

Achievement Award from the Alberta PGA [Professional 

Golfers‟ Association]. 

 

In The Battlefords, we know Frank Fowler to be a great golfer, 

a great teacher, a good friend, and an all-around good guy. I ask 

all members to join me in acknowledging and congratulating 

Frank Fowler on his induction in this inaugural year to the 

Saskatchewan Golf Hall of Fame. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

State of the Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, today‟s mid-year update 

was released as it relates to our finances. The Finance Minister, 

I want to paraphrase from his scrum, his press conference just 

moments ago. And I paraphrase: “I think the former Finance 

Minister lowered expectations, and I am continuing to do that.” 

Well certainly he has, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Today‟s financial update confirms the Sask Party is still on 

track to run a consecutive deficit. Tom Ford, a former senior 

federal civil servant, commented on this record in the Winnipeg 

Free Press last week. He said, “Brad Wall, a Tory, is in deep 

deficit country.” Today‟s mid-year budget displays a major 

deficit; this at a time of historic highs and revenues. My 

question is this: when will this Premier turn this around and get 

Saskatchewan out of deep deficit country? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, indeed I was very proud this morning on behalf of 

this government to table the mid-year report, Mr. Speaker, a 

mid-year report that shows that the people of Saskatchewan 

have confidence in this government. They have confidence in 

our economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this report will show to the people of 

Saskatchewan that the province‟s revenues are up, that the 

province‟s surplus is up. The Growth and Financial Security 

Fund, known as the rainy day fund, is up, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, everything in this document will show that the people 

of Saskatchewan have tremendous confidence in the 

government. The only thing, Mr. Speaker, that‟s down overall, 

and we‟ve heard about that over the last number of months, is 

the support of the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — We know that minister likes to turn up 

the volume when the heat‟s on, Mr. Speaker. And the heat‟s on 

and rightfully, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It‟s pretty interesting. If this was really such good news, Mr. 

Speaker, that this government . . . And we know this Premier 

and how he likes good news and cheerleading that he released 

this red ink into sea of green, Mr. Speaker. Simply not credible. 

 

This minister, Mr. Speaker, and this Premier is on track to 

spend over $10.5 billion this year. Compare that with the 

spending plan from the NDP in its last budget — $7.8 billion 

just three years ago. In just three years, the Premier has 

increased spending by a whopping 35 per cent. 

 

No wonder this Premier was ranked at the bottom of the heap of 

Canadian premiers by the Fraser Institute with respect to 

spending, and his record was called pathetic by the National 

Post. And no wonder he has taken us into deep deficit country. 

To the minister: when will it stop? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as indicated in the 

mid-year report, and I‟m going to read one paragraph that says, 

“In total, GRF expense is projected to be $10,539.1 million, an 

increase of $415.0 million . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to ask the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] and the member opposite, what things would they have 

cut? Would they have cut $200 million to the children‟s 

hospitals, Mr. Speaker? Would they have cut, would they have 

cut $5.1 million to multiple sclerosis clinical trials, Mr. 

Speaker? Would they have cut $144 million to assist 

agricultural producers in this province, Mr. Speaker? Mr. 

Speaker, would they have cut $10 million to Social Services to 

ensure that those conditions are met? Mr. Speaker, would they 

have cut $8 million to provide a long-term solution to the 

Fishing Lake problem, Mr. Speaker? What would that, what 

would that opposition have cut? 

 

Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite when 

asked what would he cut, he said, just put us in the benches of 

the government and we‟ll tell you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is this: 

debt is up in a massive way. Spending is up in a massive way, 

Mr. Speaker, 35 per cent over three years. And we have a 

second consecutive deficit budget, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely 

unacceptable and a trend line that‟s not sustainable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, buried deep inside the Premier‟s own budget 

document is the truth about our debt. Page 62 of the budget 

summary shows that debt will increase 55 per cent or 4.2 billion 

over the next four years. That means this Premier is adding a 

huge debt burden to Saskatchewan people. This mid-year 

budget itself, this update shows that debt will increase by 

almost half a billion dollars in this year alone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then there‟s all of that debt, Mr. Speaker, that that 

government and that Premier is hiding off of the books, Mr. 

Speaker, that taxpayers are ultimately on the hook for and 

paying a premium for. That includes long-term care deals, Mr. 

Speaker, power purchase agreements, and for-profit health care, 

Mr. Speaker. These massive increases to our debt all represent a 

major threat to our prosperity, Mr. Speaker. When will this 



November 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6223 

Premier provide the straight goods about our debt to 

Saskatchewan people, and when will he get a handle on it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it‟s known 

by everyone in this province that the debt of the province was 

reduced. It was reduced by over $2 billion . . . [inaudible] . . . 

That‟s a known fact, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite asks for transparency. 

Well in the document on page 17, it will indicate that the 

general government debt will remain at $4.1 billion and Crown 

corporation debt will rise, Mr. Speaker, will rise to $4.3 billion 

to ensure that the infrastructure deficit for all of our Crowns 

will continue to be rebuilt, leaving, Mr. Speaker, a total public 

debt of $8.5 billion. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let‟s go back to the last document of the 

NDP. Thank goodness it was the last one, Mr. Speaker. Because 

in ‟07, the debt of this government, Mr. Speaker, overall debt of 

all entities was $10.5 billion. Mr. Speaker, projected, projected 

to rise, Mr. Speaker, in the NDP‟s very own document to over 

$12 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they can‟t have it both ways. Mr. Speaker, their 

debt was over $10 billion. Our debt was reduced by $2.5 

billion, and we‟re going to continue to ensure that our Crowns 

move forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Right, Mr. Speaker. But that minister 

seems to forget that this government left them $2.3 billion, a 

booming economy, and in fact, Mr. Speaker, revenues that have 

been furnished to government that have been at all-time highs. 

Had that minister only kept his spending commitments, his 

promise from the last platform, Mr. Speaker, of that 

government, we‟d have an $8 billion surplus at this point in 

time, Mr. Speaker. Squandered — that‟s the fact. 

 

Mr. Speaker, part of the problem here is that Saskatchewan is 

the only province in Canada that does not use summary 

financing. This allows the Premier to not only mislead the 

public but also exploit the fiscal tools to the detriment of 

Saskatchewan people. Last year they took $800 million from 

the Crowns, this year almost $500 million. A complete raid, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This Premier tries to compare our finances to other provinces. 

Simply not fair, simply not accurate, Mr. Speaker. It‟s just 

politically expedient. We‟re playing by a different set of rules 

— inappropriate public sector accounting policies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan people deserve transparency and accountability, 

Mr. Speaker, and that means one set of books. To the minister: 

when will the Sask Party government stop playing games and 

be straightforward with the people of Saskatchewan through 

summary financials, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

think what we‟re going to do as government is provide accuracy 

to the people and in fact accuracy to the NDP numbers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let‟s clarify for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. When we became government, Mr. Speaker, the 

General Revenue Fund debt, the General Revenue Fund debt 

was at $6.8 billion. Mr. Speaker, the amount of dollars that 

were in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, as it was called then, was 

$1.2 billion. Mr. Speaker, today there‟s $4.1 billion in GRF 

[General Revenue Fund] debt, and in the mid-year, Mr. 

Speaker, the fund is at $1 billion, Mr. Speaker. That‟s an 

improvement of $2.5 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but that‟s on top of, that‟s on top of the largest 

income tax reduction in the province‟s history, the largest 

property tax reduction in the province‟s history, the largest 

infrastructure development in the province‟s history. Record tax 

reduction, record debt reduction, record investment in 

infrastructure — that‟s our government‟s record, and I‟m proud 

of it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Contract with Information Technology Office 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, an 

executive director in the Information Technology Office, 

William McMorris, is also the president of Common Sense 

Consulting Ltd. In 2009-2010, Common Sense Consulting 

received over $216,000 from the same Information Technology 

Office. The minister has had a day to get information on this 

contract. Can the minister tell us today what services Common 

Sense Consulting provided under that contract, and whether the 

contract has been renewed for 2010-2011, and at what cost? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will answer 

the member‟s question, and then I will take a moment to answer 

some questions I took notice of yesterday. Mr. Speaker, to his 

question today, William McMorris has a 30-year history of 

practising. He‟s a senior IT [information technology] 

professional. He was brought on to the ITO [Information 

Technology Office] to conduct a review of IT project 

management process. He was brought on at a time, Mr. 

Speaker, where different ministries, Mr. Speaker, were going in 

different directions, were not falling under the ITO. We needed 

to show value, to show that we had a common goal. And he has 

done that job very well. 

 

Currently he is leading an improvement division in the ITO 

application maintenance area, Mr. Speaker, the largest ITO unit. 

His contract, Mr. Speaker, is a three-month contract. It is 

renewed on three months, and it is at $1,200 a day, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What is implied by this question, but not asked overtly, Mr. 

Speaker, is this William McMorris a relative of anyone on this 

side of the House. Mr. Speaker, I can assure those members if 

they want to sully contractors or the people of Saskatchewan for 



6224 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2010 

political gain, there is no relation on this side of the House with 

a contractor. He doesn‟t play hockey with anyone on this side 

of the House, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t think there‟s going to be 

Christmas dinner. This gentleman was hired as a contractor 

because he‟s a good IT professional, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to answer question number one . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member did mention that 

he would also respond, having taken notice in response to the 

question here. The minister gave notice yesterday, and I would 

ask the minister to quickly respond to the notice given. I 

recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the 

members opposite, there is 41 consultants hired by the ITO at 

this point, providing services to the ITO. When we took over 

government from those members, there was 80 consultants, Mr. 

Speaker. We have dramatically reduced the number of 

consultants. It‟s an expensive way to provide service, but in 

some circumstances it is the most appropriate way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to make the members opposite aware 

that Health has had a major initiative. Education and Social 

Services. I would like the members opposite to know that this is 

currently a three-month process, Mr. Speaker.  

 

What the member opposite has asked, Mr. Speaker, is it 

appropriate to have these consultants, Mr. Speaker? The 

members opposite would be aware that on July 31st, 2009 the 

Leader-Post had an article about a company; President Garry 

Aldridge is being contracted by the NDP caucus, Mr. Speaker. I 

would like to know if that was a tendered contract, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. McMorris is the president 

and director of Common Sense Consulting, the company under 

contract with ITO. The government directory, whatever the 

minister says today, lists Mr. McMorris as the executive 

director of customer services for the ITO. To the minister: is he 

saying that instead of paying an executive director‟s salary of 

about 90 to $100,000 to do this job, a consulting firm is being 

paid over twice that amount to do it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I answered this in my 

first question. The company has been hired for a couple of 

different projects, Mr. Speaker. His first was to conduct a 

review of the ITO project management process. He‟s currently 

leading an improvement with the ITO application maintenance 

area, the largest ITO network, Mr. Speaker. He has been very 

successful in bringing many of the ministries into line with the 

ITO and making the ITO add value to the government of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The members opposite yesterday, Mr. Speaker, asked how I 

knew it was just a drive-by slur when they started these 

accusations about a specific situation, Mr. Speaker. How does 

anyone know that there‟s unbased allocations coming from the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker? I find it fairly easy. If you see their 

lips moving, it‟s often a situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I know 

the Minister of Health is looking forward to answering this 

question. Mr. Speaker, for months the Minister of Health has 

been ducking for cover over the Amicus deal. He‟s failed to 

answer why this deal has been structured differently from all 

the other affiliation agreements signed with the Catholic Health 

Ministry and other organizations over the years. He has never 

explained why this deal needs to be backed by a loan guarantee 

while volunteers across the province scramble to raise their 

community‟s share of 35 per cent of the cost of a long-term care 

facility. 

 

So to the minister: why is Amicus not an affiliate? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, from the Patient First 

Review commissioned by this government, Tony Dagnone put 

out a report that looked at the health care system through the 

patients‟ eyes. One of the recommendations through the Patient 

First Review was to look at different funding models for 

facilities in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That‟s what we‟ve done. We‟re looking at a different funding 

model. This funding model with the Catholic Health Ministry is 

a good funding model, Mr. Speaker. It will add long-term care 

beds to the complement of long-term care beds we have in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. What it will do is move people out of 

acute care settings into appropriate living conditions, Mr. 

Speaker, such as Amicus. It‟s a good deal for the province, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s a good deal for the seniors, Mr. Speaker. And 

we‟re looking forward to the day when seniors move into that 

facility. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — The minister claims that this is a new and 

innovative financing model. But we know that taxpayers are 

going to pay for this over the long term because they‟re paying 

Amicus a higher per diem rate than any other affiliated nursing 

home. And we understand that it‟s at least $1.1 million a year 

more than any other nursing home of that size. And they‟ve also 

signed an agreement that would force taxpayers to pay off the 

Amicus mortgage even if Amicus decides to walk away from 

the deal. 

 

So to the minister: why did the minister agree to these terms? Is 

this new innovation financing model a way to take long-term 

debt off the books of the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 



November 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6225 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what this agreement 

between the Saskatoon Health Region and the Catholic Health 

Ministry will do will put 100 new long-term care beds on top of 

the complement. A hundred beds. Something that that 

government didn‟t do in 16 years is build a new long-term care 

bed on top of the complement that was already there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

As a result, it‟s our responsibility to make sure that the facilities 

that are needed in this province are built. This is a new funding 

model. The Catholic Health Ministry is building the facility. 

Yes, we‟re paying a higher per diem than other facilities 

because we‟re covering some of the capital costs, Mr. Speaker, 

as we go forward. That would be common sense, Mr. Speaker, 

to most people I think, but it doesn‟t seem to be able to resonate 

in the opposition benches for some reason, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we have a government that 

released their mid-year financial report today, and they‟re quite 

pleased with themselves. But we also have an opposition that is 

worried about what the future is going to look like with these 

kinds of deals. We know that this is a $27 million facility that is 

being built with no money but a loan guarantee from the 

Saskatoon Health Region because they‟ve entered into this 

agreement with Amicus. 

 

It‟s a great way to take debt off the books. And it‟s a great way 

to reward your friends because we know that the $27 million 

nursing home is being built by a contractor who didn‟t have a 

tendered arrangement, Mr. Speaker. And that contractor 

contributed close to $19,000 to the Sask Party. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we want to understand why a government 

would enter into this kind of a deal with contractors that would 

start digging the ground before any kind of agreement was 

agreed to by the Saskatoon Health Region. And we think, Mr. 

Speaker, that there‟s something rotten in Denmark. And would 

the minister agree? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the agreement between 

Miners Construction and the Catholic Health Ministry was put 

together because Miners Construction was the only contracting 

firm, general contractor that would put a fixed-price contract in 

place; a price guarantee, Mr. Speaker, where none of the other 

contractors were willing to do that. They interviewed the other 

contractors, Mr. Speaker, and it was the Catholic Health 

Ministry that decided to go with Miners Construction, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It‟s interesting though that the opposition would be so against 

this agreement, Mr. Speaker, because it seems to be that there‟s 

some supporters of the Sask Party that are involved. I would ask 

members opposite, do they have anybody in construction 

companies that did any government contracts in the past? Have 

they had any relations with people in construction companies 

that have done government work? Because if they have, maybe 

there was an issue there too, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Support for Affordable Housing 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this past summer 

the Premier was in Moose Jaw. And he was speaking to the 

issue of housing shortages, and he told the media in Moose Jaw, 

and I quote, “We have been building more units across the 

province. We have added a lot here in Moose Jaw.” Mr. 

Speaker, can the Premier tell me where the units are because no 

one in Moose Jaw can find them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we have added housing 

units right across the province of Saskatchewan, and Moose 

Jaw‟s an important part of it. Mr. Speaker, there are 700 more 

units that have gone up right across Saskatchewan. And we 

have units in . . . And 1,250 more are on the list at the moment. 

And I‟m very pleased that in the North we‟ve added units, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟ve added units in North Battleford. We‟ve added 

units in Moose Jaw as well. 

 

In fact the Premier, when asked the question when he was in 

Moose Jaw, when he asked the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, there are 27 low-income 

families received home ownership in Moose Jaw since we 

became government. We helped fund the first-ever Habitat for 

Humanity in Moose Jaw under our government. Twenty 

families in Moose Jaw have received forgivable loans to 

purchase homes. Six more families involved in the 

neighbourhood home ownership program who are eligible to 

become owners after five years of occupancy. These initiatives, 

along with the other ones, has helped Moose Jaw‟s vacancy rate 

go from the point six that it was two years ago to 2.3 per cent 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the minister may 

have forgotten to brief the Premier because no one knows of 

any of these units. And they aren‟t new units. They may be 

accommodating and helping families improve their situation, 

but it doesn‟t help the wait-list. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a man in my constituency, David, who‟s 

disabled. He lives on $800 a month. His rent increased from 

385 to $625 a month. And he writes, with the remaining funds, 

which is a mere $175, he needs to wash his clothes in a 

coin-operated washer-dryer, pay his phone bill, pay his 

electricity and several other bills. Groceries, I might add, Mr. 

Speaker. He doesn‟t have a heck of a lot to live on. 

 

Inaccurate statements in the media don‟t help people like 

David. When will we see some assistance and improvements in 



6226 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2010 

the situation in housing in the city of Moose Jaw? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the same minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely no doubt 

that the housing issue is a huge one right across Saskatchewan. 

And that is why we have spent millions and millions of dollars 

since we‟ve become government to deal with the issue. 

 

We‟ve dealt with issues in the North and in the cities. We‟ve 

spent money to make sure that there are low-rental homes. We 

have spent money to make sure that people with disabilities 

have homes. We‟ve made sure that there are more spaces for 

students when they are in school so that they can have a home. 

And all those spaces actually ensure that there is vacancy rates 

for other people as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a huge issue. And we deal with it in the 

same context as we deal with the issues of cost of living, 

making sure that there are money for people to have, not just 

food and rent but also to make sure that they have money for 

drugs and for the living that we deserve in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everybody in our province is pleased to be part of 

Saskatchewan. And I think that the members opposite are the 

only ones who are negative, Mr. Speaker. I think that we have 

an opportunity to be proud of our province. Only those people 

are not. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, the frustrating part for all of us 

sitting here in opposition is that the government does a student 

housing project and checks it off the list: over. Done with. And 

they talk about it over and over. 

 

The Premier has made statements . . . I mean, I‟m worried that 

the whole housing piece falls into the same category as clean 

coal, the nuclear projects that were high on his list, carbon 

sequestration. They talk about them and announce them. And 

the minister‟s long-term care facilities, the 13 that have been 

put on hold, it‟s great to talk about them, Mr. Speaker. But that 

doesn‟t help the Davids of the world or the many other people 

that are struggling to make ends meet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when is this government going to quit ignoring 

people who are struggling to keep a roof over their head and 

start paying attention to the issues across this province for 

families? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, when we became 

government, one of the issues that we talked about a lot was 

housing. And I had an opportunity to speak with the former 

minister of Social Services and talked about affordable housing 

issues. And you know what he said? He said the issue was not 

addressed under the NDP. When they finally did get around to 

looking at it, you know what they did? They funded a task force 

and then they kept the findings a secret from the people of the 

province. They didn‟t bother to do anything for the struggling 

people of Saskatchewan to find shelter. 

 

In fact, under their leadership in 2007 there was 58 affordable 

homes built. And they actually failed to increase shelter rates 

for 13 out of 16 years when they were in power. And the 

inflation rate during that time was 30 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

They also failed to increase the seniors‟ income plan between 

‟92 and 2007, and there was a 40 per cent inflation cost at that 

time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yes, there is more work to do. And I‟d be pleased in the near 

future to talk about Head Start on a Home. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Human Services 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m instructed by 

the Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 

151, The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies 

Amendment Act, 2010 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the 

Bill now be read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 

on Bill No. 151, The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies Amendment Act, 2010 without amendment, that 

the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 151 — The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies Amendment Act, 2010 
 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I move that this 

Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Advanced Education that Bill No. 151, The 

Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies Amendment Act, 

2010 without amendment be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



November 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6227 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

before orders of the day it is my pleasure to submit 

supplementary estimates accompanied by a message from His 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask members to rise for the message 

from His Honour. The message is as follows: 

 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits supplementary 

estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 

province for the 12 months ending March 31st, 2011, and 

recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Thank you. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Support for Rural Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s a pleasure to enter this debate 

on the motion that I‟m going to be presenting at the end of my 

speech. You know, basically what this motion‟s talking about is 

the Assembly‟s recognizing the Saskatchewan government‟s 

efforts to rebuild the infrastructure and roads of rural 

Saskatchewan, but mostly to acknowledge that this government 

is listening and responding to the needs of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And I can speak to that, you know, being a member for many 

years. But I will start with the history of why there has been a 

distrust of the opposition when they were in power. That started 

in the early ‟90s, you know, with rural Saskatchewan. They felt 

that they were ignored by the NDP government. I know when 

they campaigned in the ‟91 election, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. The 

Speaker has recognized the member from Arm River-Watrous 

and is having difficulty hearing what the member has to say 

with all the other debate. So I‟d ask members to allow the 

member of Arm River-Watrous to address the Assembly. 

 

[11:00] 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was discussing, 

what started years and years ago with rural Saskatchewan where 

they felt that they were out of touch with the NDP government. 

And it showed as the elections progressed. I‟ll start with when 

they first campaigned in ‟91. 

I hate to go back into history, start to rehash it, but we have to 

when we talk about this motion of why there is no trust about 

the NDP government and why the present, people right now in 

rural Saskatchewan, they feel confident with the government, 

that they‟re actually listening to their needs and dealing with 

their problems, Mr. Speaker, something that the previous 

government didn‟t do. 

 

When they ran on their election in ‟91, they didn‟t talk about 

tearing up GRIP [gross revenue insurance program]. Grain 

prices were very poor through the late ‟80s going into the ‟90s. 

Producers were looking for a form of stability in the agriculture, 

and what happens? They were looking towards GRIP. You 

know, it may not have been a perfect program, but it was a 

program there. It was a program that the producers were using, 

that a lot of the producers needed to help them operate their 

farms. 

 

And what did government do at the day? They ripped it up, you 

know, and didn‟t put anything in place. If there was a problem 

with it, then work to put something in place, work with the 

federal government. That‟s something they didn‟t do. That was 

a rural . . . That‟s where they ignored rural Saskatchewan, you 

know. 

 

And then as they carried on, what did they do? You know, they 

closed 52 rural hospitals, you know, which was hard for rural 

Saskatchewan. That was very, very hard and painful for rural 

Saskatchewan, and they didn‟t forget that. And it showed in the 

‟95 election. It showed in the ‟99 election. It showed in the 

2003 and 2007 elections, when there was not one member from 

the NDP elected in rural Saskatchewan, you know. 

 

And what have we done to try . . . What else did they do 

through that period? They closed 32 rural agricultural offices, 

22 extension offices, and did nothing to replace that. Opened 

one office in Moose Jaw with a toll-free line, then says, well 

this is going to help farmers. There has not been one thing that 

they did when they were in their terms to help rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So when we were elected, you know, we campaigned on rural 

Saskatchewan. So one of the things we did . . . When we first 

got elected, you know, the cattle prices weren‟t good. We were 

suffering through many years of BSE [bovine spongiform 

encephalopathy]. We did what we could, you know. We started 

with a cattle payment to the producers of $71 million, you 

know, $71 million that went to 18,000 cattle and hog producers 

through the cattle and hog support program. That‟s $40 a cow, 

$20 a market hog, $10 a weanling. And we did that without the 

federal assistance, you know. 

 

And my producers in my constituency and throughout the many 

other constituencies, they appreciated that. I can remember guys 

coming up to me, phoning my office and saying, you know, at 

least you‟re doing something. You‟re trying to help us. You‟re 

trying what you can. We know that, you know, there‟s 

budgetary constraints. We know that there‟s other things you 

have to do, but you‟re actually trying to help us out there in 

rural Saskatchewan. And that was one of the messages that was 

come through us and to our members in rural Saskatchewan, 

you know. 

 



6228 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2010 

Another program that we brought in shortly after we were 

elected . . . The Southwest was dealing with a drought, a 

drought that they‟d been dealing with for quite a few years over 

the . . . you know, before we were elected and going into our 

term, you know. So we were looking at . . . And what were 

producers asking for, Mr. Speaker? They were asking for help 

with water programs to help dig wells, help to dig dugouts, help 

to dig anything to help with cattle at that end of it. So we 

stepped up to the producers in the Southwest to help in the 

drought. That was a good program. 

 

We had producers in our area say, you know what, can you help 

us? Because I mean when you have cattle, it‟s getting expensive 

now to dig wells, to dig dugouts. It‟s an expense that, you 

know, many producers with the lower cattle prices were having 

a hard time to meet that demand. So we stepped up. We put that 

program across Saskatchewan. And that was a great benefit to 

many cattle producers. I know a few of them that had to dig 

very deep wells that before that were trying to just use surface 

water. 

 

And you were depending on snow. And if you didn‟t have a lot 

of runoff, they were either hauling water . . . And if you‟ve ever 

had cattle and had to haul water for a big herd of cattle, it‟s not 

fun, especially when it comes to the wintertime. That is not a 

very good job to be doing. It‟s not a very enjoyable job. I can 

remember doing it as a kid and it was not . . . You know, 

between your taps and your pipes and your tank freezing up and 

delivering cattle and hoping that they‟ll drink it before the 

trough freezes up. 

 

Those are some of the assistance we did. Going from drought 

. . . As you deal in Saskatchewan, you go from one extreme to 

the other when you‟re dealing with agriculture. And now we‟re 

dealing with flooded farm land, you know, and producers, it 

was a hardship for them. 

 

So what did we do? This present government said, we have to 

help some way that we can. We have to show rural 

Saskatchewan that we‟re behind you, that we‟re helping you 

any way we can. So we came up with the program. It was $360 

million to help farmers with flooded program, the excessive 

moisture program. That provided $30 per eligible acre for 

cropland unseeded as of June 20th. And you know, it‟s going to 

help a lot of producers, you know, pay some of the bills through 

the summer and the winter. With that also working with, we‟ve 

also enhanced crop insurance. Working with them two 

programs are trying to help producers get through a difficult 

year. And we‟ve had a difficult year in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

But when I talk to producers out there, you know, they know 

we‟re trying to help. They know that we‟ve given out some 

payments. You know, if you‟ve applied . . . We‟ve applied 

some programs to help you through the bad years, through the 

flooded years, through the drought years — something that the 

opposition never did. I think the most they ever, ever gave was 

$10 an acre and I think that was . . . I forget the year of it. 

That‟s one time. These are a couple of programs we‟ve just 

brought out in the very short time that we‟ve been elected. 

 

You know, some of the other things that we‟ve dealt with is 

looking at how wildlife damage . . . which it‟s grown over the 

years. Out in our way, in my constituency, I think as many other 

constituencies, you‟ve noticed a great influx of deer, moose, 

animals that we haven‟t even seen. In my constituency and 

around my farm, I have never seen moose up till last five, six, 

seven, eight years. Mule deer; we never seen a lot of mule deer. 

Antelope. We‟re seeing racoons. 

 

They‟re providing damage, you know, unfortunately. It‟s nice 

to see the wildlife but the more wildlife you have, the more 

damage that they cause to the crops. 

 

More geese or snow geese. We have thousands of snow geese. 

We‟re in a fly pattern through the Davidson area that comes up 

through Rosetown, goes through Last Mountain Lake. 

Thousands and thousands of geese. And do you know how 

much damage they can do? 

 

So one of the programs we did to help the farmers was to bring 

in 100 per cent compensation for wildlife. That‟s something 

that they asked. They said, you know, that the wildlife is out of 

our hands. We can‟t control that. Can you help us in some way? 

So we stepped up and we helped them that way. 

 

You know, going back to when we closed, when the NDP 

closed 52 rural hospitals, I can remember Watrous trying to 

open up a long-term care facility. And just in question period 

today, the member saying, well you know, there‟s these 

long-term care facilities that . . . No work‟s being done. 

 

Well I tell you, right now in Watrous they‟re pouring cement, 

the frame is up, there‟s carpenters working on it right now as 

we speak. I was there on November 11th; I just had to go 

around the place. The frame was up then. They‟d taken one day 

off, November 11th. I think they were going to take off the 

following Sunday, but the contractors were back on, on Sunday. 

There‟s electricians working there. There‟s carpenters working 

there. There is cement workers working there. So that facility is 

going ahead under our government. 

 

The town of Watrous and area, they asked for that support since 

about ‟93 or ‟94. They were asking the present government to 

throw in their share. Every year they would come down, ask the 

health district . . . [inaudible] . . . ask the former government, 

can you help us with that? And they said no. 

 

One of my first meetings when I was, Watrous was in my 

constituency, that was with a long-term care facility 

organization. They wanted to meet with me and say, can you 

help us any way you can? In opposition I raised it quite a few 

times. When we were in government, I brought the Health 

minister out there, and he said, yes, we need to work on these 

facilities and we need to do what we can. So they made 

Watrous, as 13 others, a priority for rural Saskatchewan. 

 

That is why it speaks to this motion, why there is confidence in 

this government from rural Saskatchewan. It‟s been there, and 

it‟s been growing as we talk to the producers because they 

know that we‟re trying to work with them, that we‟re listening 

to them and in any way that we can. 

 

Highways is another thing. The highways were deplorable. I 

know when I first got elected in ‟99 that was basically . . . I 

won, probably, the election just on that issue alone. When I‟d 

talk to somebody in the household, I‟d just say, you know, how 



November 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6229 

are the highways in your area? It was like . . . They would say, 

basically terrible. Will you do what you can if you form 

government? And I say, yes, we will work towards that. 

 

Since we‟ve, in my constituency alone, we‟ve worked on No. 2 

Highway. I think that was in the first term. That was a terrible 

stretch right around from the junction of 15 right around 

Watrous; it was just brutal. We redid that. Then we worked on 

No. 20 by Lockwood, rebuilt that. That‟s an important stretch of 

highway going to Lanigan and hooking up with No. 16. 

 

And then this fall, we also did a chunk sitting right in front of 

. . . going from junction 15 south towards Imperial and Simpson 

that needed to be rebuilt. I have one more chunk of highway, 

Highway 15 that needs to be rebuilt, and I know that we‟re 

working towards trying to get that done. We‟re making that, 

what you call a route that we can transport heavy equipment 

and also for if you have high loads, overhead loads, because 

there‟s very few power lines on that line. We‟re working on 

that, and we‟ve talked to the area transportation board in that 

area. We‟ve worked with them and said, what do you make 

priorities? You know, when we work with people in rural 

Saskatchewan and the boards, we will sit down and listen to 

them. We will sit and listen to them. That was something the 

other government didn‟t do. 

 

I can also talk about SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company] when I was there. And I won‟t say 

when they first started that program, it was 100 per cent wrong, 

because there needed to be something done in that area. But 

when things started to go wrong and things weren‟t going right 

for the producers, says, you know what? The rules you‟re 

setting out isn‟t right. The way you‟re setting things out, we 

want to have some meetings. 

 

The present government didn‟t meet with them. Didn‟t listen to 

them. And that they . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . As one 

member is saying behind me, they thought they knew better, 

and that was wrong. And when you start thinking about it that 

way, that‟s where you lose votes in rural Saskatchewan, 

because you have to work with the people. You have to listen to 

them. And that‟s something the last government didn‟t do, and 

this present government is doing. We‟re sitting down with 

people and listening to them and trying to work with them at 

that. 

 

Talking about in the Outlook area, what we did there, we‟ve 

also . . . You know, there was never any irrigation done, 

infrastructure since the ‟80s. Nothing through the ‟90s was ever 

done in that area, and that is a huge potential in that area. What 

did we do? We put $30 million into irrigation infrastructure to 

help that area. You know, right now we‟re only . . . Right now 

out of that lake, I think only 3 per cent of the water is used for 

irrigation. We‟re passing on huge amounts of water to the 

Hudson Bay that we could be using to grow rural 

Saskatchewan, to help the producers. And that is one way of 

doing it. 

 

Another way is some of the water is going towards the M1 

Canal to help some work that needs to be done on it, which 

some communities feed, get their water supply off of. And 

we‟re hoping maybe other communities will join that, would 

join that and draw more money from that. That is one way that 

we‟ve been working in rural Saskatchewan to help them grow 

through the many different ideas as we work forward as that. 

 

And we know that there‟s more work to do, but we‟re willing to 

sit down. Crop insurance? Yes, we need to do more things in 

crop insurance. We need to help the producer. But we‟re going 

to sit down with them and we‟re going to listen to them and say, 

you know, what ideas can you present that can maybe make this 

program a little better? How can we work together to make this 

program a little better, but still make it cost-efficient for the 

producers and also reality for the government? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I will move the motion: 

 

That this Assembly recognize the Saskatchewan 

government‟s efforts to rebuild the infrastructure and 

roads of rural Saskatchewan and acknowledge that there is 

a new sense in rural Saskatchewan that their government is 

listening and responding to the needs of agricultural 

producers. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the member from Arm River-Watrous. 

Will the members take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I listened to the speech from 

the member, and the thing I heard over and over again was that 

they‟re trying, they‟re trying, and they‟re trying. And so that‟s 

the new phrase from over there about trying. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

I wonder if that meant what they were trying when they laid out 

plans for the 13 long-term care facilities and then pulled back 

the money. And he talks about Watrous. Well there are 12 other 

homes out there sitting. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, also out there . . . Before I get in there, just a 

remark. In terms of Neilburg, in terms of trying, here‟s what 

they‟re actually doing in terms for rural infrastructure in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I had the good fortune of being out in Neilburg this past 

summer and attending a meeting with about 400 people there. 

And they were trying, what they were trying to do there is cut 

the ambulance service to Neilburg. And they were trying to cut 

that ambulance service to Neilburg, and the people stood up. 

And there were over 400 people who came out from that town, 

and they said, you‟re not going to take our ambulance service 

away. 

 

[11:15] 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? You know what‟s 

happened? Here‟s what their trying has got them. Here‟s what 

the government is trying. Because there‟s two stories here, Mr. 

Speaker; there‟s two stories. 

 

They were pushed back, and now they‟ve got a deal with 



6230 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2010 

Neilburg. They‟ve got a deal with the Neilburg ambulance and 

here‟s what it is: the local RM [rural municipality] has to put in 

$72,000. So this is $72,000 that‟s coming out of money that 

could have been used for rural infrastructure. This could have 

been used for rural infrastructure, and they‟re doing that all 

across the province. 

 

They‟re going out and making rural Saskatchewan pay twice for 

health care. And that money‟s coming out of RMs, and it‟s 

coming out of rural infrastructure. Money that should be used 

for those communities, that‟s where it‟s coming out. And that, 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s what they‟re saying when they‟re trying. 

And so what do we have? It‟s costing $117,000 a year for that 

ambulance because the government can‟t afford it because 

they‟re rolling in red ink. And that‟s what they‟re hiding. And 

they‟re pushing back, pushing back the cost of health care onto 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this summer I went all across this province. And 

time and time again we heard this story all over the province, 

and we can name different places of what is going on. But this 

is a great example of what is actually happening out there where 

rural municipalities are having to pick up these costs. And 

they‟re standing up, and they‟re saying we will take care of this. 

But, Mr. Speaker, what a sad day for Saskatchewan. What a sad 

day for infrastructure for Saskatchewan. What a sad day for 

health care because now it is not equal. It is not equal. 

 

When I would come home on some days from being out 

travelling the province and we were driving in to my city of 

Saskatoon, we had . . . And we were passed because there was 

an emergency. There would be a fire truck. There‟d be an 

ambulance, and there‟d be police cars responding to that. And 

you know what, Mr. Speaker? It‟s seven minutes. And here they 

were cancelling ambulance service. They were cancelling 

ambulance service, and they couldn‟t get there in 30 minutes 

. . . [inaudible] . . . the occupational health and safety. Because 

there‟s oil around there. They had to do this.  

 

And this is the deal . . . This is another creative solution much 

like Amicus, another creative solution. But this is worse 

because this is taking money out of people‟s pockets. And 

they‟re desperate out there in rural Saskatchewan because when 

the health care goes, if this ambulance would have gone, then 

the town. Because there‟s long-term care facilities, and those 

seniors are saying we‟re going to leave because we can‟t get to 

a hospital that‟s nearby. And this is, this is what they‟re saying: 

they‟re trying. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, all summer I heard all sorts of stories. But I 

just want to return, for this is the same member . . . Because not 

only is the national press after these folks in terms of some of 

their dealings, but here‟s another thing that . . . and I wonder if 

we can guess who said this: 

 

So I hope with that, that this government will look towards 

Ireland. And I expect Saskatchewan, when we form 

government, we‟ll be like Ireland one day. It will be one of 

the righteous provinces in this Canada. Thank you. 

 

Now that was the member who just spoke. He just said that. He 

said that. He said that. Well you know, we are . . . You know 

what? In some cases . . . And I don‟t want to because I know in 

the Ukraine they‟re having problems, and I know in Ireland 

they‟re having problems. But, Mr. Speaker, this is the folks that 

hitched their wagons to this sort of free enterprise stuff. And 

this is their approach. And I‟ll tell you what. That member 

might very well be right because this is where Saskatchewan is 

hitting with that plan. This is what they‟re trying, and this is 

what their plan is getting them. That‟s what‟s happening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the good privilege of going to about 55 

communities and sitting down with people — reeves, mayors, 

local townsfolk — in restaurants. Mr. Speaker, we went to one 

place, and we walked through the door. And I‟ll tell you the 

desperation, if you don‟t think there‟s desperation out there. We 

walked through the door and people looked at us. And I said, 

we‟re here on a health tour and to talk about some labour issues. 

 

And you know what they said to me? They said, are you 

doctors? They said, are you doctors? I said, no, not a doctor, not 

a doctor. But my partner said she‟s a nurse. And they said, a 

practitioner, a nurse practitioner? That‟s what she said. And she 

said, they said, come and join us — because there was about 14 

people sitting at coffee — and we sat down with them. And 

they started telling their woeful story, woeful story of what‟s 

happening to them, how they‟ve been ignored. And then we 

were off to see the reeve, and we were off to see the mayor. 

And then we‟re off to see . . . because they wanted to talk us. 

And then, Mr. Speaker — here was the great one — I went up 

to pay for the coffee, and the person taking my money said, are 

you really a doctor . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. Are you 

really a doctor? 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of, in terms of the rural . . . Because these 

folks always talk about how great they are. And the member 

was going on and on about their rural and what‟s happening out 

there. Well I‟ll tell you, I‟ll tell you one thing. I‟ll tell you one 

thing that I heard out throughout: we have not seen any 

opposition MLAs here. You are the first. You are the first 

politician that has come in here. Time and time again I heard 

that, time and time again: you are the first and thank you for 

coming. Thank you because somebody cares. 

 

And they had their plans on the walls, Mr. Speaker. And they 

talked about their bake sales all across Saskatchewan. And they 

may laugh over there. They may laugh, and they think that‟s 

funny. But those people were not. That was not funny. Because 

in most of those communities, that health care institution, that 

health care facility is the lifeblood. It is whether that community 

lives or dies. 

 

And that‟s the message we got. And that‟s the message we got. 

And I was surprised because every day I sat here, Mr. Speaker, 

I thought these were the great saviours of rural Saskatchewan. I 

mean they wrap themselves in the rural flag and, you know . . . 

And there was all these huge stories about the NDP not doing 

anything. But I went there and they said, we haven‟t seen . . . 

Well I said, I don‟t believe that, you know, come on. You must 

be an NDP supporter, and you don‟t, you know . . . That‟s not 

true. Maybe they‟re just ignoring you and so they can‟t . . . 

 

But you know, in some places, Mr. Speaker, I had coffee, and 

there were people lined up outside because they wanted to come 

in and talk. Because we could only have five or six people in at 

a time. And it wasn‟t an organized meeting. It wasn‟t an 



November 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6231 

organized meeting. And they said, to a person, we have not seen 

an MLA in here. And I stand up here and I‟ll repeat over and 

over again: they did not see anybody in there. 

 

Now I know the member from Wawota, they saw him at a 

meeting, but that‟s a whole different issue . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Yes, and I wonder what happened there. Is it 

highways or health care? Now this is arrogance. This is 

arrogance, and they can keep it up. For as far as I‟m concerned, 

I‟m glad if they do that because their days are limited anyways 

with the red ink. 

 

Now in terms . . . Because there is no money, and they keep 

hiding that. And people still somehow think well we‟ll still try 

and work. But also they‟re sort of saying, but you know, thanks 

for coming. And did you know all of this? Did you know all 

this? Maybe, maybe here we‟ll tell you this, but don‟t say we 

said that. That‟s sad. That‟s sad because this is Saskatchewan. 

And that‟s a sad day for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, just to get on the record some of the things 

. . . Because I walked into one of the places, and the person 

meeting me, the receptionist, we started talking. And I . . . 

Because the announcement had come down and the area was 

bad — because of a lot of wet — but an announcement had 

come down about what they were going to get. And I asked her, 

I looked at her and I said, is it enough? And she kind of went, 

you know, but she put her head down. Then later on, a couple 

of people talked to me that it wasn‟t enough. It wasn‟t near 

enough what was going to happen, what they needed. 

 

Now I‟m no expert. I have a farming background, but I have no 

expert. And they told me. And you should have seen the hurt in 

their eyes, Mr. Speaker. You should have seen the hurt in their 

eyes when they were doing that. Because not only did they say, 

we‟ve never spoken to anybody from that side, but they were 

also saying this isn‟t enough. 

 

But as rural people, the courteous people they are and 

everything else that I found and the welcome that we received, 

they were not prepared to at this time . . . But you knew now 

that those, particularly in health care, workers, they were going 

home, and they were going to be the main breadwinner in that 

family because there were troubles. There were troubles on the 

horizons. 

 

And councillors are concerned up there, but they might not be 

speaking out. And they might smile over there and think that‟s 

okay, that nothing‟s happening. But there‟s serious things 

coming. There‟s serious things coming next spring, Mr. 

Speaker, when we have to pay for the costs that are upcoming. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an experience . . . I will do that again. The 

wonderful people in rural Saskatchewan . . . I am from rural 

Saskatchewan as well. The members seem to think that they 

hold some sort of ownership of that. But they are not doing the 

job out there, and it‟s surprising how quickly, how quickly they 

are letting people down in all areas, whether it is in the grain 

producers or the cattle producers or in people working out in 

those communities. And, Mr. Speaker, they will definitely pay 

the price for that. I kid you not. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

great pleasure for me to enter into the 75-minute debate which 

deals basically with the subjects of rebuilding rural 

infrastructure and responding to the needs of our agricultural 

producers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am an agricultural producer. My father was an 

agricultural producer. My grandfather was an agricultural 

producer. My son is an agricultural producer. And I hope that 

his children will be as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am extremely proud of our record in agriculture 

and in rural infrastructure, and I‟m going to start out with some 

of our accomplishments in agriculture. I‟m going to compare 

them. I appreciate that last member‟s remarks wherein he stated 

that we weren‟t holding up our end in rural Saskatchewan, and 

so I‟m going to compare what we‟re doing, through my 

remarks, to what they did when they were in government, Mr. 

Speaker. And that member who just spoke was part of that 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to start with some of the most recent 

announcements of our Minister of Agriculture on the 

agricultural front. And one I‟m extremely proud of, Mr. 

Speaker, is the recent announcement of over $30 million to 

restore and repair irrigation infrastructure in the Lake 

Diefenbaker area. Mr. Speaker, I want to say that this is an 

initiative that is more than assistance for irrigation farmers. This 

is probably the greatest infrastructure investment that can be 

made in terms of potential return, Mr. Speaker. Alberta did this 

50 years ago with their irrigation infrastructure and, at that time, 

Saskatchewan had a far more advanced agriculture industry 

than Alberta does or did. 

 

And when Alberta made this infrastructure investment in 

irrigation infrastructure, that brought more livestock production, 

more intensive livestock production. It brought a packing 

industry, a feedlot industry, spinoff industries, Mr. Speaker. 

And there is no infrastructure investment that can be made in 

any area of infrastructure that will bring more spinoff than an 

investment in irrigation infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, and spinoff 

not only in rural communities but spinoff in our cities as well. 

 

Just a few weeks ago, our Agriculture minister announced, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Saskatchewan feed and forage program, the 

SFFP — which supports livestock and forage producers 

affected by excess moisture which has been a serious issue 

around the province this year, Mr. Speaker — the SFFP will 

provide financial support to producers who have to transport 

additional feed to their livestock and/or financial support to 

producers who have to transport livestock to different locations 

for grazing, Mr. Speaker, because of excess moisture. 

 

Payments in this program, Mr. Speaker, will be based on the 

amount of feed to be transported, Mr. Speaker, or the number of 

animals transported over the distance haul. In addition to the 

program, the SFFP will provide $30 per acre to producers to 

reseed hay, forage, or pasture land that was damaged by excess 

moisture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this has been a very difficult year in Saskatchewan 

agriculture, a near disaster in some areas of the province, Mr. 

Speaker. But in almost all areas of the province, a difficult year 



6232 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2010 

to say the least, a year when producers have had some issues 

getting seeding done on time, getting into soggy fields to get 

spraying done in a timely fashion, getting haying done on time, 

Mr. Speaker. Many producers didn‟t get enough feed put up 

during the wet summer — and feed of a sufficient quality — to 

get their livestock through the winter, and additional difficulties 

at harvest time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But through this all, all of this adversity, our producers 

persevered, Mr. Speaker. And while our government is there to 

help them, our producers did a fabulous job of making these 

lemons that they were handed into pretty first-class lemonade 

with this farming season. And it‟s not a disaster province-wide, 

Mr. Speaker. It‟s a difficult, difficult season but certainly not a 

disaster. 

 

One of the great things our government has done to help, well, 

all people of the province — but no group will benefit more 

from this than our agricultural producers, Mr. Speaker — and 

that‟s the historic education property tax reduction program. 

Mr. Speaker, education portion of property tax has been a 

serious burden on our agricultural producers, and I‟m just 

speaking of agriculture producers in this context, Mr. Speaker, 

but all people of the province. And we pay the highest 

education portion of . . . or we did pay, until our government 

began to intervene with phase one of our program to reduce the 

education portion of property tax, Mr. Speaker, we paid the 

highest rate in the country. 

 

And it‟s a tax on capital is what it is, Mr. Speaker, and it makes 

it difficult to do business whether in agriculture or in other 

businesses. It makes it difficult to own a home. It makes it 

difficult to prosper in Saskatchewan, and that is why our 

government has attacked this problem. Mr. Speaker, every 

government since Tommy Douglas was a brand new premier 

and promised to deal with this. Every government has promised 

to deal with it, and only ours so far, Mr. Speaker, has had the 

courage and the dedication and the will to take on this problem 

head-on. And we have implemented phase one of our program, 

Mr. Speaker, and I ask those members to stay tuned for phase 

two. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Young Tommy Douglas, when first becoming the premier of 

Saskatchewan, yes, he was going to change the world. In fact he 

said that this is a problem that needs to be addressed as soon as 

the finances of the province allow it. I believe though that‟s 

very close to a direct quote, Mr. Speaker. And I hope it‟s 

accurate, and I know that the gist of it is accurate. Mr. Speaker, 

the fact is that up to the most recent NDP premier, NDP 

premiers have been promising to do this for nearly 70 years 

now, Mr. Speaker, and I‟m extremely proud that our 

government has taken the initiative to do it. 

 

In the short time that‟s left, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak of a 

number of agricultural programs that have been initiated by our 

government and enhanced by our government — $360 million, 

Mr. Speaker, in the excess moisture program. That‟s a program, 

Mr. Speaker, that provides $30 per eligible acre to our 

producers for land that is taken out of production for the season 

due to excess moisture. 

 

And I know that the members opposite — who failed to respond 

in any significant way in the past, in 2005, 2006, and 2007 

when similar issues existed in our agricultural communities and 

large areas of the province, Mr. Speaker — although they say 

that this is nowhere near enough, our producers think it‟s 

enough, Mr. Speaker. By and large, they do. And it‟s so much 

more than has ever been done for a similar disaster previously 

in the history of the province, Mr. Speaker, that previous efforts 

pale in comparison. In fact, Mr. Speaker, this program, the 

excess moisture program, is the largest provincial agricultural 

disaster response in Saskatchewan history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on top of that, our government has been enhancing 

crop insurance in the three years that we‟ve been the 

government, Mr. Speaker. And that in stark contrast to what the 

NDP did when they raised premiums, reduced coverage, tore 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well no, and continued, Mr. 

Speaker, to take the, if I can say, the teeth out of our crop 

insurance program. And our crop insurance program, enhanced 

under this government, Mr. Speaker, has paid out over $250 

million already in this year, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s a quarter 

of a billion dollars income to our farmers from our enhanced 

crop insurance program, Mr. Speaker, and I‟m very proud of 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wanted to get time to deal with a number of 

other agricultural issues. And I‟m going to run out of time, 

clearly. And I had hoped that if I had time to deal with all the 

agricultural issues that our government has improved, initiated, 

or enhanced, that I could get on to other rural infrastructure, like 

roads and hospitals and schools and so on. But it looks like I‟m 

going to run out of time. 

 

I just want to wind up my remarks, Mr. Speaker, by saying that 

I‟m very proud to be part of this Saskatchewan Party 

government who have honoured our commitment to rural 

Saskatchewan, and I‟ll close my remarks with that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

pleased to enter into this debate, a motion that‟s been put 

forward by the Sask Party where they are congratulating 

themselves for their efforts in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting to have this particular motion 

introduced on the day that we get our mid-year financial update. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the mid-year financial update is not good 

news for farm families across the province, particularly when 

we see that debt is escalating in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I just wanted to remind the members opposite that, when they 

came to government in 2007, they had $2.3 billion in the bank 

that had been left to them by the previous government — over 

$1 billion in the GRF and also over $1 billion over at CIC, the 

Crown Investments Corporation. And we note that basically 

with the mid-year financial here, I think the cupboard is now 

bare over at CIC. Now despite the fact that the Sask Party 

government inherited $2.3 billion in cash, they‟ve basically 

blown the money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They expect rural families will somehow still have faith in the 



November 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6233 

Sask Party and that the Sask Party will deliver on their multiple 

election promises to rural Saskatchewan. But when you think 

about what‟s happening in rural Saskatchewan and what we‟re 

hearing from families living in rural Saskatchewan, there is 

beginning to be a belief that rural Saskatchewan is being taken 

for granted by the members opposite. 

 

Now there are a number of important issues for people who live 

in rural Saskatchewan — health care, education, highways, 

infrastructure, support for farmers and livestock producers. All 

of these issues are important if you reside in rural Saskatchewan 

and outside of the two major centres of Saskatoon and Regina. 

And I think the Sask Party‟s true attitude — and we see it every 

day in this Assembly — where they somehow believe that when 

it comes to rural Saskatchewan that they have all of the 

answers, that they‟ve done a good job and everything is skittles 

and beer out there when it comes to the attitude of citizens 

living in rural Saskatchewan and the government opposite. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to remind the members that in this 

year alone we had over 12 million acres of unseeded or flooded 

seeded acres, and livestock producers right now are having to 

truck in feed. And we know that there is a credit crunch, and 

there is a credit crunch coming in the spring of 2011. And the 

question that is important for people who are those livestock 

producers and those farm families that live in those areas that 

have been affected, what is the government doing to prepare for 

the credit crunch that is coming next year? And I suspect, Mr. 

Speaker, that the answer is not much. We heard the government 

today talk about what they‟ve done to reduce education tax on 

farm land and pasture land. We heard what the government has 

done for the part of the river valley that has irrigation — $30 

million for new irrigation. We heard what the government has 

done in terms of this year for livestock producers. 

 

But we haven‟t heard what the government‟s plan is going to be 

for next spring when that credit crunch comes — and it is 

coming, without a doubt. The major lending institutions are 

preparing for it. They‟re talking about the credit crunch and 

they are preparing for it. And the question is, what is the Sask 

Party government doing to prepare for this credit crunch? And 

we don‟t see a lot of evidence that the government is doing 

anything. Because how they respond to this will be important in 

terms of how those farm families and how those livestock 

producers view the government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that food bank usage in rural 

Saskatchewan is up. And we know from those volunteers that 

have food banks in rural Saskatchewan that a number of people 

are coming forward. And they‟re farm families that are going 

into those food banks because of the economic difficulty that 

they are finding themselves in, particularly because of the 

unseeded and flooded acres that were experienced this year. Mr. 

Speaker, we know from those farm families that there are many 

moms and dads that are trying to figure out how they‟re going 

to pay this year‟s bills and they need to figure out how they‟re 

going to have money to get started next year. And they‟re 

stressed to the maximum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the honour of being the Agriculture critic for 

a time in opposition and a number of farm families continue to 

contact my constituency office and explain to me and my 

constituency assistant what‟s happening to them. And I know 

that there are parents that can‟t quite figure out how they‟re 

going to pay those bills at the moment and clothe their kids. 

And they feel as though they‟ve been backed into a corner and 

there‟s really no one, nowhere to turn, and no one to talk to. 

 

Farmers are telling us that when they call the minister‟s office, 

they‟re told that the minister is monitoring the situation. Well 

that‟s kind of cold comfort if you don‟t know how you‟re going 

to pay your electrical bill or your gas bill. It‟s cold comfort. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I guess the question for us is, when is the 

government going to stop monitoring the situation and agree to 

provide farmers with assistance for those seeded, flooded acres 

and those unseeded acres? And we really haven‟t seen a lot of 

action on the part of the government. 

 

We know that the Sask Party is basically ignoring livestock 

producers. And livestock producers have had to suffer through 

BSE. They‟ve had to suffer through the high Canadian dollar. 

They‟ve suffered through drought and now they‟re suffering 

through flooding. And APAS [Agricultural Producers 

Association of Saskatchewan], which is a representative farm 

organization, and many producers have been calling upon the 

government to provide them with $150-a-head payment and a 

$75-a-head payment for feeders. And this is money that they 

think that they can use to pay vet bills and help support their 

livestock operation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the member from Fairview, 

talked about his experience going around the province this 

summer and meeting with rural residents about what‟s 

happening in health care. And we know that the doctor vacancy 

in rural Saskatchewan has increased under the Sask Party‟s 

government. We know that long-term care beds are closing and 

that over 80 long-term care beds have been closed this fiscal 

year to deal with the health regions‟ budget problems. We know 

that emergency rooms are closing, and we know that today at 5 

p.m. the Shaunavon Hospital will be closing from 5 p.m. 

onwards. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we know that there are a lot of problems in 

rural Saskatchewan. Now in the case of Shaunavon, what are 

these people going to be doing? Well I guess they‟re going to 

have to go to Swift Current or Maple Creek for emergency 

services. Is this the Sask Party‟s plan for providing health care 

in rural Saskatchewan? We know, Mr. Speaker, that there are a 

number of emergency services that have gone out of existence 

in rural Saskatchewan, and yet if you are a person who is 

injured, you want to get yourself by ambulance to a health 

centre or to a hospital as soon as possible. 

 

Now this government continues to talk about all of the rural 

hospitals that were closed by the NDP, and we‟ve had an 

opportunity to review all of those rural hospitals and what 

facilities are now in place. And, Mr. Speaker, there are health 

centres in most of those centres that had a hospital. And those 

health centres are able to provide services, rural services, rural 

health services to people living in those areas. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that the Government House Leader 

was asked about a situation in his own constituency where there 

were going to be three long-term care beds closed and two 

respite beds closed at the Wawota Deer View Lodge. And what 



6234 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2010 

did the minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s a pleasure to rise today on this debate that 

deals with rural Saskatchewan. And listening to the members 

opposite, I certainly have to admire them for getting up and 

speaking, Mr. Speaker, especially the last member, Mr. 

Speaker, who seems to be suffering a bit of a faulty memory as 

to events that happened in the past, Mr. Speaker, and that was 

very sure to read her notes from the NDP research, caucus 

research department, Mr. Speaker, the department of making 

stuff up. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first member that spoke, the member from 

Saskatoon fairway, was surprised to find that people in rural 

Saskatchewan were so polite and friendly when he went out to 

visit, Mr. Speaker. Well the people in rural Saskatchewan are 

indeed very polite, very friendly, and willing to talk to anyone 

— including the people they don‟t agree with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I understand how the people in rural 

Saskatchewan wouldn‟t know who he was and might even 

mistake him for a doctor, because in the 16 years the NDP were 

in government they never went to rural Saskatchewan, so the 

people in rural Saskatchewan would have no opportunity to 

have got to know any of those members, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Nutana is talking 

about how the Saskatchewan government of today, the 

Saskatchewan Party government, is doing nothing for 

agriculture. She‟s obviously ignoring, perhaps on purpose, the 

fact that Saskatchewan government now has a feed and 

livestock transportation support program to move hay from the 

areas with lots of hay to the areas that have a shortage, Mr. 

Speaker. As well, and has been mentioned by my two 

colleagues, Mr. Speaker, a $30-an-acre support program for 

agriculture over and above, Mr. Speaker, crop insurance. If you 

didn‟t seed under crop insurance and you were in crop 

insurance — and you could make the management decision not 

to be in crop insurance if you wanted to, to self-insure — but 

for those who were in crop insurance, got a $50 an acre support 

program for flooding or not being able to seed plus an 

additional $30, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I remember a few years ago, back in the late ‟90s, when 

there was flooding in southeast Saskatchewan — because we 

got 50-some inches of rain — the NDP were finally, Mr. 

Speaker, forced into providing $10 an acre, $10 an acre. And 

they did that only because the election was that year, Mr. 

Speaker, only reason they did it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this $30 support program, along with the $50 

through crop insurance, was the largest one-time provincial ag 

disaster response. And you have to look at it, Mr. Speaker, the 

time frame in which it was done: it hadn‟t even stopped raining 

yet and the money was available, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can remember the year when the NDP finally came up with 

some money, Mr. Speaker; it took another year to actually get 

the money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, crop insurance has been greatly expanded and 

covers many, many more services. You know, Mr. Speaker, this 

is not a problem we normally have in my area, but 

compensation is available if you have beaver problems, Mr. 

Speaker. Now in our area we do have some beavers, but they 

generally are well-behaved and don‟t damage the crops, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the reason I say that is I‟ve had beavers 

on my land, Mr. Speaker. And occasionally they would knock a 

tree over, but they were very well-behaved beavers because 

they would chop it up into shorter pieces and drag it back into 

the slough, and I didn‟t have to worry about it. I just wanted 

them to start eating willows. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as my colleague from Thunder Creek talked 

about, the property tax reductions, largest property tax 

reduction ever in the province of Saskatchewan. It was 

something that was an irritant and a financial burden on the 

people of rural Saskatchewan ever since there has been 

education property tax. And the Saskatchewan Party 

government is the very first one to have stepped forward to deal 

with that, Mr. Speaker, and I think the courage of the Premier 

and this government needs to be commended for that work. 

 

You know, the member from Saskatoon Nutana is saying that 

this government is not responding; you know, the NDP would 

have, would have. And yet I look back in history and I look at 

the BSE situation that occurred in the early 2000s, I think it was 

2002 . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — 2003. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — 2003, my colleague corrects me. You 

know, cattle prices went straight down into the tank. There was 

no value in cows. If you shipped a cow, they sent you a bill for 

the transportation because there wasn‟t enough value in the sale 

of the animal to pay the transportation cost. 

 

And yet what did the NDP government do, Mr. Speaker? Not a 

thing, nothing, Mr. Speaker. And fact is, it was one of our 

colleagues in opposition, Brenda Bakken, who approached 

Dairy Queen Canada and got them to utilize just Canadian beef, 

Mr. Speaker. That was more than the entire government run by 

the NDP did, Mr. Speaker, and that was just one backbench 

member on the Saskatchewan Party side. 

 

You look now . . . One of the areas of complaints that I have 

received for many years is wildlife compensation for crop 

damages. Well under this government there is now 100 per cent 

coverage, Mr. Speaker. Not only that, but it‟s just not for ducks 

eating your swath; it‟s also, Mr. Speaker, for new types of 

grazing which would never come covered under the NDP. 

Swath grazing, bales, corn grazing, Mr. Speaker, are now being 

covered by Saskatchewan Crop Insurance. Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan Party government responds very quickly to the 

requests and demands of agriculture in Saskatchewan. 

 

And one of the other areas that I wanted to touch on was 

infrastructure and roads, Mr. Speaker. Under the NDP, very 

little was done in rural Saskatchewan for road maintenance and 

construction. And fact is, one of their former ministers of 



November 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6235 

Highways‟ proposal was to turn everything back to gravel, Mr. 

Speaker. Back to the 19th century for the NDP was their slogan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well since this government has come to power in 2007, we‟ve 

had work on No. 8 in my constituency, No. 9, No. 13, No. 18, 

No. 33, No. 47, and No. 48, Mr. Speaker. There‟s still more 

work to do and we‟re moving in that direction. We still have 

more work to do on 47 north of Stoughton, No. 318, and No. 

361. And I know that there are other members in the House here 

who want more work to be done on No. 48. I can lip read 

sometimes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government is doing a lot 

of work on highways. One of the areas though under the NDP 

was they had a highways partnership program. And the way this 

partnership program worked was the government went to the 

municipalities and said, oh you want your highway fixed 

through your municipality? You pay half of the cost. You tax 

your ratepayers for half of the cost while they‟re still paying the 

same fuel taxes, the same income taxes, the same corporate 

taxes. You have to pay extra if you want your highway fixed, or 

else we‟re not going to fix it. That was the NDP way of fixing 

highways in rural Saskatchewan — that if you didn‟t want to 

pay extra, we weren‟t going to fix the highway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP, because of that kind of attitude to rural 

Saskatchewan, didn‟t represent any of rural Saskatchewan. 

Which makes it very interesting, Mr. Speaker. The first speaker, 

the member from Saskatoon fairway, when I look at his 

agricultural experience, Mr. Speaker, I think the only greenery 

that he knows about is actually found on the fairways, on the 

golf courses, Mr. Speaker, because he‟s certainly not an 

agriculturalist in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government is fulfilling 

its commitments. It‟s meeting its promises to rural 

Saskatchewan in both agriculture and infrastructure, Mr. 

Speaker. And I will be more than pleased to support this 

motion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to enter the debate. And when I was asked if I‟d enter 

the debate, I said well I‟m not the premier person to speak on 

rural Saskatchewan. But my leader assured me of a couple of 

things. Number one is that we ought to understand rural 

Saskatchewan a heck of a lot more even though you‟re a 

northern MLA. I think it‟s important that we understand that 

Saskatchewan has got a lot of opportunity and there‟s a lot of 

things that we all need to learn about Saskatchewan. 

 

So when I was given the opportunity, I said I was most certainly 

trying to learn about rural Saskatchewan. As a northern MLA, 

it‟s quite important. And in fact, we do have a lot of similarities, 

Mr. Speaker, of how the North is ignored and how this 

government has also ignored rural Saskatchewan. So certainly 

from that perspective, it does give me a bit of credence in terms 

of some of the points that I want to make as a northern MLA as 

it relates to this motion made by the member from Arm River. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I tell the people of rural Saskatchewan this, 

that it‟s important that they know that we are as a northern 

MLA trying our darndest to listen and learn from the many 

errors made over the years, and certainly the mistakes being 

made by this current government as well. I think they have 

taken a very arrogant position when it comes to rural 

Saskatchewan. And I think eventually they will pay because, 

quite frankly, people . . . Their memories live for a long time 

and memories die hard, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I tell the people of rural Saskatchewan a couple of things. 

First of all, in relation to the damage done to rural 

Saskatchewan over the years, they know and we know that 

when we assumed government in 1991, the province of 

Saskatchewan was flat broke. They were flat broke, Mr. 

Speaker. And we can thank that era and that party across the 

way whose many members now hide behind the Saskatchewan 

Party banner, but we know who they are. They broke this 

province, Mr. Speaker, and there was a point where we even 

had difficulty making payroll to the people that worked for the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I go back to my point earlier that the 2 and $3 million that 

we paid each and every day on that debt left by the 1990s 

Conservative government, of which many members from across 

the way are part of, that‟s the culprit, Mr. Speaker, right there, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

There were some sacrifices that had to be made, and 

everywhere we went — northern Saskatchewan, rural 

Saskatchewan, urban Saskatchewan — every single individual 

had to pay a price for their mismanagement, Mr. Speaker, and 

we continue paying that to this day, Mr. Speaker. The only 

problem that people often say to me is, they say, well why 

aren‟t these guys talking about that? Why aren‟t they talking 

about their history, as the member from Cannington says? 

 

Well obviously, Mr. Speaker, they don‟t want to talk about that 

history because that history is the one, is the history that has 

hurt this province, including rural Saskatchewan, and have 

driven the nail in many rural communities‟ coffins because we, 

as a government, had to assume a huge debt, and every single 

day 2 to $3 million in interest payment alone. What could a 

government do facing those challenges, Mr. Speaker? We had 

to make sacrifices in the North. We had to make sacrifices in 

urban Saskatchewan and yes, even rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So before we get the high and mighty response from the 

Saskatchewan Party and this silly motion made by the member 

from Arm River, I remind the people of rural Saskatchewan of 

one thing: you know the history of the Conservative Party. You 

know the history of the Saskatchewan Party. They‟re the ones 

that put this province deep in debt, and they‟re the ones that 

ultimately should be held responsible for the decline in rural 

Saskatchewan, for the decline in northern Saskatchewan, and 

the decline of Saskatchewan in general. 

 

And thank goodness we had, thank goodness we had people like 

Roy Romanow, the former premier, people like Calvert that 

come along and they worked very hard with a very amazing 

bunch of cabinet ministers, including Eddie T., that turned this 

province around. They turned this province around, Mr. 

Speaker, and they actually rescued Saskatchewan from the 

depths of despair, Mr. Speaker, and from the depths of deficit. 



6236 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2010 

And what happens now, Mr. Speaker? Now this member comes 

along and he has this motion saying, well let‟s congratulate 

ourselves because we‟re doing all these wonderful things for 

rural Saskatchewan . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, no, 

you‟ve created the problem to begin with, sir. And secondly, 

you‟re not going to do anything about the major problems that 

exist because you never intended to do this. You‟re just simply 

doing this to change the channel, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there‟s one opportunity I was thinking, how in the heck do 

they characterize the Sask Party? Because all they‟ve actually 

done, Mr. Speaker, is they said a lot of things. And they said, if 

this happens, if that happens, if this happens. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, if my aunt had wheels, she‟d be a bus. And that‟s one 

of the things that a lot of people in rural Saskatchewan have 

said. They always premise their positions with the big word if, 

if, if. And, Mr. Speaker, if we can just take that word out of 

their vocabulary, then maybe some of those words would mean 

something. 

 

So I would remind the people of rural Saskatchewan of a couple 

of things. Don‟t listen to them as they rewrite history. Don‟t 

listen to them at all. Because we know the facts. And the people 

of Saskatchewan, especially rural Saskatchewan, know their 

history. The younger ones may not, but the older ones know 

exactly how this province got into that mess at the time. It was 

largely thanks to them. So they‟re the ones that have certainly 

had rural Saskatchewan come into decline, Mr. Speaker. The 

whole province was affected by them. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Now I‟m trying to figure out how I can characterize the Sask 

Party. Like how in the heck could they be congratulating 

themselves and patting themselves on the back? How do I 

characterize that as a government? Because they‟re very 

confusing to the people. And then it dawned on me. I‟m trying 

to figure out how I could do this. There‟s two points I want to 

make, Mr. Speaker. First of all, what do you get when you cross 

an octopus with the Saskatchewan Party government? And I‟m 

not certain of a really good answer, but what I do know — I‟m 

going to give people a hint — is a self-serving, ugly creature 

that keeps patting itself on the back. And that‟s not a very nice 

sight, Mr. Speaker. Not a very nice sight at all. 

 

And my point is, the time for pretense is over. Stop patting 

yourself on the back and start dealing with the problems of rural 

Saskatchewan like you said so when you became elected. 

Because people, quite frankly, are not impressed. They‟re not 

impressed in the least bit. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I notice as well that some of the Sask Party 

guys are wearing the Saskatchewan Roughrider jerseys, you 

know. And we‟re all cheering for the Roughriders. We want the 

Roughriders to win. Right? We want them to win. But the 

problem is, is the Premier and the Saskatchewan Party guys are 

waving the Saskatchewan flag and the Roughrider flag because 

they want to hide behind that. They want to hide behind that. 

And they want people not to think about the deficit that they‟re 

putting in place, nor the credit crunch that‟s coming to many 

rural Saskatchewan families, nor the lack of services that they 

are responsible for. 

 

So they‟ll wave the flag. And I‟ve actually asked this last year 

when the Montreal Alouettes were playing against our beloved 

Roughriders, I was thinking, well what the heck happened 

there? We lost the game. Well apparently there was a 13th man. 

Now rumour has it that the Premier was at the end of the field. 

And as soon as they missed their field goal, well he rushed out 

there with his Roughrider jersey, trying to lead the parade so it 

makes it look like he‟s a hero. Well all of a sudden the flags 

flew. And here we thought it was one of the Roughriders, and 

here it was our Premier. He wanted to lead the parade because 

we won. 

 

And so there you go again, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not all about 

pretense and parades. The fact of the matter is you‟ve got to 

have progress and programs, and you have to have the money to 

do so. And you guys left us with zero money to do anything for 

rural Saskatchewan, and we all pay the price. So don‟t try and 

fool anybody with these silly little motions because it doesn‟t 

confuse anybody. It doesn‟t make anybody any happier. They 

know the facts, and they know what you are not doing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s important that I end this with two 

points I made earlier. Number one is, we said, please don‟t 

mess this up. You had two and a half billion dollars in the bank, 

a booming economy. Things were happening. People were 

moving to Saskatchewan. We said, please don‟t mess this up. 

And three long years later, you‟re making a mess of things, you 

guys. You‟re making a mess of things. 

 

So please don‟t try and change the channel with your little 

motions. Don‟t try and change the channel with your 

Saskatchewan Roughrider parade. That doesn‟t work. And 

especially this year, leave the Roughriders alone, you guys. 

Stop trying to politicize their game. Let them play their game. If 

they play their game and not worry about that 13th man 

jumping on the field, then maybe we‟ll win. 

 

So please don‟t mess up the economy. Don‟t try and change the 

channel. And for crying out loud, stop trying to politicize the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders. Let them do what they do best, and 

that is win a football game for all people of our province. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed in the 65-minute debate. 

We‟ll go to the 10-minute question period. I recognize the 

member from Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we‟ve come a long way in the last three years to serving 

agriculture in this province. Apparently the member from 

Athabasca can‟t get past 1991. I think he‟d like to be the 

minister of Agriculture at some point. 

 

For 16 years the farmers in this province had to endure the 

agricultural ignorance of the NDP government. Yet in spite of 

the NDP‟s complete indifference toward the province‟s 

agricultural sector, our farmers continue to work hard and look 

after the land, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a question about the NDP‟s sad record for farmers. To 

the member from Athabasca: where was the NDP plan to 

address education property tax on agricultural land, and why 

was it never mentioned in their last platform? 



November 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6237 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, if any party can‟t get 

past 1991, it‟s that party opposite. Because every time they run 

into trouble, they say, they say, oh where were you guys for the 

last 16 years? I think you guys need to kind of go off and do 

your own job and stop looking back at the 16 years and start 

doing your own stuff. Figure it out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the other thing that‟s really important as well, Mr. Speaker, 

is that this government, the former NDP government has done 

more for rural Saskatchewan in the 16 years that you guys could 

ever hope to do, given the financial restrictions that we had. 

You weren‟t here. You don‟t know the challenges that the 

government faced at the time. You just come here to rewrite 

history, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So once again, their point is, you can‟t get past 1991. You‟re 

guilty of that. Now it‟s time for you guys to grow up, figure out 

what you‟re going to do as government and finally help rural 

Saskatchewan instead of trying to confuse them. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to the member from 

Cannington. Doctor vacancy rates are increasing, long-term 

care beds are closing. Mr. Speaker. The emergency rooms are 

closing. And today at 5 o‟clock in Shaunavon, the hospital will 

be closing from 5 p.m. today to tomorrow, Friday the 26th. 

Now during this time, there will be no emergency outpatient 

services or in-patient admissions available. People have to 

travel to Swift Current or to Maple Creek for emergency 

services. 

 

Now they pride themselves and they have been patting 

themselves on the shoulders for a good job. Do they consider 

this providing health care to rural Saskatchewan where we still 

had highways or health care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it‟s indeed a pleasure to respond to this question. The mid-term 

financial report just came out today, Mr. Speaker, and I note 

that Health has a budget of $4.4 billion. Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

with a B; the largest ever budget in Health in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. So we are funding health care in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Highways in the same document has a total 

budget of over $600 million, Mr. Speaker. I believe that‟s the 

second or third largest Highways budget in history, the first one 

or two being our government‟s previous years, Mr. Speaker. So 

again we are providing more funding for Highways than has 

ever been done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member opposite asks about the health care closures, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they closed . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Biggar. 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP has faced . . . 

[inaudible] . . . drought in rural Saskatchewan for a long time. 

In fact some are wondering if the NDP can point out rural 

Saskatchewan on a map. One NDP insider is rumoured to have 

said, I think I can see rural Saskatchewan from my house. But 

in all seriousness, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to rural 

Saskatchewan, the only thing Saskatchewan farmers can expect 

from the NDP is neglect. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Fairview: the NDP refused to 

even tour the drought area in southwest Saskatchewan. After 

several consecutive years of dry weather, why didn‟t your 

former government provide any support to help producers 

affected by drought? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we should be living . . . That‟s 

the problem over there. They‟re living in the past, and 

Saskatchewan families are suffering today. They‟re suffering 

today, and they had record rainfalls in many areas with over 12 

million acres left unseeded. And that member is talking about 

the past. These are serious issues. 

 

The flood aid provided was $30 per acre, split between the 

federal and provincial government. Now a poll was done and 

the 30 acre payment was announced, that 56 people in that poll 

said that this wasn‟t enough. I myself heard that throughout 

Saskatchewan, that it wasn‟t enough. And, Mr. Speaker, a 

well-known agriculturist, Larry Weber, says that they won‟t 

even come close to compensating farmers for their losses. 

 

Now again, as the member from Athabasca said, continuously 

they talk about the past. The issue is right now for these farm 

families. The issue is what are they going to do over the winter? 

What are they going to do next spring? And we have these 

nonsense questions about what we did in the past, Mr. Speaker. 

The people of Saskatchewan want to know what‟s going to 

happen to them this . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is to the member from Arm River. He spoke about 

highways, and certainly I would consider northern 

Saskatchewan as part of the rural landscape. Highway 925 is the 

only road to and from the community of Dillon, Michel village, 

and St. George‟s Hill, and it‟s the only infrastructure link for 

the hundreds of people who use this highway. There is 

substantial amount of traffic on this highway that‟s involved 

with transporting goods and services to and from these Dene 

communities. The current road needs significant upgrading. 

Will your government commit to upgrading and paving 

Highway 925? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — When we took government, we took an 

infrastructure that was basically wrecked in rural Saskatchewan. 

We had to almost start from scratch after they ran it into the 



6238 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2010 

ground. So we poured record amounts into Highways 

throughout every budget. We also spent more money in the 

North than they ever did, each and every year. 

 

If you check the budget, you check the record amounts we put 

into Highways, which we did every year, we‟re building 

highways. And it‟s going to take us . . . We‟re still working at 

it, and it‟s going to take us a few more years to rebuild 

everything that you ran into the ground when you, over 16 years 

. . . It is going to take us more years, but we are going to do it. 

You did it in; it took you 16 years to run it into the ground. 

We‟re going to rebuild it in about four or five when we‟re done, 

with more record money going towards Highways than you 

ever put in each and every budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The writing was 

on the wall in the year 2007. Saskatchewan was fed up with the 

provincial NDP. In fact, Mr. Speaker, all government 

announcements at that point were poorly coordinated efforts to 

reverse bottomed out support throughout the province. 

 

And as the member from Cannington said, 2003 was the worst 

year because of the BSE. The farmers and ranchers were going 

through the worst time in their lives, and what support was 

there from our provincial government? Absolutely nothing. To 

the member from Saskatoon Fairview: why didn‟t the NDP 

provide any support to cattle producers during the last 16 years, 

and especially in the year 2007? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, again here we just had a 

question on grain production and livestock and, Mr. Speaker, 

the program of giving ranchers $30 per seeded acre for hay and 

forage and pasture land. This includes, Mr. Speaker, about point 

two two per metric ton loaded mile to haul in the feed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not what producers want. They want action 

now on these issues. It‟s much the same as the grain producers. 

People — livestock producers — say this is not enough. They 

need $150 per head and $75 per head for feeders. Mr. Speaker, 

we are calling on that, and that‟s our position now. 

 

When you come up against problems like this, it does little 

good other than to make yourself, perhaps on that side, feel 

good to talk about what we did. But, Mr. Speaker, the important 

thing is it‟s not helping the producers today. It‟s not helping 

their farmers, and they do that at their own peril, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question 

and it‟s directed to the member from Cannington. Mr. Speaker, 

we know that there are over 12 million unseeded or flooded 

seeded acres, and livestock producers are having to truck in 

feed, and that there is definitely a credit crunch and it‟s going to 

get a lot worse next spring. I‟m wondering if the member from 

Cannington can illuminate us on what the Sask Party is doing in 

advance to protect producers from this imminent credit crunch. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well building 

highways is one of the important things, because farmers need 

to be able to transport that feed from the areas where we have 

an abundance to the areas where we have a shortage. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the government is looking at that very issue because 

we‟re providing support funding for the transport of feed from 

the areas of surplus to the areas where there is a shortage, and 

we‟re also providing transport supports for the trucking of live 

animals so that they can be moved from an area of shortage to 

an area where feed is available, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the credit idea, grain prices are up, Mr. 

Speaker, significantly. Cattle prices are up, Mr. Speaker. And 

farmers, because we had an open fall this year, managed to get a 

significant portion of their crop off. It may be some grade 

deterioration but the prices are still very strong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Crop insurance is in place . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time on the 75-minute debate has elapsed. 

 

[12:15] 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Motion No. 2 — Housing 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

delight and an honour to rise today on a priority motion. And 

I‟ll read the motion at the end, and I‟ll make sure that it gets in 

as proper as it should do. 

 

But I do want to frame it, first of all, by reviewing the motion. 

And what I‟m doing is calling on the government to recognize 

the urgent nature of housing and an affordability crisis here in 

Saskatchewan. And because of the news that we‟ve seen in the 

last week or so, particularly highlighted by the Salvation Army 

in its press release where it‟s had to turn away people from its 

emergency shelter in Saskatoon due to overcapacity for the first 

time . . . And they‟ve never had to do this. Winter‟s been 

always a challenging time in Saskatchewan, but this is its first 

time, even with an increase of eight beds. 

 

But what we‟re going to be asking this government to do, 

asking this Assembly to urge the government to do, is 

immediately assist emergency shelters to increase their capacity 

to provide desperately needed services during the cold winter 

months, and to immediately begin the process of developing a 

comprehensive, affordable housing strategy and a 

comprehensive poverty reduction strategy to address the 

underlying causes of this crisis. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have talked about this many times before 

and in fact actually just this week, earlier this week, I did ask 

questions, and it was . . . From the other side, we heard calls 

saying that nobody was turned away; nobody was turned away. 



November 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6239 

But, you know, that was not the case, Mr. Speaker. In fact, I‟ll 

quote from two stories here: one from The StarPhoenix, 

November 20th by a Lori Coolican, “Demand exceeds capacity 

at local shelters.” And I‟ll quote: 

 

For homeless people in Saskatoon, the arrival of winter 

temperatures this week coincided with another grim 

reality: The shelters are full. 

 

In a news release issued Friday, the Salvation Army 

residential co-ordinator Jordon Cooper said the 

organization has had to turn people away for the first time 

due to a lack of capacity. 

 

Both the men‟s shelter on Avenue C and the new 

Mumford House shelter for women . . . are full. 

 

So this is a crisis. This is truly a crisis. And the winter is only 

beginning. Here we are at the last weekend of November . . . 

But it was November 20th. By mid-November, they were 

already experiencing full shelters. And we saw this. In fact the 

article talks about the YWCA‟s [Young Women‟s Christian 

Association] crisis shelter for women and children is also full. 

And we saw last year where they had record numbers. Over 

3,000 people had come to their doors and they could not 

provide services. 

 

So this is becoming way too commonplace and this government 

is not taking this seriously. In fact — and we‟ll talk more about 

this — they tend to look back to the previous years and blame. 

If they can blame somebody, they can, and if they can make 

reannouncements, they do. And they‟ve done very, very little to 

address this issue. And it‟s all part of a bigger package when it 

comes to affordability. It‟s all part of a bigger issue in terms of 

poverty and housing. And what are we doing about it in this 

province? And I have to tell you, not very much. 

 

Again I want to quote from CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation]. Essentially they quoted Jordon Cooper again, 

saying that this is the first time this has happened, but he‟s 

concerned about the trend this is taking. He said that the men‟s 

shelter with room for 54 people had run out of space and was 

waiting for eight beds on order to arrive. 

 

It‟s a crisis, Mr. Speaker, and we have to do something. We 

have to come to terms with this and get on with the program 

and talk to people who are out on the streets, who are 

experiencing this first-hand, and with the front-line 

organizations such as the Salvation Army, and say, what can we 

do to make sure this doesn‟t happen in a province like 

Saskatchewan? 

 

We are blessed in a province like Saskatchewan where we have 

excellent resources, excellent resources that we can get our fair 

share of royalties from — I‟m thinking of potash — that should 

be able to provide people with the kind of help they need when 

things are not going well. And often we see a problem where 

somehow it breaks down where the government thinks they can 

manage a situation and not recognize the situation for what it is. 

It is a crisis and we have a problem. 

 

And we need to do something about it today. And we can do 

something about it. And we see different organizations who are 

tackling this problem. But they need the provincial government 

to step up and put their shoulder to the wheel and make this 

happening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we just had a very interesting 75-minute debate 

about things that were happening across the province, and I just 

want to talk about some of the experiences I had this summer 

where I‟ve been touring around the province talking to people 

about housing. Whether it was in Cumberland House, North 

Battleford, Regina, Estevan, Moose Jaw, the situation is all the 

same — housing is a crisis. And what I do, Mr. Speaker, is I do 

submit a series of written questions, and I have some stats that I 

think the members opposite would be very interested in hearing. 

 

You know, we have three types of housing that Sask Housing 

provides. We have seniors housing, we have affordable 

housing, and we have social housing. And we are seeing a trend 

that causes us to worry deeply about what‟s happening in this 

province because this government is not taking this seriously. 

 

For example let‟s talk about seniors for a minute. In January 

2008, we had 521 seniors on the waiting list to get into seniors 

housing in Saskatchewan. Twenty months later, we have 916 

seniors on that waiting list — from 521 to 916. The waiting 

time has also grown. It was three months, and that‟s too long; 

now it‟s 4.7 months. That‟s way, way too long, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Where are some of the areas that we see, in this province, the 

biggest concerns? Right in the Premier‟s hometown. Swift 

Current has 120 seniors on the waiting list. And you know, Mr. 

Speaker, what the waiting time is in Swift Current for a senior 

to get into a seniors housing complex? It‟s 11 months. It‟s 11 

months, and that is really, really deplorable. I don‟t know what 

the words are you can describe this when you tell a senior you 

have to wait one year to get into a housing complex in Swift 

Current. That‟s not right. That‟s not right, and we should be 

doing something about that. And this is in the Premier‟s own 

riding. This is in the Premier‟s own riding. 

 

Melville, six months waiting list. And in La Ronge, in La 

Ronge, 13 months. La Ronge has grown from four months 

waiting time back in September 2009 to 13 months in 

September — one year. It‟s grown by a year. The member from 

La Ronge raised this issue yesterday and got a pretty pathetic 

answer from the Minister of Social Services, who really didn‟t 

know her file on this. Thirteen months for a northerner to wait 

to get into a suitable housing circumstance is way too much. 

 

What about affordable housing, Mr. Speaker? Here the stats are 

also equally alarming. Now the numbers have . . . When we 

started out in January 2008 gathering stats for written questions, 

there were about 205 families on the affordable housing list, 

205 families and individuals. It‟s grown now to 408 — almost 

doubling, doubling in 20 months. And yet this government 

seems to think that it should take credit for the good work it‟s 

done. But have the members over there actually asked about 

some of these stats? From 205 families and individuals on 

waiting lists, now we have 408. And the wait time to get into 

those units has grown from 2.5 months, 2.5 months to 4.8 

months — almost doubling, almost doubling. 

 

And where are some of the hot spots here? Saskatoon, four 

months. North Battleford, 5.8 months. Tisdale, 12 months — 12 



6240 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2010 

months in Tisdale to wait to get into affordable housing. What 

about the Premier‟s riding? What about the Premier‟s riding? I 

would think he‟d be more interested in this, a little bit interested 

in this. This has gone up to 16 months — 16 months. 

 

Now this isn‟t me making up the stats. These are written 

questions. Answers have been provided by the Minister of 

Social Services. This is alarming. These are alarming stats. 

 

Mr. Speaker, social housing. Here we go with the numbers here. 

What is the circumstance in the Premier‟s riding of Swift 

Current? How long do people have to wait to get into social 

housing in the Premier‟s riding of Swift Current? Twenty-four 

months. Twenty-four months. Seniors are 11, affordable 

housing is 16, and if you‟re looking for social housing in Swift 

Current, in one of our hot spots for the economy, it‟s 24 

months. Estevan, five months. North Battleford, 5.3. And La 

Ronge, four months. 

 

But the most alarming stat, Mr. Speaker, the most alarming stat 

about housing in our province right now is that social housing, 

the waiting list has now grown from 396 in January 2008 — 

and I want to say that number again, 396 — it is now, in 

September, 1,023. It‟s gone from 396 to 1,023. That is a 

shameful record, shameful record, and yet the minister seems to 

want to congratulate herself and this Premier and this 

government on the good work they‟ve done on the housing file. 

And I have to tell you, it‟s deplorable. It‟s just sad when we 

have situations in Salvation Army happening and it brings to 

the forefront about the circumstances too many people are 

finding themselves in Saskatchewan when this kind of stuff 

happens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to review those numbers and just give 

you a better idea of what some of these issues are. In social 

housing, January ‟08, 396 on the waiting list, 1,023 now — 396 

to 1,023. That‟s more than doubled. Wait times have gone from 

2.9 months to 4.5. Affordable, 205 to 408 — doubling, pretty 

much doubling. The wait time to get in, 2.5 months to 4.8 

months. Senior housing, 521, and this is the saddest one of all. 

Senior housing, 521 seniors waiting to get into . . . Their 

housing is now 916 and the wait time, 3 months to 4.7 months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you add those numbers together, in January 

2008 there were 922 people on the waiting list of Sask Housing 

units across this province in different categories — 922. In 

September, in September it‟s 2,347. That‟s more than double. 

That‟s more than double. And yet we see what‟s happening at 

the Salvation Army and we ask, why is that happening? Well 

we know that‟s why it‟s happening. It‟s plainly becoming 

unaffordable in Saskatchewan. 

 

As people turn to Sask Housing, this government is not doing 

anything for them and so they‟re having to go to the shelters. 

And the situation really puts people at risk as we turn into the 

winter months. So, Mr. Speaker, I have some real concerns and 

I think we should pass this motion. We should pass it today, and 

we should get on the work that needs to be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister the other day was answering 

questions about social services and the caseloads, and again it 

becomes very clear that she does not know her file. And she 

needs to be brought up to speed on this. She seemed to imply 

that actually social services caseloads or recipients were going 

down and somehow the numbers . . . There was a good news 

story in there somehow, and she always finds a way to spin 

those numbers. I don‟t know. But again, what are the true 

numbers? 

 

Well the lowest point for people on social services, the 

caseload, was in November 2008. There were 23,678 cases. The 

biggest number of caseloads, March 2010, 27,424. For the 

members opposite, that‟s an increase of 3,746 — 16 per cent 

increase in the caseloads, 16 per cent increase. Mr. Speaker, we 

have so much this province has to offer, but yet more and more 

people are turning to the measures of last resort, turning to 

social assistance. This is not good news. 

 

TEA [transitional employment allowance], the lowest point, 

November 2008 with 2,266 people on TEA. That‟s the training 

employment allowance. Highest this past summer, August ‟10 

with 3,440 people on it — an increase of 1,174. A whopping 52 

per cent increase. These are the people who could be at work 

but can‟t find work. For some reason, the system is not working 

for them. And one of the biggest challenges they have is finding 

suitable housing, finding suitable housing so they can be at 

work. A 52 per cent increase. This is shameful. This is dreadful 

news and this government needs to do something about it. 

 

And we know, Mr. Speaker, children bear the brunt of this. 

They bear the brunt of this. And we know in March 2010 there 

were 15,634 children who were part of families receiving social 

assistance. We don‟t know what the number is today. And of 

course this government, with its record of transparency, would 

not share that number. And we should be hearing what those 

numbers are because this is a very bad circumstance. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Well often this government likes to compare our record. Well 

our record in September ‟07, with the SAP [Saskatchewan 

assistance plan] and TEA caseloads together was 25,998 cases 

representing 44,853 people. That was the lowest, Mr. Speaker. 

That was the lowest since December 1990. And yet this 

minister, I don‟t know where she gets her numbers from. 

 

But the September ‟10, September 2010 caseload, when it was 

27,076 cases, represented a 1,078 caseload increase. This is 

shameful. This is very . . . This indicates a government that has 

not stepped up to the plate and done the work that it needs to do 

and develop a strategy that addresses the issue of poverty, that 

addresses the issue of housing here in Saskatchewan. For too 

many people, they‟re being left out. And in November and 

December, what that means when you‟re left out in 

Saskatchewan, you‟re left out in the cold. And we are deeply 

concerned about what‟s going to happen this winter when 

people turn to the Salvation Army and other shelters and there‟s 

just no place. And there‟s no place because they can‟t afford a 

place. They can‟t afford a home. 

 

Now this morning, yesterday . . . Well this morning, the 

Minister of Finance released the supplementary estimates. And 

for two years in a row now, two years in a row, the Ministry of 

Social Services was not able to get it right in terms of predicting 

how much they needed to provide for the people who are 

turning to them for help. 



November 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6241 

A year ago — in fact we warned about this — we warned that 

they were being overly optimistic about cutting social services. 

And they cut it in the budget previous, and then they had to 

come back a year ago and ask for 13 more million dollars for 

support for those who are asking them for help, for social 

assistance and TEAs. This year they‟ve come back for another 

$10 million. And why is that? Why is that? Because yet again, 

for the second year, this government has mismanaged its file 

and missed the mark in terms of understanding what the real 

issues are there. 

 

And for several years now we‟ve been calling for an 

anti-poverty strategy, and this government refuses to do that. In 

fact the former minister even talked about a poverty strategy as 

some sort of blue-sky and wanted to do something about it. We 

can see how this government has mishandled this file, 

completely mishandled this file. 

 

And when we travel around the province, and whether it‟s 

Cumberland or North Battleford or Estevan, we see the 

challenges that people have. And yet somehow these members 

opposite have not brought it forward, and that has not laid it out 

for the Minister of Social Services to say what really are the 

issues that they‟re facing. Right across Saskatchewan, this is a 

challenge. And I‟ve illustrated that with those quotes of those 

stats. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s been several groups who‟ve stepped 

forward, talked about what the issues are, and I just want to 

highlight a few of these reports because they‟re important. 

Because it‟s not just the NDP calling for this. In fact, actually, 

we‟ve been hearing this so much that that‟s why we‟re bringing 

it forward. When we go home to our communities and we travel 

about, we hear about this all the time. 

 

Last summer we heard about, and I think we all read about 

PATHS, the Provincial Association for Transition Houses and 

Services of Saskatchewan. They released a report called 

Saskatchewan’s Housing Crisis: Addressing the Needs of 

Women and Children Who Have Experienced Violence. And we 

see the connection between, if women do not feel they can leave 

their home and be safe within their community, they may stay 

in an abusive situation, particularly if that situation . . . if they 

cannot find a three- or a four-bedroom circumstance, it‟s very 

tough for them to leave. 

 

So we see where there are services provided, but this next step 

of having a home that they can set up their own place and be 

safe is a challenge in Saskatchewan. Because there is just a 

limited number of units, and the units, whether they‟re houses 

or apartments, the rents are so high that it‟s a real challenge for 

women in those kind of circumstances who are facing violence 

on a daily basis. And it‟s just really unfortunate. 

 

And I‟d just take a quick look at some of the recommendations 

they are looking at, and one of the first, the very first one is 

talking about rent controls. And we do have to have that 

discussion, Mr. Speaker. We absolutely do have to have that 

discussion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they talk about the problem about condos and I 

think that‟s really important. Rent and regulations are very, very 

important, but access to safe and affordable housing is so 

critical. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I found it very interesting that just last week the 

HungerCount 2010 was released and in fact we had the CEO 

[chief executive officer] of the Saskatoon Food Bank, who is 

running for the Sask Party opposite, has called for the very 

thing. He says and I quote, The StarPhoenix, Wednesday, 

November 17th, 2010, that, and I quote, “„Saskatchewan needs 

a provincial poverty reduction strategy to help stop the 

increasing reliance on food banks,‟ says Paul Merriman, 

Saskatoon Food Bank and Learning Centre CEO.” 

 

And he‟s seeing this really unfortunate increase in the number 

of people in Saskatchewan turning to the food banks. And so 

what the food bank association of Saskatchewan is calling for, a 

strategy, a plan of how do we address poverty in Saskatchewan. 

And of course, a very big component of that is housing. 

 

And here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about tracking . . . 

[inaudible] . . . homelessness in Regina. And right off the bat I 

know many of us will recall last January where there was a very 

unfortunate circumstance where we had a group of low-income 

individuals living in a business centre actually, not in a housing 

circumstance, but actually in a former business office complex 

because that was the only place they could get. And truly that is 

not the kind of circumstance that we want to see. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I found it interesting that earlier 

today the Premier referenced the retirement, the announced 

retirement of Danny Williams. In fact actually I was at a 

poverty round table yesterday that Danny, Premier Williams‟ 

name came up because the best example of a province that‟s 

been able to turn poverty around in Canada is, of course, 

Premier Danny Williams. He was able to cut the poverty rate in 

Newfoundland from 12 per cent to 6 per cent. He cut it in half 

in Newfoundland. 

 

We often think about Newfoundland as being a have-not 

province, but we know they‟re on the same path as we are. 

They‟re blessed with strong natural resources. And their case 

with oil, they‟ve been able to really turn the corner on that. And 

one of the goals was, for Premier Williams and his cabinet, was 

we are going to reduce poverty. And they did. They cut it in 

half from 12 to 6 per cent. 

 

And yesterday people were talking about, why can‟t we in 

Saskatchewan take a look at what they‟re doing in 

Newfoundland? Why can‟t we make a real difference to people 

here in Saskatchewan? And of course the key to their success 

was having it right across cabinet. It wasn‟t just the minister of 

social services; it was the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of 

Justice, a whole host of people working together to make sure it 

worked. The Ministry of Education‟s very important as well. 

 

So we need to make sure that when we talk about what can we 

do, when we ask that question — what can we do? — we look 

across Canada. And there are provinces who are turning the 

corner. There are provinces who are turning the corner. And it‟s 

a very tough corner to make, but it can be done. And we take a 

look at Danny Williams in Newfoundland and say, hey, he‟s 

been able to do a good job. Can we take a look what he‟s done? 

So I think he deserves a lot of credit. And today when he 

announced his retirement, we need take a look at him as the 



6242 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2010 

statesman he is and say, what can we learn from him? 

 

And of course I wanted to just take a second and acknowledge 

the role that . . . My colleague from La Ronge yesterday talked 

about the Canadian Conference Board, acknowledging the 

challenges that particularly northerners have, particularly in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Saskatchewan people 

have not sat back and said, we can‟t do anything. People have 

stepped up to the table and said, we can work on issues. We can 

do the right thing. 

 

And one that I do want to draw attention to is this. And I hope 

many of us have seen this. It‟s a framework about having a 

discussion about poverty here in Saskatchewan, and it‟s called 

Let’s Do Something About Poverty. It‟s a group of activists in 

this province who‟ve taken a look across Canada and have 

noticed that many other provinces — as I said for example 

Newfoundland, where they have turned the corner because they 

have a strategy — and said why don‟t we do that here? 

 

We need to have a discussion. We need to have people come to 

the table, and we need everybody to come to the table. And we 

need them to come in a non-partisan manner and get hard on the 

issues because those issues are challenging people every day, 

i.e., the Salvation Army circumstance. 

 

So Let’s Do Something About Poverty, a very important 

document. And I think it‟s very important that we all take a 

look at some of the things that we could be doing to make sure 

everyone here in Saskatchewan benefits from our natural 

resources in a fair way — our seniors, our children, our single 

parents, our young moms, everyone who may find life more 

challenging because of the barriers that are put in front of them. 

 

I just want to take a minute here and talk about some of the 

questions that this plan asks us to consider on the back here. 

And they‟re doing a good job of circulating this around. I know 

during poverty awareness week, this was their main issue. They 

wanted to make sure they got a framework, a discussion paper 

out there. They don‟t have the answers. Nobody has the 

monopoly on the answers to this. We can all benefit from 

working together and particularly working with those who live 

in poverty and hearing their life experiences. 

 

But they‟ve put together five questions. And I just want to get 

this into the record because I think this is very important. 

Questions for a Saskatchewan action plan: what does poverty 

mean to you? Why should we worry about poverty in 

Saskatchewan? Well I think as legislators when we review our 

budgets we worry very much because we see a missed potential 

for people to be part of our society, to be meaningful partners. 

And whether that‟s in work or contributing through however 

they can, it‟s very important that they be part, that they‟re 

included in what Saskatchewan is for us. 

 

And what would a poverty free Saskatchewan would look like? 

Well I can tell you right off the bat, what it wouldn‟t look like 

to me is people being turned away from shelters, that we would 

have enough emergency shelters so that we could care for 

people. And eventually we would hope that that would have to 

be reduced because we have the kind of prevention programs in 

place, the kind of long-term housing solutions that could reduce 

the need. But we need to recognize there is a need today, and 

this government‟s missing the mark. 

 

And what targets and policies should we adopt? Well, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I know that this government really likes to 

have targets. I think only about the nurses, and we often hear 

the Minister of Health talk about that. In fact he likes to 

describe that target as marvellous. Marvellous, he uses that 

phrase often. But why not use that same sort of energy on 

people who are living in poverty? Why cannot we set targets 

today and benchmarks and work together to resolve this issue? I 

think this is an important issue. We could all take a lot of pride 

in resolving this issue. 

 

But instead, what do we see? We see the waiting lists for Sask 

Housing grow from 950-some to over 2,300. That‟s not 

something to be proud of, but those are real marks. We could 

turn that around. We can turn that around. And we should turn 

that around, but we don‟t. We see the caseloads growing, 

caseloads turning . . . going up. Why can‟t we say we want to 

turn those around? Set benchmarks. Let‟s do that job. 

 

So I would encourage people to take a look. You can probably 

Google this on the Internet: Let’s Do Something About Poverty, 

Poverty Free Saskatchewan. A wide-ranging group of people 

wanting to talk about how can we make a difference here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[12:45] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I really actually wanted to talk a little bit 

at length about a report that came out last week. And I think the 

members opposite will find this very interesting. And actually, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is quite a . . . I won‟t refer to the 

whole guide, but it‟s a big book. It‟s a big report. I haven‟t read 

it all, but it‟s an important document. It was done by the report 

of the standing committee on human resources skills, social 

development and the status of persons with disabilities, 

November 2010, released last Thursday. I was able to download 

it, and I think there‟s some very important pieces. And I want to 

make sure the members opposite look this up because it‟s very 

key. 

 

Because not only are the cities and communities stepping up 

and developing action plans and doing their job and saying 

we‟ve got to get on with this, we cannot tolerate this situation, 

but it looks like the federal government is even saying we can 

do something about this. We can do something about this. It‟s 

called the Federal Poverty Reduction Plan: Working in 

Partnership Towards Reducing Poverty in Canada. 

 

The Chair of course, the Chair is Candice Hoeppner. Some of 

the members of this report are from Saskatchewan. In fact the 

MP [Member of Parliament] from Estevan is part of this 

committee. Mr. Ed Komarnicki, part of this committee. So I 

think this speaks to the wide range of support across Canada for 

working on poverty reduction strategies — a plan. Now why 

this government refuses to endorse a simple idea like a strategy 

and a plan, a public plan, is beyond me. 

 

From Saskatoon, from my city, Maurice Vellacott is part of this, 

the MP for Saskatoon-Wanuskewin. I know I‟ve worked an 



November 25, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6243 

awful lot with Tony Martin the MP for Sault Ste. Marie. He‟s 

taken a real leadership role in this document. As well, the MP 

from Halifax, and I would assume there‟s three or four MPs. I 

don‟t know what riding he is, but Michael Savage also worked 

hard on this report. I was able to meet with those folks in 

Calgary. I met with Tony in Ottawa, Halifax. Very, very 

important issue here. 

 

So they released some 300-page report about this. And I do 

need to say — I‟m going to read parts of it — but every party 

has their . . . I won‟t say dissenting report, but they want to 

make sure they get their point of view in separately. So that‟s 

very important. I would encourage all members to take a read of 

this because it‟s very important. First of all, recommendation 

3.1.1. And I quote: 

 

The Committee recommends that the federal government 

immediately commit to a federal action plan to reduce 

poverty in Canada that would see, during its first phase, 

the implementation of the recommendations in this report. 

 

This action plan should incorporate a human rights 

framework and provide for consultations with the 

provincial and territorial governments, Aboriginal 

governments and organizations, the public and private 

sector, and people living in poverty, as needed, to ensure 

the improvement in the lives of impoverished people. 

 

The action plan should be reviewed every five years and 

should follow a three-step process: consultation, revision, 

and reporting to Parliament. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that‟s a great recommendation. It‟s one 

that just provides a very important framework that all these 

other people are calling for, that we get together and develop a 

strategy so we have a plan forward. We do the consultation. We 

act on it, revise it as needed, and we measure the outcomes and 

report to Parliament. 

 

Wouldn‟t it be a great idea if we had the same idea here in 

Saskatchewan, reporting to the legislature about how we are 

turning the corner on poverty here in Saskatchewan. How we 

are turning the corner on those waiting lists that are growing for 

Sask Housing. How we are turning the corner on the caseloads 

on social assistance and TEA. I think this is a great challenge 

and one that we should really step up to the plate and say it 

sounds like the right thing we should be doing here. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they go on. And they talk about . . . 

And I want to again quote here: 

 

The Committee believes that all Canadians have a right to 

adequate shelter and that a comprehensive, long-term 

national housing strategy is essential to making this a 

reality. The Committee was told that the federal 

government must work with its provincial and territorial 

counterparts, as well as municipalities, service providers 

and other stakeholders, to develop and implement a 

housing strategy that includes measureable goals and 

timelines, reporting requirements, and accountability 

mechanisms. The strategy should include a plan to tackle 

homelessness based on the Housing First model. It should 

also provide for sustained funding for affordable housing 

aimed at building mixed communities and increasing the 

quantity, quality and variety of housing options such as 

transitional housing, supportive housing, co-operative 

housing, and non-profit housing. Where low-income 

households cannot access affordable housing, it should 

provide for assistance such as rent supplements, shelter 

allowances and subsidies. Finally, the strategy should 

include provisions for collecting and sharing best 

practices. 

 

Implementing a national housing strategy would 

demonstrate the federal government‟s commitment to 

housing as a basic right of all Canadians and represent a 

key contribution to the fight against poverty in Canada. A 

national housing strategy should be a government priority 

and should be enshrined in legislation. In fall 2009, the 

Committee reviewed Bill C-304, An Act to ensure secure, 

adequate, accessible and affordable housing for 

Canadians. If passed, this Private Members‟ Bill would 

require the federal government to establish a national 

housing strategy that fulfills many of the priorities 

outlined above. 

 

I want to read the recommendation 5.2.5 in case the members 

opposite want to get to work this afternoon and get right at it. I 

would encourage them to do so. I quote: 

 

The Committee recommends that the federal government, 

in collaboration with provincial and territorial 

governments, municipalities, service providers and other 

stakeholders, develop a comprehensive, long-term national 

housing strategy. The strategy should address the problem 

of homelessness, as well as the need for adequate and 

affordable housing in Canada, with the goal of providing a 

range of housing solutions to meet the needs of Canada‟s 

diverse population. It should provide for sustained funding 

to tackle these issues and include measurable goals, 

timelines, and accountability mechanisms. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, things can be done. And we‟ve seen 

. . . Here‟s a committee, an all-party committee from Ottawa, 

releasing a report last Thursday — ironically, probably on the 

same day that Salvation Army in Saskatoon was turning away 

people. We can solve this problem in Canada. 

 

In Saskatchewan we do have the resources. This province is 

blessed with the wherewithal to make things happen for those 

who find themselves in dire straits, and whether they‟re young 

people, young moms, people returning to the Salvation Army. 

And even as we think about what happened in Halifax just 

before Remembrance Day with the vets, we can make a 

difference so we can make sure everyone is valued. Everybody 

has a right to adequate and safe housing. That should be, in the 

northern clime like Saskatchewan and Canada, it should be just 

a given. It is a human right. But let‟s go that extra mile. 

 

And so I think this is a very timely piece, and I think that we 

should do all that we can and make sure that we have strong, 

healthy, vibrant communities where we‟re all living together, 

where people are not isolated. We do not want to see the day 

where we go back to ghettos or high-rises, where people are 

living in unfortunate circumstances and their children are not 

safe. We think we have . . . I know we have the wherewithal to 



6244 Saskatchewan Hansard November 25, 2010 

make this happen. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to say that we should get 

past blaming. We should get past when we have the minister 

looking back and talking about the last years of this 

government. We are proud of the record that we have when we 

had the HomeFirst program and we provided 25 homes and 

different kind of scenarios for people. And I even want to point 

out that this current minister who likes to blame people, at least 

the former minister, the former minister had the graciousness 

when we opened up Monarch Yards, recognized the good work 

of the former premier, Lorne Calvert, in opening Monarch 

Yards because of the funding that we provided for housing. And 

of course, you know, housing doesn‟t get built in a week or two. 

It takes a long time to do this. 

 

About a month ago, we were able to open up the Mount Royal 

training facility that was part of the funding for Station 20, and 

yet Station 20 remains part of the media‟s news stories. 

Yesterday the church has stepped forward — and I congratulate 

the churches in this very public act — to recognize that some 

communities have challenges that need that extra support. And 

it‟s more than just putting a roof over our head. It‟s making sure 

people have safe and healthy communities, safe and healthy 

communities. And I think that we should take a look at how can 

we make sure that happens. 

 

I‟ve talked about the stats from Sask Housing where we‟ve seen 

the waiting lists go on, from seniors, basically doubling, and 

we‟ve seen overall the number of people on waiting lists for 

Sask Housing going from 950 to about 2,400. This is an 

unfortunate circumstance that we have. We have the ability in 

this province to turn the corner, and I really encourage us to do 

that.  

 

I think when the Poverty Free Saskatchewan people talk about 

what kind of province would they like us to see in 

Saskatchewan — one I can tell you that I would like to see — 

that in November and December, we don‟t hear about the 

Salvation Army having to turn away people into the cold. I 

think that‟s a very unfortunate circumstance, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I think we can do something about that. 

 

And this winter and as we approach the Christmas season and 

we think of those who are less fortunate than us, we should 

think not only of making a one-time contribution. But when we 

think about how can we make a long-term contribution, think 

about what they‟re doing in Ottawa and can we make that 

difference as well? Can we make that difference? And we can 

make a difference if we work together with all sorts of different 

groups, the different levels of government, and the people that 

are living in poverty. It can make a difference.  

 

And I know that I could go on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I could go 

on because there‟s been many reports. I can talk about the rural 

report. . . the report on rural poverty that was released just a 

couple of years ago. No one is immune to poverty here. 

 

So with that, having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟d like to 

make the motion. That it‟s moved: 

 

That this Assembly call on the government to recognize 

the urgent nature of the housing and affordability crisis 

across the province as evidenced by the fact that the 

Salvation Army is having to turn people away from its 

emergency shelters in Saskatoon due to an overcapacity 

for the first time, and further; 

 

That in making this call, the Assembly urges the 

government to do the following: 

(1) To immediately assist emergency shelters to increase 

their capacity to provide desperately needed services 

during cold winter months; and 

(2) To immediately begin the process of developing a 

comprehensive, affordable housing strategy and a 

comprehensive poverty reduction strategy to address the 

underlying causes of this crisis. 

 

Dated today, November 25th, 2010. I do so move. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved a motion: 

 

That this Assembly calls on the government to recognize 

the urgent nature of the housing and affordability crisis 

across the province as evidenced by the fact that the 

Salvation Army is having to turn people away from its 

emergency shelters in Saskatoon due to overcapacity for 

the first time, and further; 

 

That in making this call, the Assembly urges the 

government to do the following: 

(1) To immediately assist emergency shelters to increase 

their capacity to provide desperately needed services 

during the cold winter months;  

(2) To immediately begin the process of developing a 

comprehensive, affordable housing strategy and a 

comprehensive poverty reduction strategy to address the 

underlying causes of this crisis. 

 

Being that it is less than a minute to adjournment, I will ask the 

House indulgence that we adjourn the House — but is the 

member on his feet? — that we adjourn the House till 10 

o‟clock . . . I mean 1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. Monday. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Monday. I will move that this House 

do now adjourn . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Okay. I can‟t. I 

declare this House now adjourned till Monday at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6217 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6217 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6218 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6218 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6218 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6218 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6218 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6218 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6219 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6219 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6219 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6219 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6219 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Elimination of Violence Against Women 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6220 

 Newfoundland and Labrador Premier Recognized on Retirement 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6220 

 Go Riders 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6220 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6221 

 Depot Division Receives Inaugural Award 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6221 

 Ile-a-la-Crosse Athlete Recognized 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6221 

 Saskatchewan Golfer Honoured 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6221 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 State of the Provincial Economy 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6222 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6222 

 Contract with Information Technology Office 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6223 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6223 

 Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6224 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6224 

 Support for Affordable Housing 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6225 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6225 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Ottenbreit .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6226 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 151 — The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies Amendment Act, 2010 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6226 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6227 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Support for Rural Saskatchewan 

  Brkich ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6227, 6237 

  Iwanchuk ....................................................................................................................................................................... 6229, 6237 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6231 

  Atkinson ......................................................................................................................................................................... 6232, 6238 

  D’Autremont ................................................................................................................................................................. 6234, 6237 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 6235, 6237 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6236 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6237 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6238 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 2 — Housing 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6238 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


