




















































Hansard: March 16, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 31B  TUESDAY, MARCH 16, 2010, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4257 

 March 16, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 97 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

The Speaker: — Being now 7 p.m., the debate will resume on 

the adjourned motions on Bill No. 97. I recognize the member 

from Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. And I thank the members for giving me the 

opportunity to continue making a few remarks on this particular 

Bill. It‟s certainly a pleasure and an opportunity and a privilege 

to be able to stand in this House and to participate in a debate, 

particularly a debate on this particular Bill, the Bill 97, An Act 

to Amend the Agri-Food Act, 2004, to repeal The Cattle 

Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 and The Cattle Marketing 

Deductions Regulations, 2004 and to make consequential 

amendments to The Department of Agriculture, Food and Rural 

Revitalization Act. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s certainly a pleasure for me to have the 

opportunity to continue on with a few of my remarks that I had 

the opportunity to enter into this debate earlier this afternoon. 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it absolutely clear that 

I‟m not drawing into question in any manner, shape, or form the 

character or the intentions of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s 

Association in any of my remarks. And I hope I didn‟t leave 

that impression anywhere because as far as I know, from those 

people who I‟ve talked to who have a working knowledge of 

the association, it‟s a fine association and does a good job of 

representing its members. 

 

My only question is, Mr. Speaker, of the government is how the 

government went about selecting this particular organization to 

do the work of what was previously done by the government or 

done by the Department of Agriculture and its collection of the 

check-off fees which have been . . . A process has been going 

on for a while in this province, and as the check-off fees is 

based on $1 of a non-refundable check-off fee on a national 

levy and $2 of a refundable check-off fee as a provincial level. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it absolutely clear that I‟m not 

questioning the character. I‟m not questioning the motives. I‟m 

not questioning anything as far as any negative aspersions upon 

the organization of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s Association. 

 

I am wondering, though, why the government decided to go in 

this particular direction, and I am wondering why the 

government selected this organization over other organizations. 

I‟m wondering what the process was that made a determination 

by the government to go in this particular direction. I am 

wondering why the government felt the need to go in this 

direction in the first place. 

What was the downfall or the shortfall of the old system where 

the Department of Agriculture collected these fees on an 

ongoing basis and held them in a fund that was disbursed only 

after the government received direction from the board that 

governed the operation of the fees? And that board, of course, 

was made up of livestock producers right across this great 

province, from every corner of the province, and certainly were 

people who were experienced in the industry and people who 

had hands-on experience in the industry and were able to give 

credible advice to the department. And it has worked very, very 

well in the past. 

 

I certainly have not had the experience of having any producers 

bring to my attention any of the shortfalls that they recognized 

in the old system and were suggesting that the old system 

should be replaced. It‟s not something that was certainly high 

on the farmers‟ want list when it comes to this government and 

this government‟s attention as far as the agriculture industry is 

concerned. So I‟m wondering why the government has decided 

to introduce this Bill in the first place and to make some drastic 

changes, drastic changes to the way the check-off fees are being 

handled and the way that they are being processed, I guess you 

would say, and the effects that they might have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the system of collecting these fees is fairly simple. 

It‟s a check-off system. It‟s a system that is done at the local 

auction mart when the animals are sold through the auction 

ring. And it‟s done on a basis of $1, on a national fee of $1 per 

head will be collected, and the provincial government body has 

added to that a $2 levy which is refundable. If the producer 

wishes, they can write in to the department and request to have 

that money refunded. 

 

Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think that too many 

producers have done that because they see the value in this 

check-off. And they see the value in this money being used to 

protect their industry, to be reinvested in their industry, to be 

directed to programs and directed in ways that will certainly 

support their industry and cause the industry to be stable, cause 

the industry to have the ability to grow, cause the industry to 

continue to be strong and hopefully develop into a very 

prosperous industry because it is a very important part of our 

economy, certainly a very important part of the rural economy, 

a very important part of the economy in many of our small 

towns across this great province. 

 

But it contributes in a big, big way to the much larger picture, 

the provincial economy, and it contributes in a very, very, big 

way to ensure that these economies stay strong. When the 

economies stay strong, people in this great province of ours 

benefit from it. So you can see, Mr. Speaker, it is important. It‟s 

an important decision to be made. And how these fees are to be 

handled and how they are to be spent to ensure that they are 

spent in a way that will bring the most benefit to the industry, 

the most benefit to those producers within that industry to 

ensure that we have a strong and viable industry, not only in the 

present time but into the foreseeable future, that‟s important, 

Mr. Speaker. It‟s important to have a strong industry and to be 

able to demonstrate that the industry is strong in order to be 

able to attract people to the industry. 

 

As we know, Mr. Speaker, time goes on and we all move along 



4258 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

in the march of time. And with that comes the opportunity for 

some of us who are getting up in age, if we‟re involved in the 

agriculture industry, if we‟re involved in the livestock industry, 

to perhaps look at the opportunity to sell our operation to 

someone else who may be looking to expand their operation. Or 

perhaps we can look at our family members, maybe we have 

family members who wish to get in the industry. And we can 

have the opportunity to pass some of this stuff on, to give them 

a leg up, the starting process to get into the industry, which is 

always very valuable. I think for anybody that‟s starting out in 

the industry, if you can have some assistance, it certainly 

improves their chances of success. 

 

And in today‟s world, I don‟t think it matters whether you‟re in 

the livestock industry or an agriculture industry in particular, 

but I think probably anywhere, the more assistance that you can 

get when you‟re first starting out, the greater likelihood you are 

of being able to achieve success in your operation. So there 

needs to be the ability to attract young people to the industry in 

order to have a strong and vibrant and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I just want to remind the 

member that the debate here centres around a levy, a check-off, 

and who is collecting it. And so to bring that to the member‟s 

attention, it has nothing to do with transfer of assets. I recognize 

the member from Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and that is exactly the 

crutch of my comments, is that the levies that are being 

collected on an ongoing basis and have been in the past are a 

very important part of ensuring that we have a strong industry 

in this province and an important part of ensuring that the 

industry continues and remains strong. And in order to have a 

strong industry, you need to have the assurance that the funds 

that are being spent to support that industry are being spent in 

the right way and that these funds that are collected through the 

check-offs are supporting an industry that is viable and is strong 

and is able to attract young people to that industry. 

 

And a part of that process will be the transfer of assets to a 

younger person to be able to be a part of that industry and to be 

a part of the continuing to have livestock moving through our 

system that will continue to have check-offs. That check-off 

will then be able to be reinvested in the industry, be able to 

support that industry. 

 

It‟s sort of a package that has to be considered. What‟s certainly 

good for the livestock industry is in turn good for the 

agricultural industry. What‟s good for the livestock industry and 

in turn good for the agricultural industry is good for the 

Saskatchewan economy. And that economy of course is not 

only a rural economy where agriculture is so very important, 

but it‟s also an important aspect of the provincial economy. 

 

So to ensure that we have a wise expenditure of those fees that 

are being collected on an ongoing basis, whether they be the 

national levy or whether they be the provincial levy, they are all 

pooled together, or at least in the past they‟ve all been pooled 

together into a fund that was held by the Department of 

Agriculture, a revolving fund. That was held by the Department 

of Agriculture and would be expended only, only after those 

who were overseeing that fund — and it was an advisory board 

that was made up of producers from all across this great 

province of ours — they would offer good quality advice to the 

department as to how to expend these funds to best meet the 

needs of the industry to ensure that the industry would continue 

to be a strong and growing industry. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that may be available under the new system. 

That may be exactly what‟s going to happen under this new 

system; it‟s just that we don‟t have any assurance of that. We 

don‟t have any assurance that the government has put into place 

those regulations and those guidelines to ensure that we will be 

able to have good quality advisors advising the fund managers 

under the new system that‟s being proposed by the government, 

the fund managers to ensure that the decisions made, are they 

made in the best interest of the industry and made in the best 

interests of the producer. It may be so. It may be so. 

 

It‟s just this government hasn‟t been able to provide us with that 

information. It certainly does not exist in the Act. It certainly 

does not exist anywhere in the comments by the minister in the 

introduction of the Bill, and it certainly does not exist anywhere 

in the notes that supported this Bill that was provided to us by 

the government. 

 

So I then have to ask a question of the government, is why not? 

I mean if you‟re comfortable with your proposal — and I would 

assume you are, you‟re making it — if you‟re comfortable with 

your proposal, then why wouldn‟t you provide the supporting 

documentation that would satisfy the questions that not only are 

we asking, but are being asked by those producers across this 

province who are aware these changes are happening? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear that I haven‟t had the 

chance to do an extensive amount of research on this, simply 

because I haven‟t had the time. But what I have been able to do 

is to talk to some producers across this province. And some 

who are aware of it say, yes they think it might be all right. It 

could even be a good idea. And then there are others who are 

saying, well I don‟t know. I liked the way it was in the past. I 

don‟t think we need to change it. But there‟s a whole lot of 

producers out there that had absolutely no idea that this was 

happening. They had no idea this was happening. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is why it is so important, it is so important 

that we ensure that there‟s a mechanism in place under this new 

proposal of the government that will first of all inform those 

producers out there that there are changes happening to the 

system, to the system of handling of the check-offs that happen 

as they sell their products through the livestock marketing, but 

ensure that the producers are comfortable with the 

understanding that they will — regardless of whether they are a 

member of that organization or not — that they will have ability 

to have input into and influence on the decisions being made as 

to the expenditure of those funds from the check-offs. 

 

I think the bottom line is that most members and livestock 

producers out there want to ensure that their money is being 

spent wisely and the money is being spent in a manner which 

will benefit the industry and which will benefit the producers. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that those are some of the key 

components to the issues that we may have — we in the 

opposition have — with this particular piece of legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s just a few simple questions I think the 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4259 

government has to answer would bring a lot of, perhaps, relief 

to producers out there. One of those questions would be, how 

much of the money is going to be going to the day-to-day 

operations of the Cattlemen‟s Association? Or any? I don‟t 

know that any will. We don‟t know that there‟s been an 

arrangement with them that they get a percentage, you know, a 

percentage for handling the fund, or if they‟re doing it without 

any fee being exchanged. We don‟t know those things. Those 

are some of the questions that the government should be willing 

to answer and answer readily. 

 

Another question, what is the Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s 

Association doing with these funds now and into the future? 

What is the plans for these funds? What do they plan to do with 

the funds? How do they plan to spend the money and on what 

mechanisms would they spend that money on to support the 

livestock industry? What programs? What ways would that 

money be invested in the livestock industry that would enhance 

the industry and would support the producers within? How 

much money will be allocated for research and development 

within the industry? 

 

[19:15] 

 

Those are the simple questions, Mr. Speaker, that are very, very 

important to be asked and, more importantly, to be answered, 

both by the government and by the association because that‟s 

the cattle producers‟ money. The producers out there, that‟s 

their money. And it‟s being checked off. And they‟re willingly 

donating that money or giving that money without any 

reservation, but they would like to know how that money is 

being spent. They would like to know, is some of that money 

going to be going into research and development? Because as 

you know, the success of any industry is being prepared to meet 

the challenges of the future, and in order to do that you must 

keep up to date with research and development. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are any number of questions that need to 

be asked. And I‟m sure that as time goes on here, we‟ll 

certainly continue to ask the questions. I‟m just not sure, Mr. 

Speaker, that we‟re going to be able to get the answers from this 

government because I would have hoped that if this government 

felt comfortable in this Bill, then they would have provided us 

with that information initially. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think that I‟ve pretty well been able 

to touch on a few of the issues that come to mind when I look at 

this Bill at a first glance. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you 

and the indulgence of the members of the House, and that will 

conclude my remarks on this particular Bill. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, I listened 

very intently to my seatmate‟s discussion of Bill No. 97, and I 

must say I have nothing but the greatest admiration for the job 

that my seatmate did in discussing Bill No. 97, which is An Act 

to amend The Agri-Food Act, 2004. I have seldom seen a more 

stellar job of explaining what a Bill might do, of raising the 

questions. But it‟s interesting, Mr. Speaker, there‟s some 

questions that I have that were not raised in this speech. And I 

want to point out that‟s sure not to denigrate my seatmate for 

the terrific, terrific job that he did. 

 

What we‟re up to, what we‟re about tonight is a discussion of 

Bill No. 97 which is An Act to amend The Agri-Food Act, 2004, 

to repeal The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 and The 

Cattle Marketing Deductions Regulations, 2004 and to make 

consequential amendments to The Department of Agriculture, 

Food and Rural Revitalization Act. Mr. Speaker, this, just by its 

title, this Act touches on a fair amount of mostly rural 

Saskatchewan but of bureaucracy and rural Saskatchewan. It 

certainly affects cattle marketing, livestock — the entire 

industry. 

 

This is an industry with one incredibly proud past. You know, 

in many ways the relatively modern Saskatchewan that we 

know came about with the plow. But before the plow came the 

cattle. Before the plow came, we had livestock. We had 

operations like the Matador ranch, which the very farm I grew 

up on came from that great Matador ranch — the Matador ranch 

which originated in Texas and worked its way north. The 

summer ranch was partially on what became the Beechy co-op 

farm land. And of course the winter range was as far south as 

Texas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, livestock have been a mainstay of agriculture. 

Certainly at the time that I was on a farm, most farmers had 

mixed farms. In fact not only did they have livestock and 

produce grain, but in those days many had hogs and chickens 

and really, really were diversified. 

 

I know farming has changed, and I‟m not wishing those days 

back other than it would be nice to be significantly younger and 

have it all to do over again. But that would be the only possible 

reason that I would wish those days back. They were good days, 

but we‟re also in good days, and I think that the better days are 

yet to come. And I am absolutely confident, Mr. Speaker, that 

agriculture‟s going to be a huge part of the future of rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

There‟s some question around crop production and the viability 

of ongoing use of fossil fuels both to run equipment and the use 

of fossil fuels in the manufacture and placement of fertilizers. 

And I‟m not trying to comment on that other than to state the 

obvious, and that is, this land was grazing land before our 

generations got there, and there‟s a very good chance that it‟ll 

be grazing land in the future. Again I‟m not trying to predict 

whether we‟re talking a very few short years or whether we‟re 

talking many more years than that. But clearly livestock are 

going to be very important and growingly important to that 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So Bill 97 which seems fairly innocuous . . . It seems on the 

surface like, you know, it‟s about setting up, how do we handle 

a, call it a 2 or a $3 levy because I know there‟s the federal $1 

that‟s included in there and that gets passed on. But how do we 

collect and deal with the $2 levy? And what does it do? But it‟s 

$2 per marketed animal — livestock. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there was rules that we were fairly 

comfortable with, knowing how this levy was collected, where 

it went, and how it was spent in the interests of livestock 

production, livestock marketing, livestock research and 

development — all of those things that are so necessary in a 



4260 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

vibrant livestock industry. We knew what the rules were and we 

are, quite frankly, on this side just a little bit skeptical. 

 

I want to point out that the minister‟s speech was incredibly 

short on this Bill. I want to point out that I go through the 

explanatory notes and frankly I find them wanting. We‟re not 

certain what exactly the rules are. And I want to say, Mr. 

Speaker, that there is some significant reason for skepticism on 

this side. I simply point out we‟re a week away from budget. 

 

And I say this only to make one point. Eleven months ago we 

were told that we were going to get $1.9 billion from potash by 

the Minister of Finance in the Sask Party government. Last 

week we found out that there was a cheque being cut to the 

potash corporations for $204 million. Not 1.9 billion in, but 204 

back to them. I‟ve never seen the largest single revenue source 

of the provincial government out by more than 110 per cent, 

more than 110 per cent. And that‟s what happened. 

 

So when we hear any discussion of dollars or numbers, we 

wonder, has the due diligence taken place? And what are the 

rules, Mr. Speaker, for the expenditure of $2? Because surely 

the $2 per animal isn‟t just going into somebody‟s bank account 

and never to see the light of day, never to be spent, and 

hopefully spent for a good cause — spent for research and 

development of livestock, for keeping a very strong look on 

markets worldwide. 

 

I know one of the things that I heard earlier today, my seatmate 

was talking about expanding economies around the world and 

how as economies grow and the local populations or the 

population of that country get wealthier, they tend to move from 

rice to potatoes. They move from chicken to pork and 

ultimately they introduce beef. And the greater the income, the 

greater proportion of beef. And then eventually we get too 

chunky and we revert back to chicken. But that‟s not the 

problem that most of the world has. They don‟t have, most of 

the world doesn‟t have the North American weight gain 

problem that many of us have. So beef will be a welcome 

addition to their diets. 

 

And there‟s every reason, Mr. Speaker, to urge that it be 

Saskatchewan beef wherever it‟s possible. We‟ve got a land 

mass that is just phenomenal in size. As we all know, there is 

much land that is suitable for livestock, raising livestock, that 

much of that land is not suitable for growing crops. But in 

addition, there is land that‟s being cropped right now that 

arguably would be serving a better use in a vibrant livestock 

industry. But to get there, we need to grow that livestock 

industry. We need to make it ever more viable, ever better. 

 

And by ever more viable, ever better, of course, what am I 

talking about? I‟m talking about dollars into the pockets of 

livestock producers. Money talks, and if they can make money, 

they will raise the livestock. This is precisely why we‟re seeing 

Saskatchewan‟s livestock herd going down dramatically in 

Saskatchewan. The money isn‟t there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a couple of years ago, I had two cousins that had 

taken over my uncle‟s herd when they bought him out . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Bill before us is The 

Agri-Food Amendment Act, which is strictly dealing with levies 

and how they will be collected and who‟s responsible. And I 

ask the member to address the legislation or the Bill before us. 

Thank you. I recognize the member from Regina Coronation 

Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The levy, of 

course, for livestock producers, the levy that we‟re talking 

about is one that has to be put to good use. This is a levy that is 

very . . . this Bill is very, very short on specifics about how that 

levy is going to be used. 

 

This is in no small measure what our objection is. It‟s clear 

where the $2 is going to go. What is absolutely missing is, how 

does that money then come out? How does that money get 

spent? That I have not been able to ascertain, Mr. Speaker. And 

that, I submit to you, sir, that the livestock producers of 

Saskatchewan have every right to know. How is that levy going 

to be spent and what is it going to be spent on? That‟s the thrust 

of my concern with this Bill. 

 

We‟ve already seen when it comes to financial matters 

questionable math by the Sask Party government, questionable 

math. Mr. Speaker, we see and we hear Sask Party members get 

on their feet day after day and tell us how good things are on 

the farm, how good things are in Saskatchewan. 

 

Well Mr. Speaker, I‟ve got before me a magazine called action! 

and it‟s from the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, their 

news magazine. And when it‟s talking here about Saskatchewan 

farm cash receipts — this is incidentally a magazine that if it 

wasn‟t in yesterday‟s mail, it was in today‟s mail; it‟s that hot 

off the press, Mr. Speaker — Saskatchewan‟s farm cash 

receipts, it shows in the years 2008, 2009 that the crop 

production is level. Level. It shows with respect to livestock, 

down. Down. It shows with respect to program payments — 

these are program payments like crop insurance, like the 

agri-support that come from the provincial and the federal 

government, government program payments — with respect to 

program payments, it shows that from 2001 right through 2007 

it never dipped below a billion dollars a year, farm support. 

 

Well what happened in 2007? The Sask Party got elected. What 

does this graph in the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 

magazine show, Mr. Speaker? It shows program . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

[19:30] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I think the Bill is 

straightforward and the Bill is very simple, as you‟ve indicated. 

But some of your arguments most recently have had nothing 

brought to my attention, anything that would resemble the 

levies that are being requested or the payments of them, who‟s 

going to manage those levies. So I‟d ask the member to confine 

his comments to Bill No. 97. The member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — So thank you, Mr. Speaker. So Bill No. 97 which 

is The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009, now that‟s the short 

title for the much longer name. I‟ve already said it once and I‟m 

not going to waste your time or anyone else‟s repeating that title 

at this moment, although it‟s tempting. 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4261 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill allows for the Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s 

Association to collect the $1 non-refundable national levy 

collected on cattle sold at market, and it also allows the $2 

refundable provincial levy collected on cattle sold at market. 

And it‟s primarily the $2 levy that we‟re concerned with 

because the $1 levy, as I read this Bill No. 97, Mr. Speaker, the 

$1 national levy flows through. I believe it to be fairly 

straightforward that that dollar does not stay here; it flows 

through for the national purposes that it was set up for. I never 

set it up, but I presume that it‟s a reasonable levy or the 

Minister of Agriculture and the government would have had 

something to say about that. 

 

So this $2 refundable provincial levy is what we‟re talking 

about and, Mr. Speaker, it‟s fairly clear that $2 is going to be 

collected from every animal that‟s sold in Saskatchewan. It‟s 

fairly clear. This legislation is fairly clear on that. I submit what 

is not clear is what then happens to that $2. And I‟m trying as 

best I can to raise legitimate concerns about what that $2 is used 

for, whether it‟s research and development, whether it‟s finding 

new markets, whether it‟s dealing with mad cow disease in 

some way. What are they using the $2 for and what triggers 

any, any expenditure from that fund that presumably, 

presumably is controlled by the Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s 

Association? 

 

And my question would be is it the executive of the Cattlemen‟s 

Association only that determine how this money is going to be 

spent? Or does it go to the annual meeting for approval before 

it‟s spent? I don‟t have the answers, Mr. Speaker. I just don‟t 

have the answers. I‟m not casting any negative aspersions on 

the Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s Association. They were, well it 

says they were consulted and agreed to this, so presumably they 

can handle what‟s going on. But what Her Majesty‟s Loyal 

Opposition has every reasonable need to know is what triggers 

the expenditures. Who controls it and what‟s it spent for? 

 

Mad cow disease has cost hundreds of millions of dollars to the 

livestock industry, not only in Saskatchewan, but right across 

Canada. It‟s a worldwide problem. Mad cow disease is a 

worldwide concern. Mr. Speaker, we need to have some 

assurance that this $2 levy that is being collected under Bill No. 

97, The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009, just like to know 

where is that money to go. 

 

You know, it used to be that the government had an appointed 

board that consisted of a number of livestock producers, and it 

would take applications and channel the money out from the 

revolving fund that previously was held in trust by the 

Department of Agriculture. And it was an audited fund, and 

every dollar that was collected presumably would find its way 

back into the industry. But it had a clear board that oversaw the 

expenditures out of the revolving fund in the Department of 

Agriculture. 

 

The funds went mostly into research for the livestock industry, 

mostly into research. I can‟t say that it all went into research, 

that some of it didn‟t go into marketing, but I can tell you that 

my information is most of it went into research. 

 

So Bill 97 is changing the rules maybe — maybe — but we‟re 

not sure. We‟re not sure. It‟s changing the rules maybe with 

respect to how the money . . . Well it‟s changed in that we know 

that the government-appointed board no longer is going to 

control the expenditures of that $2 levy. But we just don‟t know 

who for sure is, and we don‟t know what control the producers 

ultimately have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we are aware that some producers don‟t like this new 

legislation. Some producers do not like it. We‟re also aware that 

some producers are very much in favour of this Bill 97, The 

Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009. I further submit that whether 

producers, livestock producers are in favour or opposed to this 

Bill, I submit to you and to this Assembly that those livestock 

producers all want the very best for the livestock industry. They 

want it to succeed. They want it to thrive. 

 

They want it so that my grandchildren on the farm raising 

livestock can continue to raise livestock. And I hear skeptical 

heckles, Mr. Speaker. I can tell you that they‟re just loving the 

raising of livestock, and I can tell you that my two older 

grandchildren are 4-H members and are very, very proud of 

that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to introduce a 

guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

a guest. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank all hon. 

members. It‟s unusual for someone who‟s speaking to ask leave 

to introduce guests so that they can get a break from their 

speaking. 

 

But in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is actually a very good friend 

of mine. We call each other best friends. Fred Kress is there. 

Fred is my constituency assistant and doing a terrific job there. 

 

Perhaps of more importance in this legislature, Fred is one of 

four people challenging for the nomination in the constituency 

of Regina Coronation Park for the New Democratic Party. And 

ask me which candidate is my favourite, and I‟ll tell you all of 

them are. All of them are. All of them will make very good 

MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all hon. members to help me in welcoming 

my best friend, Fred Kress, to the Legislative Assembly. And 

now if I may continue, before I was so rudely interrupted for 

that introduction. No, I say that tongue-in-cheek. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 97 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s 



4262 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

Association is presumably controlling these funds in the future. 

How much money is there going to be collected? And how 

much of that money is going to go to research and development 

within the industry? Is it a set amount? Is it two-thirds or 

three-quarters, you know, 75 per cent of the $2 allocation that‟s 

being collected under Bill 97, The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 

2009? Or is it some other . . . This is one of our concerns, that 

there may be no guidelines. We have no notion of there being 

any guidelines, any generally accepted thing that the money can 

be spent on. 

 

And we do know that as whole herds are being dispersed, 

there‟s a lot of money comes in; $2 a head, there‟s a significant 

chunk of change that‟s going to come in. And we just would 

very much like to see that spent on research and development. 

And I mentioned marketing; marketing‟s a very good use of 

that fund as well. 

 

But I wonder how much of the money might legitimately go 

into the day-to-day operation and marketing for the Cattlemen‟s 

Association. I‟m simply asking what the rules are allowing. 

And we don‟t know that; we don‟t know how much money will 

go to the day-to-day operation, and the legislation is absolutely 

silent on it. I read carefully the minister‟s speech introducing 

the Bill. This is an opportunity in the minister‟s reading to 

explain what the Bill is proposed to do. And I pointed out we 

find that speech lacking in content and it leaves us with some 

real questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don‟t know if other cattle organizations who 

aren‟t part of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s Association, we 

don‟t know if they‟re going to benefit directly or even indirectly 

from these levies. We don‟t know if the, for instance, the Stock 

Grower‟s Association is going to receive any money from those 

levies to use for operation or marketing, as I understand that 

they did with the old system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So clearly we‟re on topic with the $2 levy that Bill 97 is 

allowing. I just spent a fair amount of time talking about the $2 

levy and how it might be spent. We don‟t know, Mr. Speaker, if 

there‟s an advantage in having the Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s 

Association act as the self-regulating body, or is it simply 

shifting who‟s responsible? What‟s the advantage of this new 

proposal, the proposed legislation under Bill 97? What‟s the 

change? 

 

Or is it, Mr. Speaker, like the best example that I can come up 

with is the long-gun registry where a national government said, 

we have a problem; we must do something. And so they did 

something, had nothing to do with banks being robbed in 

Toronto or anywhere else. It just had everything to do with 

reacting and doing something. 

 

And we‟re not sure if that isn‟t kind of what this Bill 97 is about 

is just, well we have to do something so here it is. Here‟s Bill 

97. Here is An Act to amend the Agri-Food Act, 2004, to repeal 

The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 and The Cattle 

Marketing Deductions Regulations, 2004 and to make 

consequential amendments to The Department of Agriculture, 

Food and Rural Revitalization Act. 

 

Previously there was a deduction of $2 per head. Under this 

new Act there‟s a deduction of $2 a head. Previously the rules 

were very clear as to how the money would be disbursed, how 

that $2 would amass into a sum of money that was held in trust 

by the Department of Agriculture. There was an oversight body, 

primarily of livestock producers, that would make 

recommendations on how that money could be spent on 

research and development of the livestock industry. 

 

It begs the question, Mr. Speaker, what needed to be fixed? 

What was the problem with the way it had been operating? I‟m 

not for a minute trying to pretend that things were perfect. 

There may well be some legitimate reason that something 

needed to be fixed, but that reason doesn‟t leap to our attention. 

It certainly didn‟t leap to our attention as we read the minister‟s 

statement, as we read the explanatory notes, or as we read Bill 

97 itself. Mr. Speaker, none of the answers are clear in that, and 

you‟d think that with three and more opportunities to get it 

right, that it would be a little clearer to the public. It would be a 

little clearer what it is that this Bill is all about. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ve asked before who in the Saskatchewan cattle 

association will be determining where and when these funds 

will be allocated, but I‟m not even sure that I know . . . I think 

this is a fairly newly minted organization and, Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

not sure what the board makeup is or what sort of an electoral 

system they go through. And it may be an absolutely stellar 

electoral system, but again it‟s not leaping out at us what that is. 

 

You know, all fees and levies charged for licensing and for 

registration and for inspection used to go into that revolving 

fund and then be disbursed from that. This Bill 97 seems to me 

has the potential, the potential, of separating the livestock 

industry and picking one winner. And potentially, potentially — 

not sure that it‟s doing it — but potentially, Mr. Speaker, 

picking some losers, picking some livestock producers that are 

going to be left out. 

 

I do understand that there are some — a minority, I believe — 

in the Stock Growers Association that don‟t like this. Are there 

other livestock producers‟ organizations in the province that 

have also, for whatever reason, chosen to be left out? So is this 

Bill 97 an Act of picking winners and losers? Is it an Act of 

being exclusionary? Or is it an Act that is trying to be more 

inclusive, perhaps, than the old Act was? Don‟t have the answer 

— don‟t have the answer, but that‟s what we‟re trying to find 

out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that the Department of Agriculture had the revolving 

fund that handled the $2 levy out of livestock sales. But we 

know that they, in that same fund, when things like the 

Saskatchewan poultry producers . . . They also pay fees and 

levies into that same revolving fund and Saskatchewan Egg 

Producers also pay into that. We‟re not sure what those two 

organizations might think of these changes. We‟re not at all 

sure that making any fund smaller by segregating it out will 

somehow benefit anyone who contributes into the fund. Again 

we‟re not sure that there isn‟t some advantages, but they‟re 

certainly not spoken to in the explanatory notes. They certainly 

were not spoken to in the minister‟s remarks as he was 

introducing this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m wondering if this will open up other 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4263 

organizations. Other producer organizations may want to also 

be self-regulating. And I‟m not sure what the government‟s 

approach would be if that‟s the case, whether they would just 

say, oh good, oh good, or whether they would actually consult 

with everyone who might be involved and genuinely try and 

figure out what is best for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve got Bill 97 that‟s coming at a time 

when livestock producers‟ income is down, coming at a time 

when many, many things say that the provincial economy is 

heading into some difficulty. And the question is, why would 

we suddenly be focused on Bill No. 97, which is An Act to 

amend The Agri-Food Act, when there are other things that 

clearly should be commanding a lot more of this Assembly‟s 

time and the government‟s time and our time? We deal with 

whatever is put on our plate. That‟s what we‟re tasked with 

dealing with, whatever is brought forward. 

 

And the question would be, why this Act? Why not deal with 

some of the real pressing issues? As I pointed out, Mr. Speaker, 

this Act is largely about a $2 levy per animal that‟s marketed in 

Saskatchewan that used to go into the Department of 

Agriculture revolving fund, the $2 levy. And now the $2 levy is 

going into a different fund that is controlled by the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s Association. Thank you . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, oh good. Oh good. Mr. Speaker, 

clearly have a lot more to say on this Bill, having now got the 

regulations on The Agri-Food Act, 2004 and I‟ve got to figure 

out what some of the changes are in that Act as it relates to Bill 

No. 97. 

 

It‟s, you know, The Agri-Food Regulations, 2004. The Act in 

the interpretation it says, these regulations. Act means The 

Agri-Food Act, 2004. Mr. Speaker, I‟m not even going to go 

into that particular book other than to point out, Mr. Speaker, 

that this Act affects an awful lot in Saskatchewan. 

 

What we‟re absolutely certain of, absolutely certain of is that 

we don‟t trust the Sask Party with respect to how they‟re 

spending money. We‟re absolutely certain that this Bill doesn‟t 

say where that $2 levy is going to go. We‟re absolutely certain 

of that, Mr. Speaker. We‟re absolutely certain. This is short on 

specifics. It‟s asking for a change that‟s going to affect some of 

my family, going to affect cattle livestock producers throughout 

the province of Saskatchewan. We think that they have every 

reasonable right to have some of those answers before we get a 

Bill jammed down our throats. 

 

The agriculture and livestock production has got just a terrific 

future. Terrific future, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s a future that needs 

to have a number of things helping it along. It needs research 

and development into the livestock industry. It needs marketing. 

It clearly needs standards set — grading of beef, standards of 

how that beef is going to be handled, how it‟s going . . . the 

rules around slaughter, the rules around refrigeration, freshness, 

how you label cuts. It needs all of that so that we can continue 

to enjoy significant consumer confidence. And indeed as the 

years go by, Mr. Speaker, consumer confidence seems to be 

even more important not only in the livestock industry but in all 

agriculture products, all agriculture production. 

 

We see a real move away from the use of chemicals. We see a 

move away from the use of antibiotics with respect to livestock. 

And this means a whole new way of raising livestock, and some 

of the $2 levy should be spent on research to help support that. 

Some of that should be, so we‟re not just into some monolithic 

way of raising livestock, some of the money should be spent 

into making sure that the livestock industry enjoys consumer 

confidence and has a future. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, it‟s even possible — it‟s possible, 

just possible — that Saskatchewan might enjoy a huge 

advantage in the production of organic livestock. This 

advantage, if I can describe it, comes from having vast amounts 

of land. We‟re blessed with more acres per capita than virtually 

anywhere in the world. We have all kinds of opportunity to look 

at unique ways of raising livestock, unique ways of marketing 

livestock. And for that to happen, some of that $2 money, that 

$2 levy could be spent on to research and development of 

organic livestock and really helping our producers to make their 

mark in that field. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of that money maybe should be spent on 

4-H because 4-H‟ers are a significant part of the future of the 

livestock industry. Many, many young producers, that‟s how 

they cut their teeth in the industry — grooming and showing 

their calves, whether it‟s a heifer or a steer or both. If you get 

old, once you get a certain age you can actually show both. Mr. 

Speaker, there‟s wonderful things that can be learned in 4-H 

and, you know, perhaps that‟s a place that there may be some 

room for some support out of this $2 marketing levy. Maybe, 

maybe there‟s room for some support there. 

 

Livestock, the industry, there‟s mixed views whether the 

livestock industry, Mr. Speaker, had to be into trouble because 

of mad cow. It‟s a case of how do you handle livestock right 

from arguably before birth. But we only control birth right 

through to the, ultimately, the kitchen table or the table — the 

marketing, birth to slaughter to table. Now should some of the 

research and development money not go into finding ways to 

make sure that livestock are registered, make sure that 

producers can have a reasonable, a reasonable safety assurance 

that when they buy a bred cow that this cow doesn‟t come from 

potential mad cow stock? This is some of the things that can 

really happen under this, under this Bill 97 and the $2 levy. But 

we need to know some of those answers. 

 

What about labelling a product? What about inspection of 

livestock? Mr. Speaker, how do producers, how do producers 

control that levy? What do they have? Do they have a direct 

vote, and is it a direct vote online? Is it a direct vote they have 

to go to an annual meeting or a monthly meeting? Or do they 

elect a board of directors? Do they elect a relatively small 

advisory group or a large advisory group? How many people 

would be involved? 

 

And are there any outside of livestock producers that would be 

involved in this? Is there outside — outside, I‟ll call it, 

expertise? I‟m not sure that‟s entirely what you need, but 

certainly we need some expertise in marketing. We would need 

some expertise in safety. How is this controlled, Mr. Speaker? 

How is the $2 levy that‟s proposed under this Bill, how is that 

controlled? Mr. Speaker, this Bill repeals subsection, under The 

Agri-Food Act, 2004, subsection 4(1) is changed: 

 

by repealing “and” after clause (c); and 



4264 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

by adding the following after clause (c): 

 

“authorize the development commission to collect a 

national levy, that is non-refundable, in accordance with 

any agreement made pursuant to section 35; and.” 

 

I‟m fairly comfortable that that simply changes which Act that 

$1 national levy falls under. And a little later in the Bill, it 

describes how that $1 will flow through. Section 3 of Bill 97 

repeals special statute 1998, C-3.1. The Cattle Marketing 

Deductions Act, 1998 is repealed. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Well that was an Act that allowed for the deductions, the $2 

deduction, and it allowed it to go into the agriculture revolving 

fund, Mr. Speaker. And of course it‟s repealed because it‟s 

being replaced with a much less defined place, a much less clear 

place for that $2 levee to go. And that‟s what our concern is. 

 

There is a provision in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, under Clause 5 

transitional and it‟s winding up of the Cattle Marketing 

Deductions Fund. And in this section, the: 

 

“former fund” means the Cattle Marketing Deductions 

Fund continued pursuant to section 6 of The Cattle 

Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 as that Act existed on the 

day before the coming into force of this Act; 

 

So clearly it‟s dealing with some transition and it describes 

what the former fund is. 

 

And then (b) of clause 5 in this Act, (b) is: 

 

“Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association” means the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s Association established 

pursuant to section 7 of The Cattle Development Plan 

Regulations. 

 

And it goes on: 

 

On the day on which this Act comes into force: 

 

(a) the assets and liabilities of the former fund [meaning 

the Cattle Marketing Deductions Fund], are transferred 

to and become the assets and liabilities of the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s Association; and 

 

(b) the former fund is wound-up. 

 

So it‟s clear that the former fund disappears, and it‟s clear that 

the Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s Association takes over the assets 

and the liabilities. The Act then goes on: 

 

Notwithstanding the winding-up of the former fund 

pursuant to subsection (2), the Provincial Auditor or any 

other auditor or firm of auditors that the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council may appoint shall audit the accounts 

and financial statements of the former fund for the period 

commencing on April 1, 2009 and ending on the day on 

which this Act comes into force. 

 

So it says, it‟s a formal way, Mr. Speaker, of saying that the 

Department of Agriculture fund that has been in place for years 

and is audited every year has to have an audit that shows when 

it‟s wrapped up. It simply makes it very crystal clear that that 

audit takes place right until the fund absolutely no longer exists, 

and it‟s crystal clear that that fund has met all of the legal 

requirements of this legislature and of the government. 

 

(4) Notwithstanding the winding-up of the former fund 

pursuant to subsection (2), the Ministry of Agriculture 

shall, in accordance with The Tabling of Documents Act, 

1991, submit to the Minister of Agriculture a report on the 

activities of the former fund and a financial statement 

showing the business of the former fund for the period 

commencing on April 1, 2009 and ending on the day on 

which this Act comes into force. 

 

So the ministry has to inform the minister what has transpired in 

that former fund, the fund that . . . the revolving fund of the 

Department of Agriculture, his ministry. 

 

(5) The financial statement mentioned in subsection (4) is 

to be in a form required by Treasury Board. 

 

And that‟s just so it‟s usable by government in its standard 

format. 

 

(6) In accordance with The Tabling of Documents Act, 

1991, the Minister of Agriculture shall lay before the 

Legislative Assembly the report and financial statement 

received by the minister pursuant to subsection (4). 

 

Okay so that‟ll be tabled in the legislature. Mr. Speaker, this 

Bill is quite clear on what happens with the old fund, the old 

fund, the revolving fund that was held in the Department of 

Agriculture that had clear rules on how the $2 assessment was 

collected and how it was spent on marketing research, research 

and development. Mr. Speaker, the old rules were crystal clear, 

and I can understand them just as surely as I‟m standing here 

and trying to speak to Bill No. 97. 

 

This Bill No. 97 does not make the new rules clear at all. Not at 

all, Mr. Speaker. And I‟ve read through the explanatory notes, 

I‟ve read them carefully four separate times. And it just is not 

clear to me what is happening with respect to the $2 levy. It‟s 

not clear to me the makeup of the Cattlemen‟s Association 

group that is going to be in charge of the $2 levy. It is not clear 

to me what that $2 levy can be used for. It is not clear to me that 

the intention is to continue to spend it as it has been in the past, 

nor is it clear that the intent is to change the way it‟s been spent 

in the past. It‟s just gone. It‟s just not clear at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we think that the government should introduce legislation 

that identifies a problem, identifies a solution, or proposes a 

solution and tries to marry the two and say, here is the problem. 

Here is how we‟re going to fix it. This is our proposal for how 

to fix it. And then the opposition‟s got a relatively easy time. 

We either agree, yes, there‟s a problem there and you‟ve got a 

solution that‟s viable; or there‟s a problem there, and you don‟t 

have a solution that‟s viable; or any other machination that we 

might come up with. But in this case we have no identified 

problem, no identified problem with the old system at all. 

 

It sounded, in the explanatory notes, like the government 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4265 

proposed the change, not a change coming at the request of the 

Cattlemen‟s Association. They were consulted, it says, and 

agreed to the change. 

 

But it doesn‟t say they asked for the change. I‟m just totally 

unaware of any hue and cry to change a revolving fund that was 

administered by livestock producers in the main, that was a safe 

repository for that $2 collection. And it safely revolved it 

around so that the money came in, and when it built up to 

enough money to do something, there was a proposal that 

would be brought forward to the directors of that fund, many of 

whom were livestock producers under the Act. And they‟d 

make a decision: yea or nay; spend it or don‟t. And it was spent 

on research and development of the livestock industry. It 

seemed pretty reasonable, seems to me to be pretty clear. 

 

Again I want to be crystal clear. I‟m not trying to cast 

aspersions on anyone that‟s being asked to do something now in 

the change. I am casting aspersions on the government. I am 

saying they should not have brought forward legislation in such 

a cloudy manner. They should not have brought forward 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that is just nowhere explaining what 

happens to the $2 levy, nowhere explaining that there has to be 

an elected board, and if so, here‟s the makeup. Nowhere does it 

explain what the intended use of that $2 deduction per 

livestock, per animal that‟s marketed, nowhere does the 

legislation say it should be spent on this or that, or here‟s the 

options, here‟s the range. It doesn‟t say, here‟s the group, here‟s 

the makeup of the group that‟s going to make the decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re asked — like we‟re asked all too often by 

the Sask Party members opposite, the government — we‟re 

asked to accept this in blind faith, that somehow Bill 97 and the 

way that it‟s handling that $2 deduction is going to be better 

than an old way that I have no evidence wasn‟t working well, 

no evidence at all. I‟ve been only . . . Now I‟m fairly new here, 

as you know. I‟ve only been here 24 years, but I‟ve yet to hear a 

single producer complain to me about the way the old levy 

worked. 

 

None of us want to pay a levy. You know, if I can keep $2 in 

my pocket or have to pay it as a levy for some transaction, I‟d 

sooner keep the $2 in my pocket. But even that was so 

relatively small that I just, frankly, never heard concerns raised 

about it. So, Mr. Speaker, Bill 97, there are clearly problems 

with it. 

 

We have an industry that just has a tremendous future, a 

tremendous future. I think that the future of livestock, if they do 

their research and development . . . I talked a bit earlier about 

perhaps going into organic livestock. Because the situation is if 

you go into the corn belt in the States where there‟s heavier 

population closer to a larger market, a larger eating-of-beef 

market, they don‟t have the land to separate livestock. They 

don‟t have the ability to raise livestock in large numbers or in 

significant numbers without using medicine. 

 

That‟s just the way that things have evolved. And many will 

argue that our livestock are much healthier because of warble 

control — and, you know, I just pulled that one out of the hat 

— but many, the multitude of medications that are now 

available to handle diseases and problems with our livestock. 

So we‟re able to, with an injection or with in some cases a 

hormone, we‟re able to help our livestock thrive and gain 

weight better and arguably be healthier in the short term. Their 

inevitable fate is, or almost inevitable, is we‟re taking them to 

market. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this $2 levy that is being handled under the 

Bill 97 by the Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s Association, some of 

that could be spent on research and development into organic 

ranching, organic farming. Saskatchewan just has this 

tremendous, tremendous opportunity to get into that. 

 

Diseases that will attack livestock when they‟re clustered 

together, when they‟re grouped . . . You look at a perfect 

example, Mr. Speaker, is feedlots. They just know that in the 

large feedlots there‟s a death rate that simply happens no matter 

how carefully they manage the animals. They also know that, in 

many of them, they feed the medication to them in the feed 

every day to try and keep their immune system up, temporarily 

at least, so that they can get to a marketable weight and go off 

to slaughter. I suspect somewhere along the way some research 

and development money was spent developing that very system, 

Mr. Speaker. And people did so in good faith, I‟m sure, because 

at the end of the day, why would somebody own a feedlot? 

They own a feedlot because they want to make some money. 

And how do you make money? 

 

You take livestock feeders. You feed whatever you happen to 

be feeding. I know it isn‟t just whatever is on hand; it‟s 

whatever you happen to be feeding. If you‟re in the corn belt of 

the States, you‟re feeding corn. If you‟re here, you are likely 

feeding barley or oats. But typically it‟s barley in Western 

Canada, and it may be something else too. But it would have 

been research money that was spent, some of it out of this 

revolving Department of Agriculture fund that developed that 

system. 

 

Well this same fund could be used to develop a very sustainable 

niche market for Saskatchewan producers, a market that many 

producers would welcome or some producers would welcome. 

And you know, you can even thrive once you get adapted to the 

organic way of farming. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 97 raises questions at a time when livestock 

prices are down, at a time when government support is clearly 

down. It‟s half what it was in the first seven years of this 

decade, and it‟s now half of that. Clearly, farm gate receipts 

might be in some difficulty. 

 

Clearly we need to have a better system that helps sustain 

agriculture, that helps sustain livestock production, that helps us 

find ways of raising livestock, of maintaining a record of that 

production, of making sure that we know the genetics of the 

livestock that we‟re raising so that we can create consumer 

confidence right around the world. 

 

Most important at home, but it‟s important that we‟re able to 

demonstrate to other markets — primarily the United States, but 

clearly the Asian market — we need to be able to show, Mr. 

Speaker, that our livestock are BSE [bovine spongiform 

encephalopathy]-free, are mad cow disease-free. We need to 

show that our livestock are raised appropriately and that if 



4266 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

you‟re buying Saskatchewan beef, you‟re buying absolutely 

top-quality beef. You can just take it from the grocery counter, 

and you can put it on your stove, in your frying pan, in your 

barbecue, whatever. Whatever . . . 

 

Quorum, Mr. Speaker. Quorum. I call quorum. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has called quorum. I‟d ask the 

sergeant to secure the doors. 

 

Order. Order. Unfortunately when I, when the Speaker called 

quorum, the Speaker asked for the doors to be secured. And 

unfortunately, miscommunication has not allowed that to 

happen. But certainly there were enough members in here with 

quorum, but not enough . . . not all the members that were here 

currently at this time. So I‟d like the members to be aware of 

the fact that when quorum is called . . . unfortunately, we 

missed, we missed communication. But I know that there were 

more than 15 members in the House. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I called quorum. Members of the 

opposition left. I was the only member on this side. I called 

quorum. I pointed to the door, to you, sir. At that moment, one 

person came in. Subsequently there‟s been a total of 15, 15 

government members came in after quorum is called. 

 

I ask you to conduct the vote and you will see, sir, that they are 

one member short. You take 15 off, I absolutely swear to you 

. . . and you should have been counting too. Fifteen members 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I think the member is calling 

into question the quorum that was called and the Speaker‟s 

ruling in this matter. The Speaker did count. The Speaker was 

aware who was in the Assembly at the time. 

 

And unfortunately, I will acknowledge the fact that we had 

more members come in the door after quorum was called and 

there was a miscommunication in that regards. But there were 

16 members including the speaker in the Chamber — including 

the speaker and the Speaker of the Assembly. And the member 

will know that quorum the Speaker has counted, plus the 

member on his feet. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you. Bill No. 97 is An 

Act to amend The Agri-Food Act, 2004, to repeal The Cattle 

Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 and The Cattle Marketing 

Deductions Regulations, 2004 and to make consequential 

amendments to The Department of Agriculture, Food and Rural 

Revitalization Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re talking about an Act that takes a levy of $2 

per animal that previously went into the Department of 

Agriculture into a revolving fund. And it was crystal clear what 

the rules were on how that money would be spent, how that $2 

would be spent, as it was crystal clear how the $1 levy that went 

to the national organization would be spent. Mr. Speaker, this 

Bill doesn‟t change the $1 federal levy, but it does change the 

$2 levy from very clear rules on who governed it, how it was 

spent. And it was governed by a majority of livestock producers 

who would make advice to the Ministry of Agriculture, and 

then the monies were disbursed for research and development in 

livestock production, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What is not clear now is what happens to the $2. We know that 

the Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s Association will collect both the 

$1 non-refundable national levy collected on cattle sold at 

market and the $2 refundable provincial levy that was 

previously went into the Department of Agriculture revolving 

fund. Now it‟s going to the Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s 

Association. And, you know, a fine organization. I‟m not 

casting aspersions. 

 

What‟s the problem, Mr. Speaker, is in this Bill we don‟t know 

the makeup of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s Association. We 

don‟t know what their election process is. Is it they get elected 

once every 10 years? You know, and maybe that‟s acceptable. 

We just don‟t know. It‟s not at all clear. It‟s a relatively new 

organization. The rules of what they spend that $2 on are 

absolutely nowhere in the legislation. It can be used for the 

day-to-day operation of the Cattlemen‟s Association. And you 

know, Mr. Speaker, maybe that‟s a good use for it. Maybe 

there‟s a good argument to be made that that should be what it‟s 

used for. But that argument doesn‟t leap out as an argument of 

ready faith on our part. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that research and development is 

critically important in the livestock industry. We know that, 

when it comes to money, they missed by $2.1 billion on potash 

revenues last year. I mean missed, missed on their biggest 

single revenue stream in the province by 110 per cent, more 

than 110 per cent. And now they‟re asking us in a leap of faith 

to accept that this change is also innocuous. 

 

And when it comes to money, we just simply don‟t trust the 

Sask Party government. Their record is abysmal when it comes 

to how they handle money. When they say one thing, my first 

inclination is to say, no. Even though it‟s been many years since 

I visited Missouri, in many ways I‟m think I‟m from the show 

me state. I say, show me, because I just have not been able to 

trust their record in terms of what they‟ve said and what they‟ve 

delivered for a good long time, Mr. Speaker. And I don‟t think 

that organizations like the First Nations University would be 

able to trust them either. I don‟t think that . . . Well there‟s just 

lots of things that are real problematic. 

 

This Bill No. 97 really raises questions on how the money can 

be spent. How are producers involved? What say do they have? 

Livestock producers, Mr. Speaker, should have a very heavy 

advisory role in this, arguably should control the fund. But the 

rules should be very clear as to how we‟re changing that $2 

levy. It should be clear that that $2 levy is going into research 

and development. It should be clear that it‟s perhaps going into 

some research on other ways of enhancing livestock production. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish, I wish, I wish it were different. I wish that 

in introducing this legislation, the explanatory notes would‟ve 

explained. I wish that the introductory speech made by the 

minister would have explained better. I wish for all of those 

things because, you know, this Bill might just absolutely fill the 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4267 

bill, so to speak — no pun intended. 

 

But what‟s absolutely missing is any notion that there was a 

problem before and that there was anything to be fixed. And 

I‟ve always thought that our job was to fix problems. Our job 

was to see where there‟s irritants and try and remove those 

irritants if that‟s the reasonable thing to do. I‟m not sure that 

there was an irritant. I‟m not sure that you could have a much 

more transparent system than having livestock producers in 

charge of the advisory group that says how this $2 levy would 

be spent. I‟m not sure that you could have a much better or 

safer place to put that $2 levy than into the Department of 

Agriculture revolving fund — audited regularly, audited every 

single year, reported on. 

 

The problems escape me. If there‟s a difference in point of view 

of how the money, this $2 levy should be spent, then I would 

argue that the government should have said, we don‟t like the 

way it was spent because research and development isn‟t 

effective. They should have said that. They should have said, 

we want to spend it on pizza and beer or whatever it is they 

want to spend it on, whatever the good project of the day is. But 

they should say where the money is going to, why it‟s going to 

be changed. And we‟re just absolutely in absence of this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to close where I began, and that is by 

saying that the livestock industry is going to be here long after 

we‟re gone, all of us. The livestock industry, the livestock 

industry has a great future in Saskatchewan and it‟s going to be 

an integral part of the future of our province. We‟re going to be 

producing livestock as long as anybody is producing livestock. 

 

Our challenge is to try and create the best environment possible, 

from a legislative perspective, the best environment that will 

enhance livestock production, will enhance the ability of 

livestock producers to do what they do best — produce 

livestock that are marketable, livestock that are in demand, 

livestock that enjoy consumer confidence that it‟s as good a 

beef or better beef than anything you can buy anywhere in the 

world. You get Saskatchewan beef and you‟ve got great, great 

beef. That‟s what we need to focus our attention on. We need to 

focus our attention on the things that will really make a 

difference. We need to focus our attention on things that can 

help the livestock producers. 

 

We need to focus on things that will end the exit of livestock 

producers from that industry — the exit that‟s happened from 

some of our neighbours, some of our relatives, and some of our 

friends; an exit that is taking place because the price of beef is 

down, the return for livestock producers is down. We need to 

spend $2 wisely and we need to know where it‟s going to be 

spent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that we can get some answers on Bill 97 

and I hope that they‟re forthcoming fairly quickly. Mr. Speaker, 

with that, I move to adjourn debate on Bill 97, the Act to amend 

The Agri-Food Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Coronation Park 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 97, The 

Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

[20:30] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 118 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Bjornerud that Bill No. 118 — The 

Milk Control Repeal Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

extremely pleased this evening to enter into debate on a piece of 

legislation, a repeal of a piece of legislation that served the 

province of Saskatchewan in one form or another since the 

1930s. And, Mr. Speaker, the Milk Control Board has a very 

long history, an important history in the development of the 

agricultural industry in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Milk Control Board, Mr. Speaker, was first developed and 

came into life in about 1930, in the early 1930s, Mr. Speaker. 

And as all members of this Assembly would be well aware, we 

have seen many, many changes in the milk industry in the 

province of Saskatchewan since the 1930s, Mr. Speaker. When 

this board came into place, the dairy industry would have been 

largely a series of family farms providing additional milk to a 

broader industry, Mr. Speaker. Today the dairy industry as we 

know it is not based on family farms but rather large dairy 

farms that produce literally hundreds of litres of milk a day. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the original desire to have a Milk Control 

Board came about as a result of a formation of a co-operative of 

a number of dairy producers in the early 1930s and a desire to 

work together to provide in the province a co-operative 

creamery to help to provide for the distribution, Mr. Speaker, 

and quality assurance of the products being provided to the 

people of Saskatchewan — in its day a very, very admirable 

desire and challenge that the producers in our province moved 

forward with in a co-operative fashion. Out of that came a Milk 

Control Board which would work on the quality control of milk 

and distribution in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, over the last some 70 to just about 80 years 

now, we‟ve seen a significant number of changes as the 

industry has progressed both technologically-wise as well as, 

Mr. Speaker, in the quality controls and assurances, the 

packaging and supply of milk products and its distribution to 

the people of Saskatchewan and across Western Canada. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the key things I‟d like to talk about 

is, in the minister‟s speech about repealing The Milk Control 

Act and moving the system of market control for milk in the 

province of Saskatchewan to The Agri-Food Act, the minister 

doesn‟t give us a great deal of detail why he feels it‟s necessary 

to make this change at this time or why it is necessary at all to 

make the particular change. Now, Mr. Speaker, it may not be a 

negative change to either the industry or to the producers in the 

province or, for that matter, consumers. 

 



4268 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

But, Mr. Speaker, what we don‟t find in the minister‟s second 

reading is something we‟re finding all too often today in second 

readings about changes being made, is too little detail. The 

minister‟s not telling us what in fact their desire is to make the 

change, and why. So it leaves us asking questions as to why the 

government of the day or the minister‟s making the particular 

change, without trying to pass at this point any question as to 

whether it‟s good or bad. We just have insufficient information 

as to why the industry and others would like to see the change 

today, if in fact it‟s industry-driven and driven by the producers 

and the, Mr. Speaker, the producers and the current refineries in 

the province of Saskatchewan or Western Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the minister telling us that the Milk 

Control Board will be repealed and it will fall under the new 

marketing board, will fall under The Agri-Food Act. And as 

many of the members in the Chamber will know and 

understand, The Agri-Food Act has many producer-controlled 

marketing boards. They each have different parameters, 

different controls within them, but they‟re each designed to try 

to help the industry to be able to market its product in an 

orderly way and provide for a benefit to Saskatchewan 

producers and consumers. Mr. Speaker, we haven‟t, Mr. 

Speaker, heard the minister outline for us why . . . One of the 

members opposite was trying to give me a little advice on this 

Bill, maybe a little more information, but I didn‟t hear him. If 

he could repeat it, it would probably be helpful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we hear from the minister. He does say that the 

dairy farmers were in fact consulted, Saputo was consulted, the 

current Milk Control Board was consulted, as well as bulk 

transporters, consumers and — consumer associations; pardon 

me — retailers and the hotel and hospitality industry. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, since they were consulted through direct 

correspondence, which again doesn‟t tell me anything, does this 

mean that they were sent the letters saying it was being done, 

and that‟s their consultation? The minister has failed in his 

second reading speech to give us enough detail to understand 

what the direction for the change is. And, Mr. Speaker, without 

that it is necessary for us to do considerable consultation of our 

own with various stakeholders in order to try to ascertain or 

determine whether or not this is actually wanted by the industry, 

whether the industry actually is pushing for this or not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s somewhat disappointing that when we have a 

second reading speech from a minister we have a total of about 

120 words, 130 words in total description of what he‟s 

intending to do. And in that 120, 130 words he tells us no more 

than that he‟s repealing an Act and having to fall under The 

Agri-Food Act. Not telling us why, not telling us who asked for 

it, not telling what the benefits to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan are, what benefits to the producers. Mr. Speaker, 

it leaves an awful lot of questions unanswered as to what the 

true intent of the Bill is. Mr. Speaker, without that, it leaves us 

having to ask many questions as to what is the driving factor 

behind these changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, former members of the board, some of the most 

recent members of the board have talked about the effect of the 

Milk Control Board and its positive influence on the province 

of Saskatchewan, producers and the retail and wholesale 

industry in the province of Saskatchewan. And if in its current 

form it‟s having such a positive impact, what were the actual 

reasons for driving this particular change, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, former members of the board are saying the board 

was most effective over the years because, unlike most other 

provinces, our Milk Control Board and our design of the board 

had representation from non-producer sectors on the board 

present at the table for decision making so that those, the 

consumers and the representatives of consumers of milk 

products in the province of Saskatchewan, had some say. 

 

That was seen by many across the country, across Canada and 

other jurisdictions, as a very strong point in the composition of 

the Milk Control Board in Saskatchewan and a very strong 

reason why we had a government-run Milk Control Board and 

not a strictly producer-controlled board. Mr. Speaker, this was 

seen as a strength in Saskatchewan and a weakness in other 

jurisdictions where they had only producer-controlled 

marketing boards. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, with that as a primary concern and that 

being evident to many in the province as pointed out by former 

members of the board and some members of both the 

hospitality industry and the consumer industry associations, 

what was driving a change today that actually would take those 

representatives off the board and make it totally 

industry-driven, Mr. Speaker, producer-driven? 

 

It wasn‟t clear in the minister‟s second reading speech. It‟s not 

clear in any of the information that‟s been provided to us to 

date. And, Mr. Speaker, that is one of the many questions we 

would have about this particular piece of legislation. Having 

said that, we don‟t have adequate information at this point to 

say it‟s necessarily negative either. As members on both sides 

. . . As I said a few minutes ago, many of our agricultural 

industries are in fact controlled under The Agri-Food Act, and 

they do have self-controlled marketing boards, producer 

marketing boards that are effective. 

 

Now it may be the time and place that in fact that the 

appropriate step is to move the function of the Milk Control 

Board into a marketing board under The Agri-Food Act, but I‟d 

have to say, Mr. Speaker, that the minister did not make that 

case in his second reading speech. In fact he gave us very little 

information. 

 

And it‟s rather disappointing when ministers have the 

opportunity to tell the people of Saskatchewan, they had the 

opportunity to tell the people of Saskatchewan why a change in 

legislation is important, what the impact would be on the 

industry, what the impact would be on the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. I find it disappointing that the 

minister didn‟t take the opportunity to provide that detailed 

information and at least a few minutes of clarification as to why 

this particular Bill is coming forward at this time and in its 

particular form. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to take some time to talk 

about what the Milk Control Board‟s function is or was in the 

province of Saskatchewan and what the Milk Control Board‟s 

responsibility was on behalf of both producers, consumers, 

consumer associations, the hospitality industry, and in general, 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan. 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4269 

Most people would know that milk has always been a staple in 

most families over the last 100 or more years in this province. 

In the 1930s when this board was originally put together, as I 

indicated earlier, milk collection was often done farm by farm 

with somebody coming out and picking up milk cans of excess 

milk off the family farms. It was then collected and sent into the 

creamery collectively. 

 

Today of course that isn‟t the case. The individual separators 

that used to sit at family farms aren‟t used in the same manner 

today. It‟s not the method of milk production or collection, Mr. 

Speaker, but it‟s still the Milk Control Board function to 

provide a quality product, Mr. Speaker, one that has both 

quality assurance and controls, Mr. Speaker, prior to being sold 

to the general public. It‟s absolutely important to the health and 

well-being of Saskatchewan residents. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we all have a desire, I would think, to ensure 

that the products that are being sold on the store shelves in our 

communities are safe for our children, safe for our families, Mr. 

Speaker. And that was a very important function that the Milk 

Control Board played on behalf of the producers in the province 

of Saskatchewan, and consumers. And, Mr. Speaker, over the 

years I‟d have to say that this function changed. As it would as 

the industry developed and changed, it would change as well. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, most important is the actual direction that 

was put forward when the actual Milk Control Board was 

designed, when the producers decided they wanted to 

collectively get together in a co-operative fashion to collect 

their milk and process their milk jointly through a co-operative 

creamery system and provide better quality controls for all the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan. I think that was a good 

idea. And in the 1930s that occurred. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, over the years we have seen changes to the 

industry but they‟ve all been able to be done under the former 

Milk Control Board‟s structure. Now as I said a few minutes 

ago, in the second reading speech of the minister, it was quite 

unfortunate that he didn‟t give us more actual information as to 

why at this time it was the direction of either the producers or 

whatever the driving force behind the change that saw the 

repeal on the Milk Control Board moving to a marketing board, 

I indicated before, we have under The Agri-Food Act. 

 

It might well be the appropriate step to make at this period of 

time in the industry, but the minister never took the time to 

actually clarify why he would want this to be undertaken at this 

time, to the members of this Assembly, or quite frankly to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to just point out a few things that have 

been brought to my attention in regards to the dairy industry in 

the province of Saskatchewan. In 1948 the Saskatchewan dairy 

industry produced 24 million kilograms of milk fat, but by 

2008, Mr. Speaker, we were down to 8.6 million kilograms, Mr. 

Speaker. So we‟re just about a third of our production today 

that we were in 1948. So, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen a significant 

reduction in the milk products, milk fat that‟s actually produced 

in the province of Saskatchewan over the last about 50 years, 

Mr. Speaker, just over 50 . . . or 60 years — pardon me, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[20:45] 

 

On the other hand, over the same period of time in the province 

of British Columbia we‟ve seen an increase from 10.4 million 

kilograms to 24.8 million kilograms — an increase of more than 

100 and about 20 per cent, Mr. Speaker. So on one hand we‟ve 

seen a significant reduction within the province of 

Saskatchewan, and on the other hand a significant increase in 

the province of British Columbia. 

 

And as all members I think would understand, the quota system 

for milk across Canada is determined through a national board, 

Mr. Speaker. It‟s not controlled provincially. But, Mr. Speaker, 

it is quite alarming that in a province that‟s known for its 

agricultural strength, for our agricultural ingenuity and 

technology development and really leaders in the agricultural 

industry in North America, if not in the world, that we would 

see a decrease in our dairy production output over the last 

number of years, the last 60 years, instead of an increase, Mr. 

Speaker. Because all the inputs that would be needed to actually 

grow the dairy industry in Saskatchewan that were there in the 

1940s, 1948, would be there and even, Mr. Speaker, I would 

argue that it would even be enhanced or better today than they 

were in the 1940s. And, Mr. Speaker, it is shameful that we 

actually have seen a decrease in the production in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s a number of serious questions that were 

asked about the industry as changes were being contemplated, 

as I understand it. Mr. Speaker, there were considerations what 

a new board‟s responsibilities would be and what structure 

would be required to meet those responsibilities, Mr. Speaker. 

And there must be a number of issues that had to be clearly 

resolved which we don‟t have an indication from the minister 

that those have been resolved or considered in the design and 

development of the new marketing board, and whether or not 

that those issues in fact have been resolved to ensure the safety 

of the milk production in the province of Saskatchewan for 

consumers. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not saying they aren‟t because they may 

well have been done. But what I‟m saying is that we haven‟t 

had that indication from the minister. We haven‟t had in his 

second reading speech. We had a mere about 120 words which 

told us virtually nothing about why or what this change was 

intended to bring about. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, some of the concerns that the new board 

would have to be capable of dealing with and had to be 

considered, I‟m told, are whether it was to remain the Milk 

Control Board or for that matter under The Agri-Food Act as a 

stand-alone marketing board or whether or not the regulations 

and enforcement was well enough defined to include things like 

bacterial counts, somatic cell counts, adulteration and antibiotic 

tests, and other standards that needed to be considered in the 

quality of the milk in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, and whether the board had adequate controls, 

regulations, and authorities to ensure that those standards were 

maintained in a transition period and long term, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those were concerns that were raised, that needed to be taken 

into consideration. And the minister gave us no indication 

whatsoever that during this period of transition or change that 



4270 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

those types of considerations that were raised were in fact going 

to be dealt with. Now, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t by any means want 

to raise a fear and say they weren‟t dealt with. I‟m simply 

saying we weren‟t given that indication and that would have 

been very helpful coming into the second reading speech from 

the minister. 

 

In a haste to do a very short second reading speech, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟ve seen in the last year second reading speeches 

giving very little information to the people of Saskatchewan, 

very little information to the Official Opposition to know 

whether or not what is being brought forward is in the public 

interest. Mr. Speaker, we all wish to pass appropriate legislation 

and regulations that are in the public interest. But it would be 

very helpful if ministers of the Crown would in fact in their 

second reading speeches provide greater clarity, more 

information, Mr. Speaker, as to what they‟re trying to 

accomplish. 

 

Rather than having a 40-second or 30-second second reading 

speeches, Mr. Speaker, to simply move a Bill, it would be nice 

to see a minister tell the people of Saskatchewan why the 

legislation‟s required, Mr. Speaker; what it‟s meant to 

accomplish; that the, in cases of legislation involving food, Mr. 

Speaker, that the proper controls and authorities are put in place 

to determine quality, Mr. Speaker. All these things weren‟t 

provided by the minister in his 40-second little speech telling us 

he‟s moving a Bill forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s disappointing. If ministers could just take the 

time to inform the public, to inform the opposition, then, Mr. 

Speaker, legislation likely would move forward much quicker. 

We‟d be able to talk about the Bill with some assurances from 

the minister that in fact he‟d done his job, he‟d done his 

research, that he‟d put adequate steps, protections in place to 

ensure the standards continue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we‟re not getting that. We‟re not getting that from ministers 

of the Crown, Mr. Speaker. And I hope that the ministers are 

listening because they could do a few things by adding a couple 

of minutes more to their second reading speeches that would 

help move legislation forward, would help inform the public of 

Saskatchewan, and I think, Mr. Speaker, provide for better 

understanding of what the government‟s agenda is. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not saying, as I said earlier, that the 

changes are wrong, not necessary. I‟m saying that they‟re not 

giving us enough information to determine that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I hope that the Government House Leader and 

the government leadership are listening to this and in future we 

will see second reading speeches with more detail, willing to 

tell the people of Saskatchewan what they‟re trying to 

accomplish and why. I think that‟s to all our benefit. The people 

of Saskatchewan who have the opportunity and stakeholders 

who have the opportunity to go on to Hansard and see what the 

minister‟s saying then can see what‟s intended. And I think 

that‟s extremely good for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. And it makes it much, much better from the 

point of view of understanding whether the public policy 

objectives are being met. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of questions were asked about this 

particular piece of legislation and, I think, need to have some 

clarification. And again I wish you would have been able to 

have that clarification in the second reading speech. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, one of the fundamental questions that‟s of 

concern to former board members and those who are involved 

in the milk . . . or pardon me, in the dairy industry in 

Saskatchewan was, how would the board interact with the 

Canadian Dairy Commission, the Canadian milk supply 

management committee, and the several Western milk pool 

committees which all have a role in determining the quota 

system of milk delivery in each of the provinces, but also in the 

national delivery system in ensuring that there‟s quality control 

to the milk that‟s delivered to our homes, to our businesses, and 

to in fact the hospitality industry and others in Saskatchewan 

and across Canada. They use milk products. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a good question. A very good question. It‟s 

unfortunate that in the second reading speech provided we 

didn‟t get any clarification of these types of issues. It must be 

recognized I think, by both the government and the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan ourselves, that the organization 

of the dairy industry is much different than the ag and poultry 

industries, meat industries at the national level for that matter, 

and the other industries covered by The Agri-Food Act. They‟re 

not the same. 

 

And there‟s many, many producer groups that are covered 

under The Agri-Food Act and they each have a different set of 

rules. Well, Mr. Speaker, we needed to understand in the repeal 

of The Milk Control Act whether or not in the new agri-food 

Act that there is going to be the appropriate control of standards 

in the Act and in the direction given to the new board that‟s 

controlled by the new marketing board, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 

the quality for both the industry and for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And as we said earlier, it may well be there. We 

just simply have heard very little from the minister at all about 

these things. 

 

There was questions about who would make the final decisions 

at the CMSMC [Canadian milk supply management 

committee], the Canadian Dairy Commission, Mr. Speaker, and 

the Canadian milk supply management committee, the Western 

Milk Pool, Mr. Speaker. The meetings on price and quota 

issues, who would make the final decision between the various 

players? It‟s not laid out. It‟s not clear. So what are the 

expectations of the new board? This has been a problem for 

both BC [British Columbia] and Alberta boards as their 

decisions are subject to their superboard approval and in some 

cases by the minister. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, without a clear understanding how the new 

marketing board would work and what role the minister would 

play and what role the Western Milk Pool board would play and 

what the role the Canadian Dairy Commission would play and 

what role the Canadian milk supply management committee 

would play, Mr. Speaker, without some clarity of those issues, 

the role of the board is somewhat difficult to understand. And 

have we taken the steps to understand and put in place rules and 

regulations to ensure clarity of decision making to avoid some 

of the problems that have been seen in Alberta and British 

Columbia? 

 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4271 

And if we‟re going to really take the opportunity to move 

forward in a new direction, we may as well do it right from the 

very beginning. We may as well take the time to ensure that we 

get it right to start with. And maybe we have. As I said earlier, 

maybe we have but simply we don‟t have enough information 

to determine if that in fact has occurred. 

 

Now I know the minister would like . . . And I‟m hoping the 

minister is listening, and in future when he brings forward a 

Bill, will provide us more information, a little longer second 

reading speeches, a little more detail. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the questions that is important to be 

considered is, who‟s responsible for the coordination of the 

milk component and quality among the board? A milk analysis 

lab, the truckers, and the processing plants must be established 

for timely milk pay and penalty application. It all has to be 

established. And who is responsible for that within the board‟s 

structure? 

 

Would there be a real reduction in cost in the new structure? 

One of the things that is anticipated is the new structure would 

reduce actual cost and cost to both the producers and, Mr. 

Speaker, ultimately to the consumers. But what steps have 

actually been taken to ensure that there actually will be a 

reduction in cost to the producers? 

 

Mr. Speaker, how would the necessary audit and regulatory 

issues be carried out? What regulations are going to be put in 

place to ensure that in fact the quality standards are assured and 

that we can guarantee that on a regular basis we have a quality 

product with consistent basis for pay, Mr. Speaker? This 

requires coordination with the Western Milk Pool, Mr. Speaker, 

with the national board, the Canadian Dairy Commission, Mr. 

Speaker. And how does that fit in, in the structure of a new 

marketing board? And are adequate authorities there in the 

regulations to ensure moving forward with this? 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are all things we haven‟t seen. They‟re all 

things that really are genuine concerns to a seamless transition 

to a new structure to ensure that we continue to have and 

deliver in this province what our producers want, a high-quality 

product that we have among the best dairy industry, if not the 

very best dairy industry in Canada, Mr. Speaker. That‟s a desire 

I‟m sure of our producers in the province of Saskatchewan and 

I‟m also very sure it‟s a desire of the marketing Canadian Dairy 

Commission and the Western marketing pool. 

 

How can the Minister of Agriculture staff acquire and maintain 

. . . How can we maintain an expertise in the Ministry of 

Agriculture and a high level of understanding of the dairy 

industry as we move ourself further away from the structures of 

the dairy industry to ensure that we have an oversight capacity 

to make sure that what was intended by moving the structure to 

the marketing board is actually carried out? 

 

One of the functions of having the Milk Control Board was that 

there was a connection between the current marketing structure 

and the quality control structures and the Department of 

Agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan so we had that 

skill pool within the Department of Agriculture, an important 

thing to have. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, last but not least, of some of the major 

questions that people had about this were, how can 

representations from all segments of the production side be 

ensured that 25 per cent of the provincial milk is produced by 

Hutterite colonies, Mr. Speaker? There are very specialized 

breeding stock farms supplying the national and international 

market. And they may feel that they‟re not fully represented in a 

marketing board where they were previously represented, Mr. 

Speaker, on the Milk Control Board. They had a say and they 

had input, Mr. Speaker. So how can the Hutterite colonies, Mr. 

Speaker, who produce about 25 per cent of all the milk in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and international and national farm 

supplying market companies in fact have a say, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there‟s been a number of concerns raised 

about whether or not we have been given adequate information 

by the minister in his second reading speech. Now having said 

that, Mr. Speaker, the answer is and the question really is, is 

why in the second reading speech did the minister not give us 

more information? 

 

Now whenever a minister doesn‟t give us adequate information 

to determine what the public policy direction he is trying to 

undertake is, and what the desired outcome is, and what is his 

motivation for the desired change, Mr. Speaker, then it leaves 

you to wonder why the change. Why are you going through a 

change that the minister isn‟t willing to tell you why you‟re 

doing it, isn‟t willing to provide you adequate information as to 

. . . or assurances during the transition and during the change 

that it‟s good for the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 

good for the industry itself, and good for all the subsidiary 

industries and individuals who are involved in either trucking 

the product, Mr. Speaker, or processing the product, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[21:00] 

 

The minister told us none of that. So when the minister doesn‟t 

tell you anything about what he‟s trying to accomplish and why, 

then you just naturally start to ask some questions. Why weren‟t 

we told those things? Was it simply the minister only wanted to 

spend 40 seconds on his second reading speech? Was it a matter 

of not wanting to give the information? Was it a matter of 

simple, shall I say, work ethic in not wanting to take the time to 

write a longer speech? 

 

Those are all things that I would hope that, Mr. Speaker, was in 

fact he was just busy and couldn‟t take the time necessarily to 

give an adequate second reading speech. Because, Mr. Speaker, 

spending that extra few minutes and providing the information 

both to members of the opposition and to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, first clears up a lot of unanswered 

questions, a lot of uncertainties, but also drives, Mr. Speaker, 

some certainty to why the government would want to undertake 

this change. 

 

And in the undertaking of this change, is it good for the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan? But most importantly, is it 

good for the industry? Is it good for the producers? I can‟t say 

no, but I can‟t say yes, Mr. Speaker. So having not been given 

adequate information to make those determinations, Mr. 

Speaker, it leaves you with a number of questions. 

 



4272 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

We do know that over the years that the Milk Control Board 

was considered to have done a very good job dealing with all 

the people in the industry, right from producers to retailers. The 

Milk Control Board went an additional step further than what is 

done in other jurisdictions in that it dealt with not only the 

producers but, Mr. Speaker, all the way right to the retailers. So 

it had in its composition of the board, representatives from the 

producers, representatives from the transportation industry, 

representatives from the retailers, Mr. Speaker. So there were 

steps taken to ensure that all those who had a valid interest in 

the . . . from the production of the milk on the farm, shall I say, 

from the cow to the store, Mr. Speaker, the Milk Control Board 

tried to include representatives from all those that had a concern 

in it on the board. 

 

So that the cow to the carton, the cow to the home, Mr. Speaker, 

however we want to portray that, but people actually who had a 

concern about the quality of the milk, the delivery of the 

product right from the farm to the house had some say. And I 

think that is important. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that came 

about partly as a result of, Mr. Speaker, the fact that the original 

Milk Control Board came out of the formation of a 

co-operative, a number of producers, a number of farmers who 

got together and said, look, we want to do something better for 

our industry in the province and something better for the people 

of Saskatchewan. And I think that‟s a goal in which we would 

all share. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, why a marketing board and why now? It‟s a 

simple question. Why the change now? What drove that 

change? We don‟t have that answer, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t know. 

We‟re told from even former board members we‟re not sure 

why now and why the change. It would have been nice to have 

some of that included in the second reading speech, and I 

understand . . . I see some of the ministers opposite listening 

very carefully, and hopefully we‟ll see some more detailed, 

more, shall I say, more detailed, more inclusive second reading 

speeches. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, government 

ministers, many of second reading speeches are less than a 

minute. If they took 5 or 10 minutes out of the hours of debate 

that can be included on a Bill, we‟d actually be very 

appreciative. If they wanted to take 20 minutes even to explain 

a Bill well so that the people of Saskatchewan understood 

exactly what they were trying to accomplish, what the Bill the 

included, and why it should be moved forward at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s not a surprise that there are other jurisdictions, 

other provinces that have marketing control boards much to the 

same composition, direction of the board here in Saskatchewan. 

But they have experienced some problems and weaknesses that 

I would hope that if we‟re coming to this new structure at a later 

date that we could try to ensure that we didn‟t go through some 

of the same growing pains that they did and ensure seamless 

transition in such a way that the producers in the province of 

Saskatchewan and consumers were both protected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all the stakeholders needed to be consulted. Again 

the minister indicated a number of stakeholders had been 

consulted, but he said, through correspondence, Mr. Speaker. 

So we don‟t know if that‟s a letter sent by the minister to 

somebody saying to industry associations or producers that it‟s 

going to happen on this date. Or was it meaningful 

consultations where somebody actually went out and talked to 

people about the proposed changes? And do they want them? 

Are they good? And should they move ahead? 

 

It may well have been extensive consultations. It may well have 

been driven totally by the industry and perhaps by all the 

stakeholders. But, Mr. Speaker, we weren‟t told that. It would 

have been nice to have been informed, one way or the other. 

Mr. Speaker, in fact we‟re hearing that the consultations were 

very narrow and only a small group of producers actually drove 

this change with very little broader consultation. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I don‟t know. 

 

And as we‟re saying, Mr. Speaker, if the minister had laid out in 

more detail what process he used, we‟d understand it fully. He 

didn‟t do that. And I just hope in future pieces of legislation that 

the Minister of Agriculture puts forward that we will have the 

opportunity to hear a little more detail about exactly why he‟s 

bringing forward legislation and what its impact is on the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan and upon the families 

of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act really does nothing more than repeal The 

Milk Control Act and introduces a new marketing board under 

The Agri-Food Act, but it gives us no detail, Mr. Speaker. So in 

the second reading speech of the minister, he could have 

provided us some detail. Mr. Speaker, as I look at the second 

reading speech of the minister, it‟s some four paragraphs, about 

120 words. And, Mr. Speaker, if I read the whole thing it tells 

me the great sum of nothing, Mr. Speaker. And I would really 

have appreciated, as I think the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan who are today looking at this change and trying 

to analyze whether it‟s beneficial or not would have 

appreciated, a little greater input from the minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, being a minister of the Crown is about being 

accountable to the people of the province and providing them 

the information they need to analyze and make decisions 

whether or not what is being done by their government is in 

their best interest. So, Mr. Speaker, I hope that in future we can 

get a little more detail on some of these Bills to help all of us, 

the people of Saskatchewan, to have the opportunity to make 

much better choices and decisions.  

 

Mr. Speaker, there are always issues of accountability and 

transparency in marketing boards or, for that matter, any 

structure. Mr. Speaker, there is the transferring of the assets and 

liabilities of the Milk Control Board, contracts and personal 

property to the new marketing board. And any of these that are 

not fully transferred becomes the property of the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister could have taken the opportunity to 

give us a little detail as to what the structure of the new board 

would be, what would happen with the assets of the Milk 

Control Board and so on and so forth. Absolutely none of that 

included in the second reading speech, Mr. Speaker. And when 

some of these things aren‟t included, when you give simply just 

a 120-word, 40-second thing on passing legislation, doing away 

with one structure and putting another one in place without any 

greater detail than that, then you wonder why. And as I said 

before, Mr. Speaker, it could be simply a matter of not wanting 

to go to that detail. It could be that but it also could be just as 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4273 

easy as trying to hide something in the transaction, Mr. Speaker. 

So we would hope that we would see, as time goes on, a little 

more detail, a little more information about some of the Bills 

that are being brought forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the agricultural sector in Saskatchewan is a very 

important part of our economy. It can be said to be the pillar of 

our financial history, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan at one time 

was largely an agrarian province, Mr. Speaker. Agriculture was 

the number one industry, Mr. Speaker. Today it is still a very, 

very large part of our province, Mr. Speaker. So all legislation 

that‟s dealing with the agricultural industry in our province, Mr. 

Speaker, is important to the people of this province and 

important to us all. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I see some of the members over there 

laughing a little bit, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t know that as I 

question, sort of, I question basically, Mr. Speaker, the lack of 

information provided in their second reading speech, they‟re 

making me . . . they‟re making fun of the fact that agriculture is 

such an important . . . plays such an important role in the 

province of Saskatchewan. The difficulty is, Mr. Speaker, the 

individual that‟s making fun of it I believe‟s a farmer and I 

think has spent most of his life as a farmer in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, and still is a farmer and should fully understand the 

importance of agriculture to our province, as I‟m sure he does, 

as I‟m sure he does, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I‟m sure that he should share the same, he should share the 

same concerns about the development and the sustainability of 

the agricultural sector in our province and the farming 

community in our province, Mr. Speaker, that we all do. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, none of us are far from the farm. And 

none of us have ever . . . In a province where we have the most 

arable land in Canada, farming has played such an important 

role in the development and sustainability of our province over 

time, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . How many 

acres in the province? Six hundred and forty, Mr. Speaker. But 

that‟s not a question . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Sorry. In a 

section, pardon me, Mr. Speaker. The member asked me a 

question and I gave him the answer. But there is more than 640 

acres in the province, Mr. Speaker. I agree. But there are 640 

acres in a section, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important that as we consider agricultural 

legislation in this province, that we take it seriously. It‟s 

important that we take the time to review it carefully, Mr. 

Speaker. It is very important that we talk to the stakeholders 

who have a vested interest in the assurance that this legislation 

meets the needs of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated a few minutes ago, that would 

have been much easier had we had a more detailed second 

reading speech. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in the absence of that more detailed second 

reading speech, we could perhaps ask the minister to send over, 

you know, a little information as to why this change was 

necessary, maybe a position paper, Mr. Speaker — something 

to indicate why this particular change at this particular time and 

why that change is in the best interest of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve got members throwing agriculture 

questions back across the floor to see whether members on each 

side know that, Mr. Speaker. It seems to be about a tie right 

now. And the members on the government side might be losing 

an answer, maybe losing and falling behind just a little bit. But, 

Mr. Speaker that is very difficult. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we are currently talking about an Act to 

repeal the Milk Control Board in the province of Saskatchewan 

and, in fact, then move it to a marketing board under The 

Agri-Food Act. Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve had over the years a 

time to work quite extensively with The Agri-Food Act and its 

development as a member of the government previously, and 

working through the legislation in various sectors as they‟ve 

fallen under the marketing board structure under the umbrella of 

The Agri-Food Act, Mr. Speaker. And I have learned a number 

of things that I think are incredibly important: that each of the 

marketing boards is different, each of the agriculture industries 

that the marketing boards cover is different, and the needs of 

each of those boards is quite different. 

 

[21:15] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we‟re now at a point where, in looking at 

this particular piece of legislation, we need to ask a fundamental 

question: was the board asking for this change? Was the 

industry asking for this change? And if they were, Mr. Speaker, 

why wasn‟t that indicated by the minister? Why in his second 

reading speech didn‟t he tell us what the industry wanted to 

accomplish and why? Simple, very simple questions. 

 

It wouldn‟t take a relatively long period of time to do that. And 

I know there‟s a couple of very senior cabinet ministers over 

there nodding their heads, agreeing that that probably wouldn‟t 

have been a bad idea, you know. Well maybe they were falling 

asleep, but I think, I think they were listening carefully and 

trying to anticipate what they could do to improve their second 

reading speeches. And in particular one or two of them might 

take the time to work with the Minister of Agriculture to 

improve his second reading speeches, including more detail. 

 

Now having said that, I‟m sure the Minister of Agriculture 

would like to have provided us the detail that would have been 

necessary to fully understand this particular piece of legislation 

and in future will endeavour to ensure that, as much as possible, 

there‟s thorough answers to the basic questions that would be 

anticipated, bringing forward such legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to just talk for a few 

minutes about the AgriStability Act in which the legislation‟s 

going to fall under. And if my colleague would just hand me the 

legislation there, Mr. Speaker, it‟d be easier just to have a brief 

discussion about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the agri-stability Act, 2004 which the . . . oh 

pardon me, The Agri-Food Act, 2004, which the new marketing 

board will fall under, is a piece of legislation that is about the 

formation of marketing boards for various agricultural sectors 

in the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, it lays out 

very clearly a number of key elements as most Bills do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it talks about the development of the 

commissions, the development of boards, what role they play. 

There is powers that may be granted to any of the agencies or 



4274 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

boards and what those powers are, rules regarding the licensing 

and suspension of licences of the various boards. It deals with 

the agency is a corporation and each board is in fact . . . each 

agency is a corporation. It is not an agent of the Crown, Mr. 

Speaker. And it goes on to deal with a number of powers and 

general rules about the composition of the marketing boards. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation was put in by the former 

government. When this legislation was put in place in 2004, I 

had the opportunity to sit on a committee that reviewed all the 

legislation that went through the previous government, called 

the legislative instruments committee, and spent considerable 

time looking at this legislation‟s composition, its powers, and 

what it was intended to do. And, Mr. Speaker, I could speak for 

some time in great detail about this legislation and provide an 

update to the people of Saskatchewan about the powers and 

information that‟s contained within this legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be good for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan to understand that with the repeal of 

the Milk Control Board and its transfer to a marketing board 

under The Agri-Food Act, that this piece of legislation will be 

the governing legislation for the new milk marketing board. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, within that, the control of the milk marketing 

board are responsibilities that members of the province of 

Saskatchewan . . . or people of the province of Saskatchewan 

may not well be aware of. But it‟s important to understand that 

when we‟re moving in a new direction here, in fact that the new 

marketing board will fall under an established piece of 

legislation, a piece of legislation that‟s worked relatively well 

for a number of marketing boards in the province of 

Saskatchewan, that we can anticipate will work well for the 

marketing . . . the new milk marketing board in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and that there is regulatory 

oversight and control by the Ministry of Agriculture, that there 

is oversight and control of the decision making and the 

outcomes of the marketing board. 

 

Now having said that, it doesn‟t mean that the government is 

actually interfering and meddling in the day-to-day operations 

of these marketing boards, because that‟s not the intent 

whatsoever. But what it does, Mr. Speaker, provide oversight if 

there is a problem within the marketing board or an unforeseen 

circumstance develops. Mr. Speaker, there is parameters 

established to actually deal with those problems within this 

legislation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting that there is a . . . Instead of 

regulations that‟s actually put in place for each of the marketing 

boards, Mr. Speaker, and currently under The Agri-Food Act, 

we have marketing boards dealing with a number of things — 

The Alfalfa Seed Development Plan Regulations, Mr. Speaker, 

so they deal with alfalfa seeds, the beekeepers development 

plan, Mr. Speaker — all these regulations fit within The 

Agri-Food Act. The canary seed development plan, Mr. 

Speaker, the canola development plan, Mr. Speaker, The Cattle 

Development Plan Regulations. So, Mr. Speaker, each of these 

marketing boards and each of these marketing agencies in the 

province of Saskatchewan is controlled, in fact, by this 

legislation and by a series of regulations, Mr. Speaker, that are 

in fact controlled with specifics of that industry — The 

Commercial Egg Marketing Plan Regulations, Mr. Speaker. 

So now we will have a new set of regulations, Mr. Speaker, 

dealing with the milk marketing plan regulations, Mr. Speaker. 

Now when those regulations come forward, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll 

want to examine those regulations in some detail as well 

because those regulations will present the detailed rules of how 

the marketing board will operate. And it will include the 

detailed rules in which the members of the board will be 

accountable to both their producers and to other stakeholders as 

well as to the people of the province of Saskatchewan and to the 

ministry itself. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting to see today that the 

government has decided to move to a marketing board, but we 

yet have not seen or heard of any regulatory regulations coming 

forward, Mr. Speaker, under The Agri-Food Act that would in 

fact put in place a new marketing board. And it‟s my 

understanding — if the minister was here he could perhaps 

clarify; if the minister is here he could perhaps clarify — but 

my understanding is that the Milk Control Board has already 

wrapped up its function and in fact we are operating today with 

a marketing board in place without yet regulations in place. I‟m 

not sure of that, but that‟s the information that has been 

provided today. It would be something that again I would have 

like to have heard in the second reading speech, because if that 

transition has already moved forward to a step in which we can 

see and expect some smoothness and clarity in that transaction, 

I think it‟s to all our benefit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have an industry today that‟s about one-third 

the size it was in 1948, that we hope, as the official opposition, 

will actually grow and that we will see a larger share of the 

quota for milk products in Canada come from the province of 

Saskatchewan. We have more arable land than anywhere else in 

Canada in this province, Mr. Speaker, and we definitely have 

the capacity to expand our dairy production in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, we are a province where our 

agricultural producers are among the most innovative and 

creative anywhere in the world. They have been able to meet 

challenges head-on and improve our industry on a continual 

basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we would hope that the new structure and 

marketing board will have as one of its goals to undertake an 

improvement of the industry in the province of Saskatchewan, 

an expansion of the industry, a growth of the industry, so that 

more Saskatchewan farmers and producers can grow and thrive 

and in fact benefit the people of the province of Saskatchewan. I 

think we all have a shared desire to see growth and expansion in 

all the industries in the province of Saskatchewan, a vibrant 

future for the agricultural sector, and in fact progress towards a 

more vibrant and expanded dairy industry in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hopefully if we could regain some of the market share we lost 

from 1948 . . . As I indicated earlier we had about 24.8 million 

kilograms of milk fat produced in the province of Saskatchewan 

in 1948. Today we‟re just a little over 8 million, so we‟re about 

a third of what we were. It would be great if we could actually, 

through marketing structures and quota development, Mr. 

Speaker, expand our market share in the province considerably. 

And if that is possible to do, we‟d be much better off and we 

would see an enhanced industry in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4275 

Mr. Speaker, The Agri-Food Act and The Agri-Food 

Regulations, 2004, the new governing structure at the milk 

control industry in Saskatchewan is important to the people of 

Saskatchewan. It‟s absolutely important that we have a vibrant, 

thriving industry, Mr. Speaker, one that‟s controlled and 

inclusive of the stakeholders in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we all hope that the ministry and the government is 

working closely with the industry to ensure that their needs are 

met, to help them try to expand their quota in the province of 

Saskatchewan, to help them try to thrive and make positive 

inroads towards that expansion in a way that helps make their 

operations more sustainable, but also helps, Mr. Speaker, 

continue to grow what is a very important industry in our 

province which is our dairy industry, which is a very important 

part of our overall agricultural structure in the province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And as you would know, and I‟m sure many members in this 

House will know, agriculture has played such a very important 

and vital role in the development and history and sustainability 

of our province. And, Mr. Speaker, without that role being 

played over the years across the many communities and farms 

of this province, Mr. Speaker, we clearly wouldn‟t have some 

of the infrastructure and industry we have across the province. 

We wouldn‟t be situated to be one of the leading producers of 

grains and oilseeds in the world, Mr. Speaker. And we wouldn‟t 

have the amount of development and research that‟s done to 

improve our agricultural sector around the world if we didn‟t 

have such a vibrant agricultural industry in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, although I would have liked to have a great 

deal more detail in the second reading speech, I think that it‟s 

important to allow some of my colleagues the opportunity 

tonight to speak to a number of Bills that they would like to 

speak to. And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would 

like to adjourn debate on Bill No. 118, An Act to repeal The 

Milk Control Act, 1992. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — It has been moved by 

the member from Regina Dewdney that debate be adjourned on 

Bill No. 118, The Milk Control Repeal Act. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 126 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 126 — The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act be now 

read a second a time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure to rise tonight to speak about Bill 126, An Act 

respecting the Management and Reduction of Greenhouse 

Gases and Adaption to Climate Change. And I would note that 

this is a variation or an amended version of Bill No. 95, which 

was introduced in the last session of the legislature. 

 

Now I‟m going to start out my talk a little bit differently when I 

talk about this Bill because I just received some mail from the 

Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, and it proudly advertises 

a 2010 state of the province address by the Premier tomorrow in 

Saskatoon. And I‟m just rising to provide a little bit of advice. 

Because when I see the topic that the Premier‟s going to talk 

about, I note that on page 20 where the ad is, he‟s talking about 

exports, revenues are growing and there‟s lots of positive things 

happening. But on page I think it‟s 14 or 15 of this exact 

magazine, they sort of go a little different direction. And 

basically on . . . No, it‟s on page 11. The magazine itself says: 

 

International Merchandise Trade 

Driven by declines in both volume and price, the value of 

merchandise exports fell by 26% in 2009, erasing most of 

the . . . increase in . . . [the previous year]. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve got a very interesting one. 

 

[21:30] 

 

But the reason I raise this particular magazine is that it does 

have a rant that the chamber of commerce often puts in their 

magazine, and the rant this month is about environmental 

reform and change management. And I think it‟s a reference to 

Bill 126 that we‟re looking at tonight, and also another Bill 

relating to the environmental management. 

 

But I just want to read one quote from this particular article 

because I think the Premier may want to address this tomorrow 

when he‟s speaking to the business people of Saskatchewan. 

And here I will read from page 16: 

 

Effective change management involves dynamic and 

strong communication with stakeholders. In business, 

communicating changes to external clients is critical to a 

seamless (or at least less bumpy) transition both for the 

business and its clients. However, it seems that the 

Saskatchewan Ministry of Environment has missed the 

boat on this one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that‟s the theme as it relates to this Bill 126 

as well. 

 

When I listen to the speech by the minister and then we read her 

comments in the second reading speech, there is not sufficient 

information there to understand exactly what the purpose of this 

legislation is. And it‟s unfortunate that there appears to be a 

general trend among the ministers to forget the role of the 

second reading speech, which is to explain to the public. But 

more importantly, to some of my former colleagues as lawyers 

and also judges in Saskatchewan, the second reading speech 

sets out some of the policy and some of the rationale for 

legislation. 

 

And when that information is not laid out very clearly, that 

causes problems, not this year, not next year, but maybe five 

years from now when somebody is trying to interpret legislation 

and make some sense of it for use at another time. This is 

especially crucial when we talk about legislation like this 



4276 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

legislation, which talks about the management and reduction of 

greenhouse gases and adaptation to climate change. Because 

this legislation is not easy legislation, it‟s legislation that‟s 

trying to make rules and set out parameters in an area that is 

continuing to evolve. 

 

And when there is not a clear leadership on how this 

information is going forward, it causes problems. I think that‟s 

the source of the rant from the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce, that when there‟s a lack of leadership, there‟s a 

difficulty for everybody in trying to deal with the issues that are 

involved. 

 

Now in this particular legislation there‟s an attempt to do a 

number of different things. And I will spend some time trying 

to understand what that is and try to set out what‟s there. But 

before I start going into that particular task, I want to point out 

that when I looked at the legislation one of the things that was 

especially troubling about the legislation was the number of 

clauses, the number of words, the number of things that are in 

the Act that are to be defined subsequently by the minister, by 

the Lieutenant Governor in Council, by it‟s not entirely clear 

who sometimes. But it‟s most everything that‟s in this Act is 

subject to some kind of change at a later point. And it‟s quite 

fascinating to see that legislation that is as crucial as this is will 

end up without anybody really knowing what the legislation 

means until the regulations are brought forward. 

 

And even at that point, there will be opportunities for the 

legislation to be changed with very little advice or consultation 

or discussion within the community. And I think that‟s why the 

words from the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce about 

environmental legislation in Saskatchewan generally is very 

important because everybody‟s trying to comply with the rules. 

They want clear rules so that they know how they can develop 

their business, how they can invest the money, often 

hard-earned money, that they have in any particular project that 

they‟re working on. 

 

And if the legislation is designed and written in a way where 

regulations, for example, under section 83(1)(a), allow the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council to define, enlarge, or restrict 

“the meaning of any word or expression used in this Act but not 

defined in this Act,” it ends up with some things that, you 

know, you‟ll never know exactly what the rules are. And when 

you read through the legislation, there are time and time again 

where you use the words prescribing, where you use the words 

that it‟s going to be defined, you use many words where you 

just don‟t really have a clue what the rules are going to be. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we‟re into a new generation of legislation 

where the minister gives a very short explanation bringing it 

forward. Maybe because she doesn‟t know exactly what is here, 

but I think maybe more importantly because she doesn‟t 

necessarily want to define what she‟s introduced. 

 

And if we put this in a timeline, we know that this legislation 

was introduced at a point before the Copenhagen conference, so 

there would be some piece of paper that Saskatchewan would 

have when our people were at the particular conference, and 

also at a time before the federal government had really done any 

definition or provided any leadership on this. And also before 

the United States had made any specific direction, which I think 

maybe is still the case. Now I know there‟ve been some pieces 

of information filed by the supposed January 31st, 2010 

deadline, but clearly the information that‟s come from 

Saskatchewan is very different from what was there two years 

ago in the election platform. And it seems to be changing on the 

go. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would say this legislation allows for a 

change-on-the-go policy to exist as we move forward as well. 

And I don‟t think that‟s fair to business people. I don‟t think 

that‟s fair to the public. I don‟t think it‟s fair to the staff within 

the department who are supposed to be trying to administer this. 

 

And I think that everybody should sit down and try to figure out 

something that has some clear, substantial information, perhaps 

after consultation with the chamber of commerce, with other 

representatives of business, with representatives from some of 

the non-governmental organizations that are very involved in 

this, with discussion with the government caucus, with 

discussion with the opposition caucus because this legislation, 

we know, has crucial importance as we move forward. We‟re 

talking about large expenditures of money, but more 

importantly we‟re talking about the future of our children and 

grandchildren and about the future of our province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let‟s take a little bit of a look at the 

legislation and see if we can understand the format of the 

legislation such as it is laid out here. And also maybe point out 

some of those areas where basically it‟s to be defined. 

 

And we know that there are quite a number of terms that are to 

be subsequently defined. One that‟s been added since last 

session is on page 2 where they add the word “code”. And I 

thought this was kind of an interesting definition because it 

says: 

 

“code” means the code adopted by the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council in the regulations. 

 

So it appears that the code is actually the core of the Bill, but 

we don‟t know what that is. We don‟t know where and how it‟s 

going to be defined. We know that there‟s a similar code in the 

other environmental legislation that the chamber of commerce 

is upset about and they, in actual fact, make a comment. And 

this is referring to the other environmental Act that says: 

 

As part of the new environmental model for 

Saskatchewan, an Advisory Committee for development 

of a new Saskatchewan Environmental Code will be 

established to clarify the details, yet government has not 

been forthcoming with how this committee will be initially 

established and supported by industry. 

 

End of quotation on page 16 of the chamber of commerce 

magazine. Mr. Speaker, the same criticism applies to this 

legislation. There is going to be a climate change advisory 

council, but when you look at their role, it doesn‟t seem to have 

anything to do with trying to define this code. And in fact the 

only place you can find a reference to the code is when you 

look into the regulatory powers given to cabinet. 

 

And basically there it sets out the fact that cabinet can set up a 

regulation adopting a code. But then once again it goes into this 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4277 

total definition, by I guess committee or whatever, but 

definition by cabinet of all of the terms that are in that. Then it‟s 

got a curious other paragraph here which says, “The code may 

contain all or any of the following provisions:” So this is on 

page 38, it‟s section 83(2). So it says: 

 

The code may contain all or any of the following 

provisions: 

 

(a) provisions respecting any matter, activity or thing 

that is governed by this Act [that is] prescribed in the 

regulations; 

 

(b) provisions determining any criteria, terms, 

conditions or requirements that must be met in order to 

carry out any activity governed by this Act and set out 

in the code. 

 

Well we know that the code isn‟t defined. It‟s going to be 

coming from somewhere, maybe like Moses going to the Mount 

Sinai and getting it delivered or maybe it comes from some 

other place, I‟m not quite sure. But and then there is this 

section: 

 

(c) provisions adopting a standard, including a standard 

developed or established by the minister . . .” 

 

So here we have the minister defining this. But she can define it 

once, but it can be amended from time to time or otherwise. 

And then section: 

 

(d) provisions requiring a person to provide the minister 

with a notice before engaging in activities regulated by 

this Act and to prescribe the information that must be 

contained in that notice. 

 

So Mr. Speaker, before we even start looking at the legislation, 

we see that the key parts of it are still to be defined and still to 

come from the minister, from cabinet, from somewhere. Maybe 

from Mount Sinai, we don‟t know. But it‟s going to be 

legislation that‟s not yet defined. 

 

Now I‟m not quite sure if this legislation has precedent in this 

legislature. But it appears to me that when a minister brings 

forward something to the legislature, it should have definition. 

It should have some idea for us as legislators what‟s intended to 

be done. And it should have sufficient information for business, 

for the public, for various other groups that are especially 

interested in this topic to at least understand what the rules are 

going to be and where they‟re going to go. 

 

And I know that often the place where that is set out is in the 

second reading speech of the minister. That‟s not here, Mr. 

Speaker. And it may be that there‟s some rule whereby the 

minister can get to work and come back with another second 

reading speech which is a second version, maybe a more 

expanded version that would actually give us the information 

that we need because this kind of legislation is crucial for the 

further development of this province, for our economy, and for 

what happens. It‟s also very important as we work together with 

other provinces, with the federal government, and with other 

governments around the world. 

 

[21:45] 

 

Now legislation has got some particular basis here. It once 

again sets out that cabinet can establish a number of the 

emission baselines and targets. So practically, the legislation 

has an enabler for cabinet to set something which then they can 

subsequently change and amend, as we‟ve already heard. 

 

It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that when the Sask Party ran in the 

last election, they had some pretty clear goals and pretty clear 

things that they said in their platform as it relates to this 

particular subject. Those things are not in this legislation. In 

fact, the legislation itself says: 

 

Greenhouse gas emission baseline 

4 The Lieutenant Governor in Council may establish a 

greenhouse gas emission baseline for Saskatchewan for 

a year selected by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 

Now if we went back and looked at the platform, we could fill 

all that in and it would be very clear what this legislation was 

about, and we would have some clear rules for everybody 

who‟s involved. Now practically, we know that‟s a problem 

because between the time this Bill was introduced a few months 

ago and now, that particular line has been changed. And we 

know that there‟s going to be some other changes and 

adjustments because we don‟t think that there‟s clear leadership 

from the government on what they‟re going to do in this 

particular area. 

 

If you go and look at section 5, it‟s the same kind of thing. I 

mean it‟s basically setting out a formula where, you know, X 

plus Y equals Z, and put anything you want in X, Y, and Z and 

see what happens. I don‟t think that‟s appropriate type of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, that should be brought forward in this 

House. What we need is for people who are working in the 

government to actually sit down, do their work, and then take a 

position, show some leadership, and set it out in the legislation. 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation doesn‟t have that. 

 

Now I‟m not quite certain exactly what we can do about it. I 

suppose we can look at it and try to propose amendments that 

puts in the Act the words that we‟ve heard in election 

campaigns, that we‟ve heard in speeches, that we‟ve heard 

many places. That‟s maybe one way to do it. It‟s not necessarily 

a very logical way to do it. It‟s not a way that is normally done 

by a group that seems to want to try to show their leadership on 

a particular topic. But, you know, maybe a way of using some 

binder twine and chewing gum to put a Bill together that might 

work. 

 

Now you go on to the next section about reports, section 6, and 

basically it says the minister shall monitor compliance of the 

targets that have been established. Well we know that the 

targets are in the previous paragraphs, and they‟re still sort of 

out there somewhere or coming from Mount Sinai, or we don‟t 

know where they‟re coming from. And basically it goes on to 

say that the minister can “. . . use any indicators that the 

minister considers relevant in preparation of a report.” 

 

Well I‟m not quite sure if you can be as — wow, I don‟t know 

what‟s the word — mushy or fuzzy or unclear as this particular 

legislation appears to be. And so then you go in and this report, 



4278 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

based on a whole bunch of things that we don‟t really know, 

can be filed. 

 

Now I‟m not sure how you can even compare what that report 

is or whether it complies with anything when you don‟t have 

those rules set out in the legislation. There are many other 

places where we have some pretty clear rules and a judge can 

give an opinion on whether the rules are in compliance, other 

members of the legislature can give their opinions about that. 

You can actually vote on something. But so far this Bill has got 

a lot of difficulty, and I think there‟ll be many, many questions 

that we have as we move forward with this particular one. 

 

Now then we get into part III of this: the responsibilities and 

powers of the minister. And we know that this section was 

changed slightly from the last Bill and the slight addition — 

which I‟ll have some more to say about later — is section 8, 

which gives the Lieutenant Governor in Council the ability to 

enter into agreements with almost, well with, I think, probably 

with anything that pretty well exists in the world. But I‟ve got 

some comments on that, and I‟ll save those for a little bit later. 

 

But basically under the powers and responsibilities of the 

minister, we know that the minister, which presumably here is 

the Minister of Environment: 

 

. . . is responsible for all matters not by a law assigned to 

any other minister or government agency respecting 

greenhouse gas emissions, climate change, and adaptation 

to climate change. 

 

Now this is a very interesting clause just in itself because the 

Minister of Environment will be given certain powers, but if the 

Minister of Energy happens to have a power that conflicts, it 

looks as if these rules and the responsibility of the Minister of 

Environment would be overridden by that other minister. If 

there‟s a Minister of Agriculture has got some powers that 

relate to these particular concerns, those would all be in priority 

to the Minister of Environment. 

 

And it looks as if this clause has been set up in a way that puts 

this issue of management and reduction of greenhouse gases 

and adaptation to climate change as subordinate to other 

ministerial roles. I think if the intent of the legislation was to 

place a high priority on this, this clause would be written 

differently. 

 

So then you go and you look and see, well what are the powers 

that the minister has to carry out the responsibilities? And, you 

know, some of the clauses are the logical ones. They include 

guiding, promoting, coordinating, adopting policies, doing 

those kinds of things, also undertaking planning and research 

and making forecasts, those kinds of things. 

 

But then we get into some other interesting areas. So we end up 

the minister‟s got the power to “install, operate and maintain, or 

cause to be installed, operated or maintained, devices to 

measure greenhouse gases.” Well that sounds like an 

appropriate task, also the ability to monitor effectively 

greenhouse gas emissions, climate change, and adaptation to 

climate change, and then it has the role of education, providing 

information to the public. But also then we go through all of 

these different things which we would expect in this legislation, 

and they seem to be quite clear as to how this is to be done. 

 

But then you get to section (i), where you get to the actual 

registry or the information around offset credits and some of 

these things, and once again we get into a situation where the 

minister is going to be defining all of this, and we don‟t quite 

know what that definition is going to be or how those rules will 

be created. And it appears to me, Mr. Speaker, that one of the 

reasons that people want some clear rules in this area is so that 

they can be certain, when they invest their money, that they are 

going in the right direction, that they‟re doing the right thing. 

And any time you have uncertainty and lack of clarity, we know 

that that costs the economy a lot of money. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, it gives a lot of flexibility to the minister, probably lots 

of flexibility to the cabinet, but I think it may be to the 

detriment of our Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Now there are other powers that are set out here which 

effectively follow on with the enforcement of these ill-defined, 

well, undefined terms and conditions. And so it‟s a bit hard to 

comment on these things until we actually see the regulations or 

what other form of instrument they use to define what‟s going 

to happen here. 

 

But practically, this is the heart of what many people in the 

community and in business are concerned about, is if in fact 

there are — what are they called? — pre-certified investments 

around some of these issues, if there are in fact rules and 

regulations around regulation of CO2, what is it that these rules 

are going to be and how are they going to be used? And once 

again the minister‟s given the power to define all of these 

protocols, but we don‟t really see exactly how any of these 

things are going to be done. 

 

Now if in fact that the legislation is defined in a way that 

doesn‟t tell us where or what the ultimate purpose is, and the 

second reading speech doesn‟t give us that information, I think 

it may be prudent that the legislation is withdrawn until such 

time as that information is available because this is a crucial 

issue for the province, it‟s a crucial issue for some of our most 

important industries, and it‟s a crucial issue for many people 

who may or may not want to invest in some of these particular 

certificates or whatever else that‟s here. 

 

Now the minister also has the power to appoint enforcement 

officers, and I think that that‟s an appropriate clause, but it all 

relies on having a code and having rules. Now it‟s interesting, 

the introduction of the power to enter into agreements that was 

added since last May or June. And if we look at section 8, we 

see that the cabinet, the Lieutenant Governor in Council can, for 

the purposes of furthering the minister‟s powers and 

responsibilities under this Act, which as we already know, we 

don‟t really know what they are, but basically the minister can 

be authorized to enter into agreements on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. And effectively we know these 

agreements may commit the tax dollars of the people of 

Saskatchewan as we enter into the agreements. 

 

Now clearly, entering into an agreement with the Government 

of Canada, we know how that‟s done. We know how it can be 

maybe done with governments of other provinces or territories. 

But then we get into a whole issue of Saskatchewan entering 

into agreements with other countries or states or divisions of 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4279 

other countries, or any ministry or agent or official of a 

government of another country; and then finally, “any person, 

agency, board, commission, organization, association, 

institution, or body,” I think that‟s drafting language to say you 

can enter into an agreement with anybody. And we don‟t 

necessarily know what that means. But what we do know is that 

one of the developing areas of great interest around the world is 

the whole issue of how agreements are negotiated between 

businesses and Western countries and provinces and, for 

example, Chinese, state-owned enterprises. 

 

[22:00] 

 

And I just got a copy, I guess it‟s last year, of The International 

Lawyer, which comes out of the section of international law of 

the American Bar Association. And they get into a very 

interesting discussion about negotiations between westerners, 

and they include Western businesses and Western governments 

and Chinese, state-owned enterprises. And, Mr. Speaker, this 

type of legislation is enabling the entering into of agreements 

with particular agencies like the state-owned enterprises in 

China. And we end up in getting into a whole other area where 

I‟m not sure we necessarily have all of the understanding or the 

expertise to get involved. 

 

And I think it‟s especially difficult when the legislation that 

backs up what we‟re trying to do here is so lacking in clarity. 

And I was looking at this article and some advice that was here, 

and I thought, well this is kind of an interesting bit of advice. It 

applies, I think probably, to business negotiation we‟d have in 

Canada as well, but they said it‟s especially true. And I‟ll read a 

quote that basically describes a person named Mr. Fang who 

establishes the Chinese business cultural framework for 

negotiation with Western businesses. And he says it consists of 

three distinctive and interrelated components. 

 

You know, one of them is the People‟s Republic of China 

condition, one is Confucianism, and one is Chinese stratagems. 

And these writers who are trying to put this into language that 

we could understand describe it as follows, and I quote from 

page 1304 of The International Lawyer, volume 42, no. 4: 

 

The Chinese business culture framework suggests that the 

Chinese negotiators have a “three-in-one” negotiating 

style; they negotiate like “bureaucrats,” “gentlemen,” and 

“strategists.” Trust is a prime indicator showing which role 

the Chinese are going to play. When mutual trust between 

the business partners is high, the Chinese will negotiate as 

“gentlemen;” when it is low, they will negotiate as 

strategists! The People‟s Republic of China negotiators 

[will] also negotiate as “bureaucrats,” particularly so when 

the political wind blows. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had to chuckle when I read that because as a 

bureaucrat trying to negotiate with the province of 

Saskatchewan, one would go and look and see if the legislation 

. . . which actually gives the authority for the negotiation. And 

once again I go back to the lack of clarity in this legislation 

which I think would cause difficulty for our negotiators, let 

alone somebody else trying to figure out whether who they 

were dealing with had the power to do what they were supposed 

to be doing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, my suggestion is that there may be some more 

work that needs to be done on this kind of legislation as we go 

forward to try to get some clarity and get some sense in how it‟s 

supposed to be done. 

 

Now let‟s proceed with the legislation. The next part of the 

legislation says that there‟s going to be a climate change 

advisory council established, and it sets out the normal rules 

about how you would do that. But it‟s not clear from the second 

reading speech, it‟s not clear from anything I‟ve seen from the 

minister or the ministry as to who this advisory council would 

be. And I know that, once again, that was the criticism coming 

from the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. 

 

This all is laid out and presented to us and there‟s no 

consultation about exactly what this means or where it‟s going 

to go. And so it made . . . And you know, I think it‟s probably a 

good idea, this kind of a council. But there‟s been a missing of 

the boat, as the Chamber of Commerce said in the 

communication about how this is going to go forward, in this 

legislation in the same way as it has been in the other 

legislation. 

 

Part V of the legislation says there‟s going to be an office of 

climate change established. This is established right within the 

ministry and it sets out the rules about how that‟s done. That 

seems to be relatively clear, what that‟s going to be. I think it‟s 

something that is once again a good idea. It probably replaces 

some things that were removed or eliminated quite recently. But 

I think I‟d give that one the benefit of the doubt because it 

clearly will end up having some precedents from the previous 

government as to how to operate and actually probably can do 

some good work. 

 

So then you get into the part IV which is the “Regulated 

Emitters and Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction Programs.” 

And this is an area where once again there‟s a lot of definition 

by the minister, definition that isn‟t entirely clear where that is. 

But it does, I think, follow on some information that is a little 

bit easier to understand. 

 

But then we get into a whole issue around carbon compliance 

payment, is the description here. And that I think gets to the 

heart of what this particular legislation is going to try to do. We 

know that in our neighbouring province of Alberta they have 

collected quite a bit of money like this. It‟s unclear exactly 

whether it‟s the right amount. It‟s also unclear how this fits into 

a national or international strategy. 

 

What we do know is that the advice coming out of various 

national and international law firms dealing with this kind of 

legislation — because once again it‟s legislation that can 

implement some major costs for businesses — but the advice 

that‟s coming from law firms and other advisers is that 

unfortunately, without clear results coming from the 

Copenhagen conference and from similar meetings like that, 

what we‟re going to be dealing with is a patchwork quilt right 

around the world of legislation like this legislation that‟s here. 

 

And so one of the difficulties that we will have in Saskatchewan 

is, how does our system fit with our neighbours to the east and 

to the west and also down into the States? Where do our 

programs fit in, in that whole situation? And once again, we 



4280 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

don‟t have very clear leadership on this as to what is intended 

or what kind of cost it‟s going to entail for the businesses in our 

province. 

 

Now we know that the discussion for quite a number of years 

has been that if there is a payment like this related to carbon 

that the money would be paid into some kind of a fund that 

would be controlled in Saskatchewan and used in 

Saskatchewan. I think the next section tries to set out that kind 

of a fund and do it in a way that would allow this money to be 

gathered and used here. And this is a concept that‟s been around 

for quite a few years. It appears to set out how that is being 

done. But once again, it‟s based on a rather elusive foundation 

and it maybe will be able to work once all the rules are set. But 

at this stage we don‟t have enough that would allow this matter 

to go forward. 

 

One of the interesting concepts that was in the second reading 

speech of the minister was the fact that this fund was clearly 

going to be controlled outside the government. And that‟s the 

way the legislation appears to create the fund and we will 

practically see and monitor to make sure that the funds are used 

specifically for this purpose. We know that the previous 

government had a fund in place that was going to allow for the 

kinds of things that are mentioned here, but that fund has been 

dissipated and we think gone into some other purpose. Or we‟re 

not quite sure where it‟s gone. We know that there‟s a little bit 

of the money that was set aside three years ago that was used 

for green policy, but very little of the original amount of the 

fund. 

 

Now there‟s also a intention, it appears here, to set up a climate 

research and development fund and this is, I think once again, a 

good idea. Clearly the issue there will be what kind of funds 

will be made available to make sure that this fund continues in 

existence. And it once again is to be a fund that‟s outside of the 

Crown. And I think that it can serve a good purpose. But once 

again it‟s in how it‟s implemented and how the resources are 

provided to it, and I think that that‟s something that we‟re going 

to have to watch very carefully. It is an area where there could 

have been more clarity or definition or description in the second 

reading speech from the minister, but it wasn‟t there. 

 

Also there‟s something set up — it‟s intended to be set up — 

called the Saskatchewan climate change foundation which is a 

not-for-profit corporation, and this is to be set up as a charitable 

foundation. And it‟s not entirely certain what the purpose of this 

is, but I assume it‟s to receive funds that maybe would have a 

charitable status, but also that it could be used to promote and 

deal with climate change issues. So there‟s some mechanism 

here that would allow for that. 

 

Then as well there‟s the ability under this legislation to set up 

another corporation which is a not a charitable corporation, and 

it clearly has the ability to get involved in quite a number of 

activities including carbon capture and storage, energy 

conservation, dealing with low-emitting technologies and 

processes, adaptation to climate change, biodiversity, water 

conservation. So it appears that it‟s a corporation that would be 

of a broader nature, but not a charitable kind of corporation. 

 

We don‟t really have any detail on what is intended there. It 

appears that it overlaps with some existing corporations that we 

have like the Saskatchewan watershed corporation, so maybe 

the idea is that some of that kind of activity would be expanded 

into this, but once again we don‟t have very much clarity about 

that. So a big part of the legislation in fact actually creates all of 

these other funds and other things. But once again I go back to 

my original point that the initial definition of what we‟re doing 

here is lacking in clarity, and that then causes a bit of 

consternation as one reviews the whole Act. 

 

So we have some pieces that . . . or some corporations that are 

being set up to do a number of different things and provide 

information to the public. We don‟t quite know how they‟re 

going to be established. We don‟t know who‟s going to be 

providing advice as to how they‟re being established. But if in 

fact we had some clarity around the goals, some leadership 

around the goals of the whole legislation itself, some of these 

other pieces may be easier to accept and to explain. 

 

[22:15] 

 

Now when we get into part VIII, we get into a whole section 

which in many ways is the part that‟s probably going to have 

the most review by the legal profession, and that relates to 

administration, inspection, and enforcement. It appears that 

there will be substantial penalties or fines that will attach if 

people do not comply with this legislation. And these fines will 

come in quite a number of areas. They can relate to the kinds of 

information that people provide, compliance as to all of the 

different monitoring devices, those kinds of things. And it‟s 

pretty broad language that effectively creates offences that will 

be enforced by the minister or by . . . well which means the 

Minister of Environment. 

 

And it allows for, in addition to some of the penalties that are 

right in the legislation, it also allows for applying to a judge of 

the court for even greater ability to enforce the rules that are 

here. I think that this is a particular area that should be of 

concern to us as legislators, that all of these compliance parts 

are built on a base of lack of clarity as we start out the 

legislation. And it‟s going to cause difficulty for everybody if 

we don‟t have some clear leadership, some clear rules, as we 

begin or as we are involved in this legislation from the start. 

 

Now as we go through that whole section, there‟s all kinds of 

special powers that are available, including seizure, ability to 

enter on to land, and ability to get copies of all the records that 

are needed. And then when you get into the actual penalty part, 

there are fines up to $1 million. So in fact this is pretty serious 

business if there‟s any contravention of the regulations or the 

code or anything else that‟s here. 

 

So once again you say, well the rules are pretty clear; they‟re 

pretty exacting when you look at how the penalties are set out. 

But when you actually look at what‟s the core or what‟s the 

heart of the legislation, all that‟s left to regulation which is in 

fact cabinet creating the rules. Or it‟s even less clear: it‟s left up 

to the minister creating the rules. And the penalties can be quite 

severe, the costs can be quite extensive, and it can put a major 

damper on the economic activity in the province, especially 

those businesses which exist in the province. 

 

It‟s not entirely clear how this affects SaskPower and 

SaskEnergy. I assume that they would be bound by this 



March 16, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4281 

legislation. If that‟s the case, there may be some major penalties 

that would be payable by the customers of SaskPower who also 

happen to be taxpayers and citizens of Saskatchewan. So I think 

that this is an area that would need further clarity from the 

minister — although this also may be an area where the rules 

don‟t apply because the power of the Minister of Environment, 

as I pointed out earlier, is subservient to powers of other 

ministers. So it may be that the Minister of SaskPower and the 

Minister of SaskEnergy would have some kind of an exemption 

from the legislation. If that is in fact the intention, I think we 

should be told about that before we actually pass this 

legislation, or at least we should know what the rules are as it 

relates to that particular situation. 

 

Now as we move forward with this legislation, I think that quite 

a number of the people in my caucus are going to be wanting to 

speak to the legislation because of the number of industries that 

are affected and because of the number of the people in the 

community that are affected by how we set out the rules for 

management and reduction of greenhouse gases. We have an 

opportunity in this province to provide leadership, not just in 

Canada but in the world, around what we do for the 

environment. And it‟s been substantially problematic to make a 

transition from the kind of coal-fired electrical power that we 

have in our province to new forms of electrical power. And we 

know that there are a number of things that can be done. 

 

But this kind of legislation, with its lack of clarity about the 

rules as we move forward, doesn‟t make matters easier. It 

complicates them. And I think that if there were clear rules, 

possibly clear ways that there would be a transition to use of 

more other forms of power, this kind of legislation could be of 

great assistance. But the way it‟s worded now, it doesn‟t 

provide that assistance. And it would have been possible, even 

with the mushy words that we have here in some of the key 

parts of this Bill, for the minister to set out a plan, for her to set 

out some goals of what we‟re going to do so that we actually 

knew what we were dealing with. 

 

And I‟m not certain whether amendments will be brought 

forward at a later point in the process which clarify some of 

these things or, as has been done with some other pieces of 

legislation, proposed regulations will be presented before the 

Bill is dealt with in committee so that questions can be asked 

about the Bill using the information from the kinds of 

regulations that are intended to be passed. 

 

If they‟re not, it would be my suggestion that it may be 

appropriate for this Bill to be withdrawn and then worked again 

to set out with greater clarity what the targets are, what the 

goals are. And given the comments from the chamber of 

commerce, it may be prudent that the Ministry of Environment 

perhaps catch the boat and get involved with consultation with 

people in industry who are concerned about this. 

 

And I know that it‟s always interesting to look at suggestions 

that come from business. And I know that the author of the 

particular piece in the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 

newsmagazine for this quarter did try to lay out for government 

some advice. And so I think it‟s important to set out this advice. 

And what they say is that basically when businesses are going 

to make major changes, they spend a lot of time and effort in 

the education and consultation part because they know that if 

you‟re going to lead change, you have to be part of it. And I‟ll 

just read a couple of paragraphs here from page 17 from this 

magazine: 

 

Government needs to open their playbook on „How to 

Manage Change‟. Leading organizations understand this 

well and ensure extensive communication occurs with 

stakeholders outside of their organizations. Leading 

organizations create plans and execute them well to 

maximize the success with which change is implemented. 

 

Here are a few of many of the things they do: 

 

1. They understand that their stakeholders react differently 

to change given their resource capacity levels; 

 

2. They understand that stakeholders have fundamental 

needs that have to be met (i.e., frequent communication, 

detailed information, understanding of internal changes to 

the business that could affect them); 

 

3. They are clear about what stakeholders can expect given 

what is realistically possible; 

 

4. They address stakeholders‟ fears to build a level of 

trust; and 

 

5. They ensure that the resources and supporting systems 

that stakeholders require during and after changes are 

implemented are in place. 

 

And then it goes on: 

 

There are many unanswered questions, yet the business 

community is expected to „trust‟ government to find 

economic, efficient and effective solutions for 

environmental protection. 

 

And I guess basically the message is, there isn‟t trust in this 

government in how they bring forward Bills like this one. And I 

think that my comments over the last while have identified the 

kinds of issues that business, through the Saskatchewan 

Chamber of Commerce, are talking about, which is, talk with 

us, understand our business, understand what we‟re trying to do 

so that we can help you create rules, regulations, good public 

policy that will serve the needs of the people Saskatchewan, but 

will also serve the economic needs of some of the major 

businesses in the province and also serve the community needs 

of all of the people of the province who are concerned about 

climate change. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, last spring I had a chance to talk a bit about 

this particular topic. And one of the themes in my speech last 

spring was the fact that at the federal level in Canada the 

leadership was lacking as we move forward in this particular 

area, and that that seems to be the situation that we have on a 

provincial level as well. It‟s almost — well it‟s about — nine 

months since I gave that speech. Quite a number of things have 

happened. The promises of the Sask Party government in the 

election have been diminished a couple of times at least, and 

now they don‟t show up in the legislation. 

 

We end up with legislation that lacks clarity. It doesn‟t provide 



4282 Saskatchewan Hansard March 16, 2010 

the information that‟s needed. We have the chamber of 

commerce and the people in the business community of 

Saskatchewan saying quite directly, look, talk to us. Work with 

us so that we can get something that will be in place. They say 

also very directly that the Sask Party government has missed 

the boat in this area and that there‟s some things that they need 

to do. 

 

On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we know that 

legislation, as it relates to greenhouse gases and climate change, 

is crucial for the economy to continue to grow here in 

Saskatchewan. And any time we have something which creates 

further uncertainty, we know that that costs businesses money. 

We know that it perhaps prevents businesses from establishing 

here. And we make some strong suggestions that this Bill either 

should be pulled or fixed. 

 

And I know that there are many, many people who will want to 

add their concerns as we move forward with this particular 

legislation. Mr. Speaker, when one is working at something as 

tricky — if I can put it that way — but also as in the core of 

what‟s important in the economy, one needs to spend a lot of 

time working on it and working with everybody in the 

community. It appears that that hasn‟t been done here in a way 

that gets at the solution that we need here in Saskatchewan. 

 

We‟re, I think, quite justly proud in Saskatchewan of the kind 

of work that we‟ve been able to do in a whole number of policy 

areas and, Mr. Speaker, we have the ability to work in this area 

as well. Let us work together. 

 

The Speaker: — It being the hour of adjournment, this 

Assembly stands adjourned until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 

p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 97 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4257 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4259 

  Trew (quorum) ........................................................................................................................................................................ 4266 

  The Speaker (quorum) ........................................................................................................................................................... 4266 

 Bill No. 118 — The Milk Control Repeal Act 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4267 

 Bill No. 126 — The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4275 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4261 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


