




















































Hansard: November 08, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 7A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5867 

 November 8, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 

through all members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce 

Katie Turnbull. Is Katie up there? Oh, there she is. Katie is a 

third-year nursing student through the U of R [University of 

Regina] and the U of S [University of Saskatchewan]. Katie is 

also a Saskatchewan Roughrider cheerleader. And I do 

understand, Katie, that you had suffered an injury this past 

game, and we’re hoping for a speedy recovery so that you’ll be 

at the playoff game this coming Sunday. Anyway I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming Katie Turnbull to our 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly the young man that’s with Katie today, who happens 

to be a very distinguished member of our Saskatchewan 

community, the Leader of the Liberal Party, Mr. Ryan Bater. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the member opposite in 

recognizing the Leader of the Liberal Party. As everyone knows 

of course, the passing of a long-standing Liberal member; the 

flags are flying at half-mast. And I’m sure that Ryan and other 

Liberals across the province will recognize the loss of a great 

person. And I’d like to also add to the member’s comments a 

welcome to your legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the 

members of the Assembly, two guests in your gallery today. 

Frances Wach is the executive director of the Saskatchewan 

SPCA [Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals] and 

Tim Wiens, Chair of the Farm Animal Council of 

Saskatchewan. And they are here today in support of new 

legislation I’ll be introducing regarding the animal health and 

welfare. So I would ask everyone to welcome them to their 

legislature and thank them very much for their support. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways, the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to this Assembly, I’d like to introduce 

some visitors from Medicine Hat. They’re in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. They are Candace and Derek Paton and their daughter 

Ashley. Just give us a wave, folks. Candace is the sister to my 

chief of staff. They’re here, going to take in question period 

today, Mr. Speaker. And I’d ask all members to please give 

them a warm welcome. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are 

concerned over the quality of our highways and the steady 

deterioration that they’re experiencing, as well as the safety 

factor that this all causes. And the prayer, Mr. Speaker, is as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and 

the junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety 

for Saskatchewan’s motoring public. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the good folks 

from Fort Qu’Appelle; Balcarres; and Lipton, Saskatchewan. I 

so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition on behalf of the people in Wawota and area 

who are opposed to the closure of the five beds in Wawota Deer 

View Lodge. They feel it’s unsafe and unfair that families are 

separated in their last years of their lives. And the petition reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to stop the closure of these beds. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This is many more signatures to add to the hundreds that I 

submitted last week. And these are from Kipling, Kennedy, 

Arcola, Manor, Windthorst, Wawota, Wapella, and Moosomin. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. We know that the freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. And 

unfortunately Saskatchewan’s income gap between the rich and 

the poor continues to grow, and now one in five children in our 



5868 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

province live in deepening poverty. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these folks come from Regina, Saskatoon, 

Melfort, Tisdale, and Nipawin. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for university students 

in Saskatchewan, a petition that calls on the Sask Party 

government to expand the graduate retention program. The 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition with respect to the future of Saskatchewan’s 

potash resource because Saskatchewan has a 1,000-year supply 

of the world’s highest quality potash and that the people of 

Saskatchewan are the owners of this strategic resource and 

deserve to receive the maximum benefit for its development, 

processing, mining, and sale. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Saskatchewan Party government to publicly demand 

the following terms and conditions on behalf of the people 

of Saskatchewan of any foreign bidder bidding to take 

over PCS: to ensure people receive the maximum net 

benefit, a golden share and preferred shares so that the 

public participates in both the corporation’s future 

decision making and its profitability; public guarantees on 

a strengthened head office presence; support for Canpotex 

and long-term targets for potash production and 

employment; Saskatchewan representation on the board of 

directors; public agreements to ensure no loss of royalties; 

and public commitments to meet world-class standards of 

corporate social responsibility; and an independent potash 

review commission with the power to monitor and enforce 

all of these terms and conditions. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by good folks from 

Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of occupational health and safety. Mr. 

Speaker, the true cost of human suffering or loss of human life 

cannot be measured in dollars and cents, and the government 

allows the fines levied against companies for violations of The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act to be treated as tax 

deductible expenses. And the government therefore continues to 

allow companies to treat such violations and fines levied for 

them as the regular cost of doing business. And the petition 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to amend the laws so companies will not 

be allowed to get a tax deduction for fines levied against 

them under The Occupational Health and Safety Act and 

regulations, and to remove the existing cap on fines levied 

against such companies. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by residents of Coronach, Grandora, 

and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 

here today to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 

from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the mismanagement of 

our finances by the Sask Party. They reference the fiscal trend 

line, which is negative, the fact that we’re into two years of 

deficit. And in fact we have billions of dollars of debt growth 

piling up underneath the Sask Party, projected in their own 

documents, Mr. Speaker — page 62 from their budget summary 

of this year. I reference that for folks at home. The prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now these petitions today are signed by good folks 

of Saskatoon and Prince Albert. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place on his feet? 

 

Mr. Broten: — With leave to introduce guests, please. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5869 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to all 

members for leave. In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members in the 

Assembly, two individuals that have joined us for the 

proceedings today: Menno and Annabelle Martens from the city 

of Swift Current. Menno is a retired educator from Swift 

Current, and they are very active in Bridgeway Community 

Church and good friends of my in-laws. So I welcome them to 

the Assembly today. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Tribute to Davey Steuart 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to pay tribute to 

Davey Steuart, a man who gave more than five decades of his 

life to serving the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Davey Steuart was a son of Moose Jaw. And he began his 

career in the public service at the civic level in Prince Albert 

where he was elected city councillor and later served two terms 

as mayor, becoming as well the president of SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association]. He entered 

the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, after a by-election in 1962, and 

when the Liberal Party formed government in 1964, he became 

the minister of Health. This was the first of several portfolios, 

Mr. Speaker, that he would carry on in. He was later minister of 

Natural Resources, deputy premier, as well as minister of 

Finance. 

 

And his great wit and humour were well-known. And he 

delivered the black Friday budget in 1968, a difficult budget 

which he nevertheless delivered with his trademark sense of 

humour, and saying, and I quote, “This is probably the first time 

in history of a legislature that a provincial treasurer delivered 

the budget not from his desk, but from under his desk.” 

 

In opposition after 1971, Mr. Speaker, he eventually won the 

leadership of his party, carrying the Liberal banner into the 

election of 1975. And though unsuccessful, he went on to serve 

the people of Saskatchewan in the Senate until 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, whether in the council chamber in Prince Albert 

or in this Assembly or in the Senate in Ottawa, the people of 

Saskatchewan had in Davey Steuart a man committed to 

working for them and dedicated and with a good sense of 

humour. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

on behalf of all members of the House to offer condolences on 

the passing of former Liberal leader, Davey Steuart, who passed 

away last Friday at the age of 94. Steuart had an accomplished 

career as a public servant. He served as councillor and mayor of 

Prince Albert, and president of the Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association before being elected to the 

Legislative Assembly in 1962. He held several major cabinet 

portfolios including Health, Finance and deputy premier in the 

government of Premier Ross Thatcher. 

 

Steuart later became Liberal leader and Leader of the 

Opposition before being appointed to the Senate. He remained a 

senator until his retirement in 1991. Mr. Steuart is being 

remembered as one who saw the great economic potential of 

Saskatchewan. Wascana MP [Member of Parliament] Ralph 

Goodale recalls Steuart as one of those trying to prime the 

pump to create a potash industry in Saskatchewan in the first 

place. Former Progressive Conservative MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] Jack Klein described Steuart as a great 

Canadian. Described by some as the bantam rooster of 

Saskatchewan politics, there was never any doubt that 

Saskatchewan came first with him, and he was always ready to 

fight for the interests of his province. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, Davey Steuart has left his mark on this 

province, and for that we are grateful for his five decades of 

service to the people of Saskatchewan. In remembrance of his 

service, the flags at the legislature will fly at half-mast until his 

funeral. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Battlefords Interval House Celebrates 30th Anniversary 

 

Mr. Taylor: — If there was one message that the more than 

250 people attending the 30th anniversary dinner for Battlefords 

Interval House took away it was, “Do not stay quiet. Please 

speak up.” I bring that message here to the Saskatchewan 

Legislative Assembly today to remind us all that everyone 

needs to take the issue of domestic violence seriously. 

 

It was most appropriate that the Battlefords Interval House 

chose the sister of domestic violence and murder victim Nicole 

Brown Simpson, Tanya Brown, as their guest speaker. It was 

also most appropriate they chose October 18th, known as 

Persons Day, the day that women in Canada were recognized as 

persons under the law. 

 

Interval House is a transition house that first and foremost 

provides a safe refuge for women fleeing domestic violence. In 

addition to safe accommodations, Interval House also provides 

support, counselling, referral, and advocacy services and 

assistance in finding temporary or transitional housing. 

Utilization of its services has remained constant during the past 

30 years, with approximately 100 families per year finding 

shelter within its walls. 

 

There is no good reason for domestic violence to occur, but 

most people are surprised to learn just how often it occurs. And 

all too often when it occurs, we least expect it. Transition 

houses like Interval House in The Battlefords save lives. I ask 

all members to join me in congratulating the Battlefords 

Interval House for 30 years of service. 

 



5870 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Veterans’ Week 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Throughout the 

province of Saskatchewan and the rest of Canada, people of this 

great nation will join together from November 5th to 11th to 

celebrate Veterans’ Week. During this week many 

commemorative ceremonies will take place across 

Saskatchewan to recognize the achievements of our veterans 

and to honour those who made the ultimate sacrifice. 

 

As our Canadian Forces members return home from missions 

around the world, we must celebrate the commitment made by 

servicemen and women and their families. This year Canadians 

are being asked to take the remembrance challenge. The 

challenge is to transform remembrance from something you not 

only feel, but to something you also do. 

 

Some of the many ways to show that we remember and honour 

our veterans include pinning a poppy above our hearts, 

attending a local Remembrance Day ceremony. Talk to a friend 

or relative who has just returned from serving in Afghanistan or 

other areas of conflict. Listen to veterans talk about their 

military experiences. Participate in any number of social 

networking sites readily available. But most importantly, we 

must vow to never forget. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to the men and women of Canadian Forces, 

both past and present, we recognize your achievements and 

honour your sacrifice. God bless the men and women of our 

Armed Forces. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

National Adoption Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November is National 

Adoption Awareness Month. It’s an opportunity to recognize 

adoptive families in Saskatchewan who have opened both their 

hearts and homes to children in need of a family. 

 

Adoption provides a child with permanence and security, and 

all children need roots and a feeling that they belong to a 

family. This feeling of belonging affects a child’s sense of 

self-worth. It helps to determine how children see themselves in 

relation to others and their communities. In Canada, over 

30,000 children in foster care wait for adoption, and the 

numbers are equally too high here in Saskatchewan. More 

importantly, children’s lives are positively changed forever 

when caring people commit to meeting their needs and 

accepting the rewards and challenges of parenting. 

 

With the common goals of educating the community about 

adoption issues, promoting adoption of children in foster care, 

and raising awareness about adoption in general, groups 

throughout Canada hold adoption-focused conferences, 

symposiums, and events. These are all opportunities to educate 

ourselves and others about adoption and about issues 

surrounding adoption. And with a little advance planning, our 

efforts can work wonders. Even one family for one child is a 

success. 

Mr. Speaker, Adoption Awareness Month fittingly brings 

much-needed attention to the children waiting for permanent, 

loving homes, as well as it celebrates families formed by 

adoption — a very worthwhile objective indeed. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

Premier’s Awards for Excellence in the Public Service 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier’s Awards 

for Excellence in the Public Service was established in 2003 by 

the former Department of Government Relations and Public 

Service Commission. These awards recognize members of 

Saskatchewan’s public service — individuals, groups, or teams 

who have made outstanding on-the-job contributions to the 

government and the citizens of the province. 

 

In total, 797 employees, individuals, and teams have been 

honoured. There are three categories of awards: quality service, 

innovation, and leadership. The recipients were presented with 

their awards by the Premier on November 4th, here in Regina. 

 

There were five team awards given out last Thursday. The 

Battleford’s domestic violence treatment options court; the 

on-unit programming, courage to change field study; and the 

vaccine management team won Innovation Awards. The 2010 

Saskatchewan Olympic pavilion team and the soldier settlement 

negotiations team were given Leadership Awards. 

 

I would like all MLAs to join me in congratulating all of the 

hard-working teams and the individuals who were nominated 

for these awards. And once again, congratulations to all the 

winners. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Resource Revenues 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Premier 

doesn’t understand our provincial finances, particularly for 

potash. This Premier forged ahead with an out-of-line budget 

assumption and, with his pattern of unsustainable spending, 

launched us into massive deficit, a damaging pattern that is 

continued with the tabling of the second straight deficit budget 

from this Premier. 

 

The Premier has once again put his lack of understanding of our 

resource revenues on central stage as he entered the debate 

about ownership of PCS [Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

Inc.]. The Premier underpinned his argument against the BHP 

takeover based on the loss of revenues, approximately $2 

billion, that would be the result of BHP deducting its expenses 

to build a new mine off of its profits. The fact remains this 

deduction occurs regardless of whether or not PCS was or is 

taken over. It just changes the timing: relatively soon, as would 

be the case with the takeover; or simply down the road when 

BHP brings a new mine into production. 

 

It should also be pointed out that if PCS, Agrium or Mosaic 

began construction of a new mine tomorrow, the exact same 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5871 

loss of revenues would occur — a result of deduction as in the 

takeover, the very same result. The Premier’s flawed argument 

displays one thing — this Premier doesn’t understand the 

finances of this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it makes crystal clear that this Premier is not 

in a position to maximize the benefit from our resources, and 

not able to manage and ensure a prosperous Saskatchewan. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Support for Agricultural Producers 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, a question to 

the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, the minister will 

know that this summer has been devastating for many farm 

families, and one of the glaring omissions in the Throne Speech 

was any mention or suggestion of new money for farm families 

who are hard-pressed because of the flooding and frost that 

occurred during the crop year. And while I know members of 

the community who received the $12 an acre from the 

provincial government appreciate that, they’re saying that it just 

isn’t enough to see them through the winter season and into 

seeding next spring. 

 

Can the minister inform the Assembly whether there’s an active 

process in place for the provincial government and the federal 

government to come forward with a meaningful payment for 

farmers facing the worst flooding and frost this province has 

seen in a long, long time? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I would agree with the Leader of the Opposition. 

It’s been a very frustrating year for producers right across the 

province of Saskatchewan, probably one of the wettest years 

that we’ve ever had in the history of the province where the 

total province has been wet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was one of the reasons we brought forward, in 

conjunction with the federal government, in dealing with the 

federal government, a $360 million excess moisture program to 

try and help producers right across this province — something 

that probably we’ve never had in the history of the province, a 

program that large, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Ahead of that, though, what may seem as somewhat odd that we 

had also done a drought payment for west central Saskatchewan 

to the tune of about $20 million for producers, where last year 

they didn’t have no feed or no pasture for a large majority of the 

summer out there. 

 

So we have been out there helping producers. We have toured 

the area. A number of my colleagues and I have toured the area 

on a number of occasions, Mr. Speaker, and dealt with, talked 

with producers right across this province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister indicates that 

there was a drought payment made to certain parts of the 

northwest area of the province. I know the people in Consul and 

the southwest area were urging the minister to come forward 

and include the southwest area in that payment as well, and I 

hope that is under consideration. 

 

But my question to the minister goes back to the need for a 

payment, and I quote from The Western Producer where the 

minister says, and I quote: “This might be a good time to see 

just how well AgriStability is going to work. If it doesn’t work 

this year, it’ll never work.” 

 

I wonder if the minister can explain to farmers how long he will 

be studying whether or not AgStability works. Most farmers 

know — in fact I would expect 99 per cent know — it doesn’t 

work. When will the minister put forward an idea of getting 

$100 per acre for those farmers’ unseeded, flooded acres in the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 

opposite should know how the programs work very well. He 

was one of the people at the table when some of these programs 

were designed, Mr. Speaker. So if there are shortfalls, and there 

may well be . . . We know a number of producers, Mr. Speaker, 

across the province that are not happy, totally happy with the 

AgriStability program. That’s one of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, 

on an ongoing basis we’ve been asking the federal government 

to make changes to the AgriStability program. The livestock 

sector is a really good example, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if the member had gone to the table without 

leaving meetings and walking out on them and helped design 

the program adequately, and even going back to ’91, don’t cut 

programs like the GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] 

program . . . Mr. Speaker, producers across this province 

remember very well the Leader of the Opposition and some of 

the cuts he made to farm programs right across the province 

and, Mr. Speaker, cut funding to every producer in the province 

of programs that they relied on at that time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, one of the areas that was 

left out of the $12-an-acre program announced by the minister 

is the area of beef producers in the Northeast and the flooded 

area of the province. Many of them are asking why the minister 

and the government has not provided a payment for beef 

producers. 

 

And my question to the minister is this: is there active 

consideration of a payment being made to the beef producers in 

the flooded area of the province to help them see their way 

through winter and not have to sell off their breeding stock, so 

they’re in a position to make a living growing cattle in this 

province going forward? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll just remind the Leader of the Opposition, in the 



5872 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

three short years that we’ve been in government, some of the 

programs that we’ve brought forward for producers, and I 

noticed the Leader of the Opposition . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the opposition members 

to allow the minister to respond to the Leader of the 

Opposition’s question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — I guess, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

things that the Leader of the Opposition certainly doesn’t want 

to be reminded of is the relief for education tax on farm land 

right across this province. It was an ask that the farmers and 

ranchers in this province had asked the previous NDP 

government for many, many years, to deal with that problem 

and the high taxes they were paying. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve dealt to that to some degree. We’re going to 

make more changes to that program but give relief to producers 

right across the province. Whether you’re in the Northeast, the 

Southwest, or any part of this province, when you go to pay 

your education tax this fall, it’ll be far less than it was under the 

previous government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also last year brought in a $71 million program 

for cattle and hogs right across the province. Mr. Speaker, we 

brought in a water program for producers right across this 

province — something that they never had before — to help 

them in the case of drought or ongoing when they want to drill 

wells or dig dugouts. Mr. Speaker, I believe we’ve done a 

number of things for producers in the three years that we’ve 

been in power. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister 

follows along the line of the producer groups who are calling on 

the Government of Saskatchewan and the federal government to 

co-operate in a $150-per-head payment being made to beef 

producers this winter, along with $40 an acre to reseed 

grassland that was flooded out during this summer’s extreme 

flooding that went on. In fact, Greg Marshall, the president of 

APAS [Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan] is 

quoted as saying, “But across Saskatchewan and many parts of 

Manitoba, the moisture levels are so unusual that livestock 

producers will have a bleak feed situation this winter.” 

 

Can the minister now indicate whether or not the $150-per-head 

payment will be made this winter and whether $40 per acre to 

reseed grass that was flooded out, will that be available to 

farmers and ranchers in the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I can 

tell the Leader of the Opposition that we’re working with our 

federal colleagues on this issue. We’re also talking to Manitoba, 

Alberta, and BC [British Columbia], for that matter. Some of 

them had somewhat the same situations over there, although I 

believe Manitoba’s had flooding for going on four years in 

some areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of programs we’ve helped 

livestock producers over the last couple of years. The 100 per 

cent wildlife damage compensation program, something that 

producers have asked for, for many years — never received 

under the previous government — and we’ve brought that 

forward. Mr. Speaker, the livestock predation compensation 

program where livestock, no matter what the livestock are out 

there, are killed by predators, we’re compensating producers for 

that, Mr. Speaker. And especially in the Northeast that’ll help 

those producers. Whether it’s coyotes or wolves or whatever the 

situation is, we will compensate producers — something they’d 

asked for, for many years, never received under the previous 

government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think we’re doing a number of things for 

producers. Can we do more? We’re in negotiations with the 

federal government at the present time, working with our 

neighbouring provinces. And if the Leader of the Opposition 

just stays tuned, we will probably have an announcement in the 

next few days. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s time for 

PotashCorp to stand up for the people of Saskatchewan. So I 

want to know what formal, binding, signed commitments has 

the Premier received to ensure that PCS will live up to its 

pledge to Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 

indicated last week to the member in exactly the same question, 

that we have already had occasion to have some discussions 

with Potash Corporation. We’ll be continuing to hold those 

discussions. The Minister of Justice is looking at the various 

options that are available for us. 

 

I would remind the member opposite that there’s a 30-day 

period here where we have to be mindful of the situation as 

well. BHP still has opportunity to ask for a further review of 

this from the federal government, so we’ll be working most 

diligently with Potash Corporation, and more importantly the 

people of Saskatchewan, to ensure that the commitments that 

PotashCorp has made are lived up to. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — The 30-day window is important, Mr. Speaker, 

because it offers the government here a chance to raise the bar 

for BHP. It’s an important time for Saskatchewan certainly, but 

it’s clear that they have no plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the PotashCorp’s pledge is vague on several 

points. What detailed information can the Premier provide 

regarding binding, signed commitments on head office 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5873 

relocation, Aboriginal employment targets, and enhanced access 

to the best in medical care and other elements of the pledge so 

that the people of Saskatchewan know that the Premier is 

willing to stand up for them to the Potash Corp to give us a 

better deal on our resource? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I’m 

understanding the member’s question correctly, I think he may 

have misread it a little bit. He said about raising the bar for 

BHP. Well it’s actually they’re raising the bar for PotashCorp, I 

think is what he was trying to get at. But we’ll certainly be 

continuing to have discussions with the PotashCorp officials. 

They have made representations to us that they believe are good 

pledges to the people of Saskatchewan. We certainly agree with 

them. 

 

We are looking at a number of different things that we could 

have discussions with PotashCorp about, and we’ll be certainly 

making sure that the interests of Saskatchewan remain 

paramount in those discussions. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that he doesn’t 

understand that when you raise the bar for PotashCorp, you also 

raise the bar for BHP to have a net benefit for Saskatchewan 

people. It’s the big problem. He doesn’t understand the file; it’s 

too complex for him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, vague assurances and verbal understandings are 

not enough. The Premier has had weeks to prepare for this 

contingency, and PotashCorp has had weeks to put the meat on 

the bones of its pledge. 

 

So let’s start with point one. What head office functions will be 

relocated to Saskatoon? Will they include corporate finance, 

corporate development, R & D [research and development], 

national and international sales including Canpotex, human 

resources, and officers and staff managing external potash 

investments in Jordan, Israel, and New Brunswick? And when 

will the Premier give us the details and tell us what formal, 

binding, and signed commitments he’s received on this issue so 

that he can prove to Saskatchewan people that he’s willing to 

stand up for them on this issue? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would say to the member opposite that many, if not all, of those 

functions that the member speaks about are positions that we 

would be prepared to take a look at as a government. We have 

indicated that we are having discussions with PotashCorp with 

respect to that. Those discussions will continue. We believe that 

this is a very important thing. 

 

And I would just remind the member opposite that when it 

comes to standing up for Saskatchewan, it was the Premier of 

this province that laid out the most compelling case that you 

could put before the people of our province and before Canada, 

before the federal government that resulted . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister of Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — The most compelling case that could be put 

before the people of Saskatchewan and Canada and the federal 

government. It resulted in an overwhelming no with respect to 

this deal from the federal government. We are extremely 

pleased at that outcome, and I believe the people of 

Saskatchewan are. And the evidence is very clear. All you have 

to do is look at the recent polling over the weekend, and it’s 

clear that the people of Saskatchewan, in overwhelming 

numbers, support the Premier of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Out-of-Province Medical Care 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again the 

minister and the government has failed to put the patient first. A 

man the Provincial Ombudsman refers to as Christopher was 

experiencing loss of vision, migraine headaches, and low blood 

pressure. He saw three specialists in Saskatchewan who were 

unable to help him. Out of desperation he went out of the 

country where it was determined he had a brain tumour. 

Christopher had surgery to remove that tumour, and now the 

minister is refusing to pay the costs of that surgery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is the minister choosing to deny Christopher 

coverage for a diagnosis and surgery he was unable to get in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

The situation that the member opposite referred to, I won’t get 

into the particulars. But what I will say is that this case has been 

in front of the Ministry of Health. Through the policies through 

the Ministry of Health, it was not funded. Since that time, the 

Ombudsman has had a look at this particular case, which I 

won’t comment on directly. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it sounds like there were some issues around 

communication, around clarity of policy, clarification of the 

policy that was in place, Mr. Speaker. I have committed, after 

seeing the Ombudsman’s report and the recommendations put 

forward by the Ombudsman, that we will review this case once 

more. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — In 2008 the minister said he would review those 

internal policies about how to deal with out-of-country or 

out-of-province funding. It’s 2010. How long is it going to 

take? 

 

Do people have to come to the legislature to get their issues 

brought to this minister? I mean the Ombudsman was pretty 



5874 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

clear. He said: 

 

The Ministry knew that Christopher was not at home 

when they responded to him at his home address. The 

Ministry has an obligation to let Christopher know what 

his options were so he could assess his financial risk and 

make an informed decision. It did not do so . . . that, to us 

tipped the balance in favour of saying “Look, these are 

special circumstances and you should pay.” 

 

That’s not a big decision; a big review doesn’t have to happen. 

The minister has had this at least a week and still nothing. 

 

One of the Sask Party’s election promises was to create a health 

ombudsman office, and it was again in the Throne Speech. Mr. 

Speaker, to the minister: what good is it to create a health 

ombudsman if the minister just disregards the Ombudsman’s 

recommendations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous 

answer, the Ombudsman has looked at this case as he looked at 

a couple of other cases. He’s made recommendations that 

would definitely help patients into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the other two cases, we are accepting those 

recommendations. We feel those recommendations are sound 

recommendations that we can move on. On the third case, on 

out-of-province, we are going to review that one because we do 

feel that perhaps by the reference of the Ombudsman that 

perhaps the information wasn’t clarified properly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but what I will say is we did make a commitment 

to have a health care ombudsman in this province. The Speech 

from the Throne identified it again. Another promise made; 

another promise kept. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, one of the first things the minister, 

one of the first things the minister did when he came to 

government was to pay the out-of-country medical expenses for 

the Bonderud family. Both Mr. Bonderud and Christopher went 

out of the country for surgery because they couldn’t get 

treatment in Saskatchewan for life-threatening issues. 

 

The one glaring difference is that Christopher didn’t appear in 

Sask Party election ads. Is that the minister’s new criteria for 

getting out-of-country medical expenses covered? You have to 

appear in a Sask Party election ad. Does Christopher have to 

wait till November of 2011, the election, to get his money? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what I will say is that 

every situation and every case is different. There’s nuances to 

every case, Mr. Speaker. But what I will say on the Bonderud 

case, Mr. Speaker, that government turned their backs on those 

people — absolutely turned their backs on those people. 

 

The Ombudsman looked into it and said it was absolutely 

justified. We made the payment before the Ombudsman 

recommended it. But the Ombudsman went on to further 

recommend that that absolutely should have been paid, that 

there was negligence on that former government’s hands, Mr. 

Speaker, that they should have never got to that point. It should 

have been covered by that government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this situation that the Ombudsman is 

referencing, we are certainly taking a look at it because we 

think there are some issues there around the case that may need 

clarification. We’re taking the Ombudsman’s recommendations 

very, very seriously. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Support for Flood Victims 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Families 

and business owners and producers across the province are still 

reeling with the after-effects of this summer’s floods. Mr. 

Speaker, these families are waiting for help. They’re calling 

upon their government to provide the necessary and needed 

financing immediately, Mr. Speaker. Some four months after 

the flooding, many, many families have still not heard from 

their government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as we all know, this has been a 

devastating summer for so many people within the province. 

And our intent is to have these people covered as quickly as 

possible, with money as soon as possible and responding to 

their needs. 

 

I will say, Mr. Speaker, that when we formed government, we 

inherited a program for the disaster assistance in this province 

that was extremely, extremely flawed. And we have, we have 

changed that program, Mr. Speaker. We’ve worked on the 

program since the first year when we changed some of the 

program. We’ve been working on it continuously. We’ve been 

working . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’m having difficulty hearing 

the minister trying to respond to the question from the member 

from Regina Dewdney. Allow the minister to complete his 

response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — We’ve been working with the 

people of the province that have been experiencing these 

disasters, Mr. Speaker. We’ve done a number of changes to the 

program. At the request of a mayor, we had money in the hands 

of people within 24 hours after being requested. So, Mr. 

Speaker, we have been working very, very hard on this 

program, and we have done very well for the people of this 

province who’ve experienced disasters. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5875 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

government is failing families, business owners, and producers 

across our province, Mr. Speaker. Many, many families today 

are facing significant financial hardship as a result of this 

summer’s flooding. In the communities of Maple Creek, 

Yorkton, North Battleford, on First Nations, and on farms 

across this province, Mr. Speaker, people are hurting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have no furnaces in their homes. They are in 

cases, many cases, waiting for government inspectors to say 

whether or not their home is inhabitable, Mr. Speaker. Winter is 

here, Mr. Speaker. What is the government going to do to help 

those families immediately deal with their housing needs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections and Public Safety. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, once again, we’re 

working with the families that are experiencing these difficult 

times and working very, very closely with the people from all 

of the areas that people have been affected. 

 

But what I really want to be able to tell the House and the 

people of the province, Mr. Speaker, is what we’ve done to this 

program. When we inherited this program — I’ll give you an 

example — private claimants were required to pay 20 per cent 

of the deductible, 20 per cent. We’ve reduced that to 5 per cent. 

That’s thanks to the people of the province that said that was an 

error. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had caps on claims. Private claims, the cap 

under the previous administration was $100,000. Mr. Speaker, 

this doesn’t bode well to the times of today. In late 2007, we 

changed that to 160,000. Most recently we changed that — 

private claims — to $240,000, Mr. Speaker, which is very 

responsive to the people and the needs of the people of this 

province. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s rhetoric is cold 

comfort to any of the families across the province that today 

cannot live in their homes because there’s mould, Mr. Speaker. 

That they don’t have a furnace; they have no ability to heat it. 

They don’t know if it’s structurally sound because they’re still 

waiting for government inspectors. Mr. Speaker, these families 

have waited months and months, Mr. Speaker. And the 

government did provide a $3,000 advance payment, but only 

after the Leader of the Opposition challenged him to do so in 

the community of Maple Creek, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What can the minister tell those families today that need 

immediate cash injection to put a new furnace in their home, get 

their home ready so they can inhabit it for this winter? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s 

very interesting coming from members opposite because, as I 

was explaining, what we’ve done to this disaster assistance 

program that we inherited from members opposite. He talked 

about furnaces for an example, Mr. Speaker. They had a 

depreciation rate of 60 per cent on furnaces under the old 

program, 60 per cent, and we’ve reduced that to 35 per cent. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about furnaces and we’ve dealt 

with individual cases day after day where people now in Maple 

Creek . . . Every person there that had a furnace issue has 

received money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting with the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] talk about waiting for money. Do you know 

what the average wait time was for any money to get out under 

the old program, any money? Twelve to 18 months — 12 to 18 

months. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there’s members opposite have 

talked about, well we didn’t have disasters to this degree in the 

earlier days. People in Vanguard waited in excess of two years 

to get any money under the old program — two years, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can think it’s funny. 

The minister can make his comments and laugh about this issue. 

But, Mr. Speaker, this is a serious issue to thousands of 

Saskatchewan families who have had their lives turned upside 

down, who today can’t resume living in their own homes, some 

of which have had to move from the community of Maple 

Creek to others, individuals whose homes have been totally 

destroyed. And they’re being offered . . . They’re condemned. 

They’re being offered a fraction of the value of their homes, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

These are life changing, negative events for people, Mr. 

Speaker, and it is absolutely . . . [inaudible] . . . that the minister 

would laugh, that he would laugh, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Can the minister today say that he will immediately move to 

provide more money to needing families today, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s pretty disheartening when you hear the member 

opposite talk about people laughing. The only person I saw 

laughing in this whole interlude was the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can go on about how much we’ve done, we’ve 

done for the people of this province in the short period of time. 

We’ve reduced the depreciation rate on tangible properties. For 

an example, Mr. Speaker, we listened to the people of the 

province when they talked about drywall. Under the old 

administration, the old rules, drywall was depreciated up to 50 

per cent. And people came to us and said, why would you 

depreciate drywall up to that level? I’d say, well that was the 

old program. We have changed that, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

changed it totally. 

 



5876 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

We’ve put more structural engineers in. And the member talks 

about people that are waiting. In some cases, if a house has 

been totally damaged by flood, that you need a structural 

engineer to come in and assess it before anybody can move 

back in or put any money into it. We have hired more structural 

engineers, Mr. Speaker, and we’re very happy the way we’re 

going with the whole PDAP [provincial disaster assistance 

program] program. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 148 — The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 2010 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move Bill No. 148, The Animal Protection 

Amendment Act, 2010 be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has moved that 

Bill No. 148, The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 2010 be 

now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered again? I 

recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Junor: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Eastview has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, in the east gallery is Arden Fiala 

who is a board member of SaskFEAT [Saskatchewan Families 

for Effective Autism Treatment] and a parent of an autistic 

child. She is following the proceedings regarding the autism 

Bill which will be given first reading this week, and has come 

to talk to us again about the lack of autism services in the 

province and how that affects her and her family. So I would 

like all of us to welcome Arden to the Assembly today. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 1 through 35. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers to questions 1 through 35 are tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Gantefoer, seconded by Mr. 

Wyant, and the amendment moved by Mr. Broten.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the conclusion of 

Thursday, I had just began giving my response to the Throne 

Speech so I’m just going to do a little bit of a recap here. 

 

And I spoke of my constituency and how proud I am of it. We 

have Boundary dam power station, the Shand power station. I 

mentioned the Spectra event centre that is now under 

construction. I also mentioned the Energy Training Institute 

that’s under construction there. 

 

But one thing I did forget to mention, Mr. Speaker, was that 

Estevan Web Printing, and they have captured the contract for 

printing the Toronto Globe and Mail, prairie region. So that 

includes all of Saskatchewan and Manitoba. And Estevan Web 

Printing has invested in excess of $10.2 million in a new 

community press that stretches over 120 feet in the company’s 

refurbished plant located in Estevan. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

printing at this plant is completed by 11:30 each evening. And 

the trucks heading to Manitoba and Saskatchewan destinations 

depart in the wee hours of the morning so that the newspapers 

can hit the streets in the early hour of the morning. And Estevan 

Web Printing is also responsible for the printing of 41 weekly 

newspapers and 10 monthly publications. So I did want to talk 

about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to, at this time, thank my family 

for all their support: my son, Terry; my daughter, Trisha; my 

grandchildren, Beau, Bailee, Shelby, and Tristan. And as you 

know, Mr. Speaker, my family’s just been through a very 

difficult time, and it’s probably the most difficult that I, as a 

grandparent, will ever have to endure. But with the love and 

support of family, my colleagues, and friends, we will continue 

to heal, as hard as that process is, and all the while thanking 

God for the time we had with Brooke — 14 short years. But our 

lives are indeed richer because of her, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would also like, at this time, to thank my constituency 

assistant, Rosalie Story, and also my part-time assistant, Wilma 

Bjorndalen. Mr. Speaker, we all rely an awful lot on our CAs 

[constituency assistant], and I am so thankful for Rosalie and 

Wilma for their loyalty and dedication to me and their work on 

behalf of all the constituents of Estevan. I would also like to 

thank my executive president, Bernie, and all the members of 

my executive who work tirelessly for that association. 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5877 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, the Boundary dam power 

station and the Shand power station in my constituency. And in 

August, the Minister Responsible for SaskPower, the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone, and I had the privilege of touring 

both of those power stations as well as the Sherritt mines. And 

we were able to go on one of the draglines that was absolutely 

huge, and the boom is over 300 feet long and the bucket, I think 

they said, like a basement could be dug with maybe one and a 

little bit of a scoop. So it was absolutely huge and just most 

enjoyable. But I would like to thank Mike Zeleny, Kevin 

Scobie, Kevin Guillemin, and the management of Sherritt Coal 

for making that tour possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very excited and proud to be part of the 

Saskatchewan Party government under the leadership of our 

Premier, the member from Swift Current. And under our 

government, we have paid down the provincial debt by almost 

40 per cent. And that is something that every person in this 

province takes a great deal of pride in. 

 

This government has taken action and continues to take action 

regarding the education portion of property tax, and that is a 

commitment we made to the people of this province while 

campaigning in 2007 to be implemented during our mandate. 

And the promise in this Throne Speech means that the 

education property tax will see a reduction of an average of 80 

per cent on agricultural land and a huge reduction to other 

landowners as well, Mr. Speaker. And that is something that 

means a lot to every property owner in this province. 

 

And this is an issue that Tommy Douglas used to speak about. 

And in fact for years the NDP often spoke of it, although they 

did nothing about it. But it was our Saskatchewan Party 

government that made this happen. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, our government will also fulfill its promise 

to fully implement the new revenue-sharing formula based on 

one point of the PST [provincial sales tax], something 

municipal governments have been waiting for for a long, long 

time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regarding the population, between January of 

2008 and January of 2010, our province experienced its fastest 

growth in almost 80 years. Our population is over 1,045,600 — 

the highest in the history of our province. And, Mr. Speaker, 

our province is so inviting that even the Leader of the 

Opposition came back to it under a Sask Party government. And 

they continue to come back. The economy here is booming and 

people just can’t wait to come back, and not only from other 

parts of this country, but from all parts of the world they’re 

coming to it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our highways were sorely neglected by the NDP 

when they were in government. All of rural Saskatchewan was 

actually neglected. But in the year 2000 rural residents were 

forced to fix their own highway, and the current NDP leader 

mused that more farmers should volunteer to fix roads. In the 

first three years of our Sask Party government, highways and 

infrastructure budgets have been the three largest in the history 

of our province. 

 

A couple of weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, I was at an anniversary 

celebration, and a gentleman came up to me and asked me to 

extend a thank you to the Minister of Highways and to our 

entire government for work done on the highways where he 

lives. He said the roads have been in a sad state of disrepair for 

a long, long time, and he was so pleased that something was 

finally being done. 

 

And I must say, Mr. Speaker, that I find it very ironic that they 

have been, since they have been in opposition, the NDP have 

filed many petitions regarding highways. And in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, the very first petition filed this session was regarding 

highways. Ironic because the NDP did absolutely nothing 

regarding the infrastructure of this province when they were in 

government. In fact, the Canadian Automobile Association and 

the Canadian Taxpayers Federation named certain 

Saskatchewan highways the worst in Canada when the NDP 

were in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was also very happy with the leadership our 

government has shown regarding the MS [multiple sclerosis] 

liberation treatments. Several people I have spoken to in my 

constituency have expressed their appreciation regarding this, 

and it’s certainly not limited to the people in my constituency. 

 

When I was out in Swift Current recently, I spoke to a 

gentleman from Calgary. And he told me his daughter, who 

lives in Ontario, had MS, and she had just returned from Europe 

where she had the liberation treatment and was making such 

progress. And, Mr. Speaker, that gentleman had tears in his 

eyes when he expressed how happy he was for what the 

government of Saskatchewan was doing, stepping forward and 

showing true leadership. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the weekend following the Throne Speech, I was 

reading the October 29th issue of Lifestyles. And that’s a paper 

published in Estevan that comes out every Friday. And there 

was an article titled “Government releases Throne Speech” in 

there. And the member from Regina Rosemont actually did an 

interview with a reporter from that paper. And in that article the 

member from Rosemont claims that he has spoken to, and I’ll 

quote, “. . . to many people who are concerned about the lack of 

rural doctors and the funding formula for health care facilities 

that requires communities to raise 35 per cent of a project’s cost 

before it can move forward.” 

 

Number one, Mr. Speaker, while I’m aware of the doctor 

shortage, the NDP cannot claim that this had just happened. 

While they were in power, they closed 52 rural hospitals as well 

as the Plains hospital. And the members over there know that 

that Plains hospital was built for the people of rural 

Saskatchewan. So again, Mr. Speaker, they absolutely 

abandoned rural Saskatchewan, and for that member to pretend 

this just happened is something that is just simply not true. 

 

And number two, Mr. Speaker, regarding the funding formula 

for health care facilities. Yes, the communities are required to 

raise 35 per cent of a project’s cost. But that is exactly the same 

amount they were required to raise when the NDP were in 

power. So the member from Regina Rosemont should maybe do 

a little research into how his government acted. 

 

And another interesting comment that same member made, that 



5878 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

member from Regina Rosemont, was this, and I will quote 

again: “This year’s Throne Speech will take Saskatchewan 

down roads forged by this government and previous 

Conservative governments.” Now by the sounds of that 

statement, Mr. Speaker, you would think that the . . . Well it 

sounds like they’re aligning the Saskatchewan Party with the 

Conservatives. 

 

And I find that very interesting because when the Leader of the 

Conservatives, Mr. Rick Swenson, was in this Chamber a week 

ago on Thursday, he entered through the NDP opposition’s 

door. He sat behind the bar on the NDP side. And, Mr. Speaker, 

get this: he was introduced by the Leader of the Opposition, the 

NDP. So I ask, who is aligning with whom? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to express how happy I was to 

see the plan to expand the emergency medical services by 

bringing in STARS [shock trauma air rescue service], the 

helicopter-based shock trauma and rescue society. I have been 

interested in this program for a long time. And in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, when I was out in Calgary this summer, I toured this 

facility along with the member from Thunder Creek and his 

wife, Linda, and also Heather Chisholm, the wife of the 

member from Turtleford-Cut Knife. And, Mr. Speaker, both 

Linda and Heather are nurses. And what we all saw out there 

was an amazing program that has a role to play in our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think of the industries in my constituency, 

the Boundary dam power station, Shand . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Other members will 

have the opportunity to enter the debate. I’d ask the members to 

allow the member from Estevan to have the opportunity to 

share her thoughts without interference. The member from 

Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was just speaking 

about how proud I am that we are expanding the emergency 

helicopter services by bringing STARS into our province. And I 

can’t help but think about the industries in my constituency — 

the Boundary dam power station, the Shand power station, the 

mines, the oil fields, and agriculture — and, Mr. Speaker, if, 

God forbid, a tragedy happened, how this could be the 

difference of life and death when time is of an essence. And I 

would also like to express my appreciation to the member of 

Melfort for the good work he is doing on that file. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last Wednesday was a wonderful day for 

Saskatchewan and for Canada. And I would just like to say how 

proud I am of the leadership shown by the Premier and this 

government regarding the potash industry. And, Mr. Speaker, 

they say that a good leader is one who has the ability to make 

tough decisions, so I guess that makes my Premier a great 

leader. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we remember last Wednesday immediately 

after the announcement was made, the Premier asked for leave 

to get up in this Assembly and to make statements regarding 

that, and the NDP denied him that right. And so the next day, 

the next day they allowed him to get up and speak, and they 

were gracious in doing that. And of course, then the Leader of 

the Opposition got up too. And I was absolutely stunned by the 

comments from the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Their response to this potash deal was that nationalization and 

increasing royalties, not only for the potash industry but for the 

oil industry. That is their answer to this. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

know the people of my constituency are very, very concerned 

about that. But you know what? I guess maybe given where he 

is in the polls, he doesn’t figure he has anything to lose. And if 

he can . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — He can afford to lose a few points. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — He really can’t afford to lose any points. But 

you know, I don’t know, maybe there’s an audience he was 

trying to appeal to; I can’t imagine who. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I take my seat, I just want to take time now 

to pay tribute to our war veterans. Remembrance Day is this 

Thursday, and our appreciation and gratitude to these gentlemen 

and women should not be limited to November 11th. We should 

be so thankful every day of the year for the sacrifice they have 

made, a sacrifice that has allowed me to get up and make the 

comments that I have this afternoon, because without what they 

did for our country, that wouldn’t be possible. 

 

So I do want to take this opportunity to thank them. And all 

those who are serving in the armed forces today, I say, thank 

you and God bless you all. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I will be 

supporting the motion put forward by the member from 

Melfort. I will not support the amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose, the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

a pleasure for me to rise today in this House and join in the 

debate on the Speech from the Throne. The first issue I want to 

discuss today, Mr. Speaker, is potash, what happened last week. 

Mr. Speaker, the province was watching; the country was 

watching; indeed the entire world was watching. And Mr. 

Speaker, I am so proud to serve under this Premier. Mr. 

Speaker, he clearly, emphatically, and eloquently made the case 

for the Saskatchewan people. And, Mr. Speaker, the federal 

government listened. He did an amazing job. He makes me 

proud to be a Sask Party MLA and have him as my leader. 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, he makes me proud to be a citizen of this 

great province and have him for our Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as many of my colleagues have done, I want to 

congratulate our newest colleague in this Assembly, the MLA 

from Saskatoon Northwest. Mr. Speaker, he is going to be a 

tremendous MLA. He has a great background, successful in his 

career, very popular city councillor, and now a Member of the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to help out a little bit during 

the by-election, and just a few things popped into my head. First 

of all, what a tremendous campaign team he had. They ran a 

phenomenal organization. And secondly, Mr. Speaker, I was 

door knocking, and it became abundantly clear to me very early 

as I was out knocking on doors just how well known and how 

highly regarded this member is. Mr. Speaker, I look forward to 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5879 

having the opportunity of working with him for many, many 

years to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the Throne Speech debate, MLAs typically 

acknowledge family, friends, supporters who have helped them. 

And I have a lot of people that I need to thank. To start with, the 

good people of the Rosetown-Elrose constituency. Mr. Speaker, 

I am so honoured and privileged to serve them in their 

legislature. This has been just the experience of a lifetime for 

me, and I will be forever indebted to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge the support that my family 

has given me in the past. My wife Bonnie, my mother Elizabeth 

Reiter in Unity, my sister Laura and her husband, Eldon 

Schwab, in Wilkie. And my brother Ken Reiter and his wife 

Debbie and my nephews Jeremy and Justin who live in 

Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoke about my nephews in this Assembly 

before and, you know, like all families, I guess not everything’s 

perfect. We do have some dark side to the family, I guess. Both 

my nephews are Edmonton Eskimo fans. And Mr. Speaker, I’ve 

been working on that. But I just want to share with you, the 

game on the weekend I was texting an awful lot with my 

nephew Jeremy as the game was going on. But for some reason 

as it neared the end, I think his battery in his BlackBerry must 

have went dead, Mr. Speaker. But I’ll continue to work on that. 

We’ll convert them yet. 

 

I’d also like to mention my uncle, Arnold Schultz in Unity. I’ve 

also mentioned him in this Assembly before, and I know he 

watches the proceedings here with a great deal of interest, and I 

just want to mention him and hope he’s doing well. 

 

And also my Aunt Jean, Jean Cooper. She also takes a great 

interest in politics. And I just saw her the other day to celebrate 

her birthday with her. It was great to see her, and I want to 

acknowledge her today. 

 

My constituency executive, Mr. Speaker. They do a great deal 

of work for me throughout the year. I just want to express my 

appreciation to them. Too numerous to mention by name, but I 

do want to mention two people in particular, Doug and Polly 

Orth. They’re good friends of mine from Rosetown. They are 

just . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, the member 

from Regina Rosemont keeps talking from his seat. I’m not sure 

what’s happening there. 

 

He seems a little grumpy these days. I don’t know what’s on his 

mind. He’s been that way ever since he decided to verbally spar 

with the Deputy Premier first question period. He didn’t fare 

too well, Mr. Speaker. I would have assumed he would have 

known better than to attempt that, and he’s been a little grumpy 

ever since. And he looks different, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure. 

He looks different than the billboards. I’m not sure what it is. 

Maybe a new tie. I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Anyway I was mentioning two people from my constituency 

executive, Mr. Speaker, Doug and Polly Orth. They’ve been 

just fantastic people, great supporters. They’re always first to 

help out with constituency events. I go back to the election, and 

Polly did a great deal of work in the campaign office and Doug 

door knocked with me virtually every day of the campaign. 

The reason I’m singling those two people out, Mr. Speaker, is 

because they’re going to be moving. Not too far away; we’ll 

still stay close. But a bit of a sad day for me mentioning that, 

Mr. Speaker, and I just want to mention I’ve just been truly 

blessed to have them as friends. 

 

Also want to mention staff, Mr. Speaker, my constituency 

assistant in Rosetown, Kathie Parry, and my staff in the office 

here: Jason Wall, my chief of staff; my ministerial assistants, 

Ashley Anderson and Jarret Coells; and Karalee Croissant, our 

admin person. Karalee sadly will be leaving us soon. She’s 

moving on to bigger and better things, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy 

for her, I’m sad for me, and I truly appreciate all the good work 

that she’s done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just a few highlights of the last few months of 

constituency events that I’ve had the opportunity to take part in. 

Mr. Speaker, just a few highlights, as I said. Rosetown fall 

festival just recently, on October the 9th. We had a fantastic 

weekend. The organizing committee was headed up by a 

gentleman from Rosetown named Hugh Lees who does just a 

great deal of work in our community, and we’re just very lucky 

to have him. We had a great weekend, including, on October 

the 9th, if you can imagine, a parade. And it turned out the 

weather was absolutely beautiful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact I was texting with the member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy, the Minister of Environment, and he sent me a text 

saying, who would have a parade in October in Saskatchewan? 

But, Mr. Speaker, our organizing committee took the risk and it 

paid off big time. It was just an absolutely beautiful event, great 

turnout, and they did a tremendous job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last few months I also had the opportunity 

to attend trade fairs in a couple of other communities in my 

constituency, in Beechy and Lucky Lake. And it’s always good 

to get out to those events, have an opportunity to speak to many 

of our constituents. Those were terrific. 

 

Also an event that was kind of near and dear to my heart, 100th 

anniversary in Fiske, the hamlet of Fiske, which is in the RM 

[rural municipality] of Pleasant Valley, the former employer of 

mine, the RM I worked for, for many years. Mr. Speaker, it was 

a great weekend, great supporters. I took part in the parade. 

They had a pancake breakfast. People of that community, I 

can’t say enough for. They are just tremendous people, great 

community people. And they put on a great show. 

 

Hundredth anniversaries — there was a number of those around 

the constituency this year. And one of them was the RM of 

Marriott — again my employer that I worked for, for many 

years. They had an event out at the RM shop at the hamlet of 

Marriott and it was attended by a lot of people. And it was just a 

great event and I want to acknowledge them. 

 

Also the RM of Harris, the neighbouring municipality, had a 

100th anniversary this summer. And the administrator there is a 

good friend of mine, Jim Angus, who’s also my co-campaign 

Chair and our constituency vice-president — does a great deal 

of work and I want to acknowledge him. 

 

[14:45] 

 



5880 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

I’m also looking forward to another 100th anniversary still to 

come in December in the RM of St. Andrews, with offices also 

in Rosetown. I have a number of friends on that council and I 

look forward to that as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, probably the highlight of the last few months of 

constituency events is, I go back to May, I believe it was, and I 

had the opportunity to tour my constituency with the Premier. It 

was a fantastic day, Mr. Speaker. It was a whirlwind tour. We 

got out to as many communities as we could. We went to 

Beechy, where we had a meeting with community leaders. We 

were in Lucky Lake, where we met with the town and RM 

councils. We went to Outlook, where we also met with the town 

council and some community leaders, had lunch with them. Had 

a great hour or so in the Outlook school. The Premier spoke to 

the students there and was very well received, Mr. Speaker. 

He’s so popular. 

 

Interesting story happened that day I have to tell you about, was 

when the Premier was done speaking and was done with the 

question-and-answer, the kids didn’t let him go. They 

surrounded him and started asking him for his autograph. So he 

was signing things for them. And one little boy came up and 

handed him a pen and asked him if he’d sign his shirt. And the 

Premier looked and kind of chuckled and the little boy was 

wearing a pretty nice new shirt. And he said, I don’t think your 

mom would like that; I think I’d better sign something else. So 

he signed a business card and gave it to him. 

 

The next little girl came up and she had her running shoe off, 

her sneaker, and asked him if he’d sign that. So he kind of 

laughed, autographed the running shoe, and that started it, the 

tidal wave. There was a lineup of kids getting their sneakers 

autographed by the Premier. And I don’t mind telling you, Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t mind riding the Premier’s coattails. I even 

autographed a few sneakers myself after he was done. Mr. 

Speaker, it was a great day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was not that long ago that Saskatchewan was 

considered a have-not province. We typically trailed almost all 

the other provinces in most major economic indicators. Under 

the NDP, thousands of our young people left the province each 

and every year in search of opportunity. My, how things have 

changed. Now Saskatchewan is a have province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve spent my entire life in Saskatchewan, and 

I’ve never seen such optimism. There’s now over 16,000 more 

people that have come to Saskatchewan within the past year to 

live, to work, and to raise their families. Saskatchewan’s 

population has now grown by more than 50,000 people since 

2007. And as a province, we are now at or near the top of 

almost every major economic category in the country, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We lead all provinces in population growth at 1.6 per cent 

annually. There’s now 6,300 more people working in the 

province than a year ago. And that number will continue to rise 

as Saskatchewan has an unemployment rate of 5.7 per cent, 

second lowest amongst the provinces. 

 

Not only are there more people working in Saskatchewan, but 

they’re making more money as well. The average wages paid to 

workers across Saskatchewan is up 5 per cent. Mr. Speaker, all 

this translates into Saskatchewan jumping from eighth place to 

second place in the Fraser Institute’s ranking of best performing 

labour markets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, things are improving in Saskatchewan. An 

example, Mr. Speaker: the value of building permits issued 

throughout Saskatchewan in the month of August alone totalled 

$176 million. That’s an increase of sixteen and a half per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s population’s on the rise, average 

wages are on the rise, and development is on the rise. And this 

positive trend will continue as RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] 

projects Saskatchewan’s real gross domestic product to grow by 

6.3 per cent in the coming year. Saskatchewan is now on a new 

road. In just three short years, our government, with the help of 

the Saskatchewan people, has been able to accomplish so much 

in what seems like such a short period of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, three years ago we made a number of promises to 

the people of Saskatchewan, and we’re determined to keep 

those promises. We’ve reduced surgical wait time for hip and 

knee replacements by 71 per cent. We’ve now passed our goal 

of hiring 800 new nurses. With 830 new nurses now working in 

the province, that’s another promise kept, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 

committed $200 million in funding to the development of a new 

children’s hospital. That’s another promise kept, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to stand here and be a part of a 

government that’s willing to take the road less travelled. 

 

Throughout my constituency, there are many people affected by 

MS, some of whom are my family and close friends. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to mention one person in particular, a good 

friend of mine from Rosetown, Watson McGregor. He’s 

travelled out of country twice now for liberation treatment. And 

I just want him to know how much I admire his courage as he 

continues his battle. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has one of the highest rates of MS, 

not only in Canada but in the world. Our government’s $5 

million commitment to fund clinical trials of the liberation 

treatment is a road less travelled. I have no idea what the travels 

will reveal, but I do know that the large number of MS patients 

in Saskatchewan deserve the answers. 

 

Our government believes that Saskatchewan should be a leader 

among provinces. Our government is doing things differently. 

Mr. Speaker, our government believes that more money belongs 

in the pockets of Saskatchewan people. And that’s why we 

committed to reducing the education portion of property tax. 

Since 2008, our government will have reduced the education 

portion of property tax by an average of 20 per cent, and for 

agriculture land, it’s 80 per cent. I had the good fortune to play 

a role in the property tax changes as legislative secretary to the 

Deputy Premier, who did just a great job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, past governments promised but wouldn’t follow 

through. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the former premier of the 

province as leader of the members opposite, I can remember in 

years when I was on the SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities] board, he attended the SARM convention 

and it was a hot topic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can still remember the speech he gave when he told the 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5881 

crowd that when it came to education tax on property, the status 

quo is not on. Mr. Speaker, I was there. We were excited. We 

expected changes. A year later, Mr. Speaker, he came, spoke 

again, and what did he tell us? The status quo is not on. He told 

us the same thing again, Mr. Speaker, and what happened? 

Absolutely nothing. Mr. Speaker, our government addressed the 

issue. That’s another promise kept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government believes in making life more 

affordable for Saskatchewan citizens. That’s why we committed 

to the largest single-year income tax reduction in the province’s 

history. Mr. Speaker, those are just a few examples how we’re 

moving Saskatchewan forward on the new road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now I just want to take a few minutes and discuss 

some of the things that are going within the ministry I’m 

responsible for, Highways and Infrastructure. Mr. Speaker, I 

had a very nice day on Friday. I was out in the community of 

Lancer for the announcement and the official ribbon cutting of 

Highway No. 32, along with my friend and colleague, the 

member from Cypress Hills. Mr. Speaker, it was a great event. 

Those people are so excited to have a highway to drive on. It’s 

going to do great things in that area, not only for public safety, 

but also for economic development, Mr. Speaker. It was just a 

tremendous day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I recently, just a few weeks ago, had the 

opportunity to be in Halifax for a meeting of transportation 

ministers from across the country. And it amazed me how, 

outside of the meetings, just chatting with people from all over 

the country, how so many people when they heard we were 

from Saskatchewan made comments about how well 

Saskatchewan’s doing, how things have been booming the last 

few years. It’s great to hear, Mr. Speaker. People across the 

country are recognizing what’s happening in our province. 

 

I had the opportunity at that meeting to make the case for 

flexibility and infrastructure projects that might be delayed 

because of weather. I was pleased to hear Minister Strahl speak 

to that. And I also had the opportunity to raise and speak about 

the New West Partnership which, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues 

from across the country are also extremely interested in it and 

are watching. 

 

During the election campaign, we promised to spend $1.8 

billion on highways during our first four-year term. Mr. 

Speaker, we are now in our third year, and we’re already at $1.7 

billion. Mr. Speaker, we will far exceed that promise. The three 

largest single highways and infrastructure budgets in the history 

of this province are the first three budgets under this 

government. Mr. Speaker, we far exceeded any previous 

budgets by the members opposite. That’s allowed us to tender a 

huge amount of construction. Work on 1129 kilometres of 

construction was tendered in the past year and, Mr. Speaker, 

almost 800 kilometres of maintenance and safety improvements 

were also completed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the administration of the members opposite, 

highways crumbled and deteriorated until we were the laughing 

stock of the country. Mr. Speaker, under the NDP government, 

people had to slow down for potholes; under a Sask Party 

government, people are slowing down for construction. Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve done a lot, but we still have a long way to go. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to touch on what was a difficult 

summer weather-wise. We saw Highway 1 west of Maple 

Creek washout due to unprecedented rainfall. I had the 

opportunity within hours of that to tour with the Premier and the 

Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. And I’m 

very pleased with the response from our ministry employees 

and outside contractors who acted quickly to deal with this. 

 

I’d like to read a quote from Al Rosseker, Mr. Speaker. He’s the 

executive director of the Saskatchewan Trucking Association. 

And his quote, Mr. Speaker, is: 

 

The Saskatchewan Trucking Association commends the 

highways ministry and the leadership shown in resolving 

a major disruption of truck traffic on what can readily be 

described as a crucial economic corridor in western 

Canada. The ministry’s proactive planning and 

communications approach contributed greatly to resolving 

a situation that had effectively shut down 

long-combination vehicular traffic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we certainly appreciate Al’s comments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, economic development is a priority of this 

government and I also have the privilege of being Minister 

Responsible for the Global Transportation Hub. Mr. Speaker, 

under the administration of the members opposite, as I 

mentioned earlier, thousands of youth left each and every year. 

They moved to Alberta mostly because there were no jobs here. 

Now people are moving back. And initiatives such as the GTH 

[Global Transportation Hub] are helping. 

 

The GTH will have an initial impact of 3 to 400 jobs in the 

winter of 2010-11 alone. And it has the potential to create up to 

1,500 more jobs by 2014. Mr. Speaker, this isn’t hypothetical. 

It’s real and it’s tangible. Hundreds of people were hired at a 

job fair just a few weeks ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has always had this amazing 

potential, Mr. Speaker, we’re beginning to live up to it. Our 

government wants to make a better Saskatchewan today, 

tomorrow, and for future generations. That’s why we’ve chosen 

to take the path less travelled. That’s why we’re fully 

committed to moving Saskatchewan forward on the new road. 

That’s why, Mr. Speaker, I am not supporting the amendment, 

but I am very proud to support the Speech from the Throne. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to weigh in on this year’s Throne Speech debate and 

bring some levity to the House here today, Mr. Speaker, bring 

some honesty, and bring the real circumstances that are 

affecting Saskatchewan people. 

 

We hear about the new road that the Minister of Highways 

believes to be on. But, Mr. Speaker, we think he’s in the ditch, 

Mr. Speaker. We think that that Minister of Highways is in the 

ditch. And I know, I believe I just looked in The Estevan 

Mercury here this week, and in fact there’s huge concern for 

that Minister of Highways as it relates to Highway 39. And 



5882 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

quite simply what they’re looking for is they’re looking for a 

plan of action. And they’re sick and tired of the rhetoric coming 

from that government on that front, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I do want to enter into this debate honourably and in a 

process that allows me to make mention of the very special 

people in my life, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to thank my wife 

Stephanie for all the love and support that she provides to our 

household, Mr. Speaker, the advice. And she’s very wise and 

astute, Mr. Speaker, and even provides some exceptional advice 

on the files and the important issues that matter to 

Saskatchewan people on a daily basis. Of course, she’s a middle 

years school teacher, Mr. Speaker, works incredibly hard. I say 

hello to her students and to her here today, and I wish her well, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I thank our broader families as well. And I know each and every 

one of us are always . . . appreciate the opportunity to do that, 

everyone of us in this Assembly. It’s those friends and family 

that are so close to us that provide us the foundations that have 

provided us these opportunities and the solid footing to speak 

on these issues, but also the support, Mr. Speaker, within our 

lives. And our families, both on my wife’s side of the family 

and my side of the family, are fully engaged and supportive. 

And we’re blessed and lucky for that, Mr. Speaker. And I think 

of the special little nephews I have on both sides, both of my 

sisters. They make our lives pretty special, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’d just like to give a quick message to my grandmother at 

home today, Mr. Speaker, who’s got a new set of knees, Mr. 

Speaker, who has got some spring back in her step, and I know 

will be looking forward to spring to plant her garden. And I 

wish her well. And in thinking about my grandmother there, 

certainly in the year of Remembrance Day, or the time of 

Remembrance Day, I think of my grandfather who’s passed 

away many years ago, but who served with Regina Rifles of 

course in World War II, Mr. Speaker, and did so honourably. 

Great memories there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d like to thank my constituency assistant, Donna From, Mr. 

Speaker, for the support that she provides to our constituents, 

Mr. Speaker. And I know on a daily basis we have so many 

different types of issues that are engaged within, in that office, 

individuals who are looking to right an injustice or looking for 

some resolution to some challenges within their life. And 

Donna From provides just such exceptional support to those 

individuals and is such a strong liaison between myself and the 

constituents. And we work together as a very strong team, I’d 

like to believe, Mr. Speaker. And it’s been my honour to work 

with somebody who’s so committed to doing the work for the 

public for all the right reasons, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:00] 

 

I would like to thank my constituents, Mr. Speaker. We have 

got a very special constituency and very special constituents, 

Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank them for their involvement both 

in the democratic process, in the number of phone calls and 

emails and meetings that they engage with myself as their 

member on, Mr. Speaker, the number of invitations to join them 

in what’s important to them in our communities, Mr. Speaker, 

and as well for the community leadership that they provide, Mr. 

Speaker, within our community. 

I think of those leaders within our community associations, 

those individuals that are working so hard to better our 

communities, whether that be the refurbishment of parks within 

our area — one specifically in McNab, Mr. Speaker, who have 

just done a wonderful job of planting trees and taking back a 

park that had been somewhat abandoned for a period of time, 

Mr. Speaker — and it’s their leadership that makes our 

community something so very special. 

 

Leadership on the front of constituents who have graffiti 

removal programs, Mr. Speaker, that in fact make our 

community have the feel, Mr. Speaker, that it’s taken care of. 

And it is. One that sets out from the very moment that you enter 

within it that individuals care about the area for which they live. 

They care about the way that it looks. They also care about the 

individuals within it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d like to think about the number of individuals who are 

leaders as coaches as it relates to recreation and culture and arts 

within our constituency, Mr. Speaker, who simply enrich the 

lives of so many in our community. And that’s not just what we 

think of when we think of children, we also think of seniors, 

Mr. Speaker, and the amount of enrichment that these 

individuals provide our community and my constituents. 

 

When we look at, even broader, some of the interfaith 

community — the church community within our constituency 

— I want to thank those leaders for the betterment of our 

community. And I certainly want to thank the schools and the 

teachers and the parent leaders that involve themselves in 

education of students, Mr. Speaker. It’s a special, special group 

of individuals who come together in our schools and make the 

lives better for our youngest generation and the future of this 

province. 

 

I would like to specifically thank my executive, Mr. Speaker, a 

very special group of men and women, leaders within our 

community, and for the very special events that we’re able to 

conduct within Rosemont, Mr. Speaker, whether that be 

outreach to make sure we’re understanding the issues in a very 

significant way, or the work on the policy development side, 

Mr. Speaker. But further to that is well, we have a team that 

really enjoys doing work as it relates to bringing together the 

community in a very enjoyable kind of a fashion. 

 

We just recently had the Rosemont pie festival, Mr. Speaker. 

The pies were fantastic. I couldn’t even pick a winner, Mr. 

Speaker, but I did endeavour to eat almost every one of the pies 

that were there, Mr. Speaker, and just a special opportunity. 

Further to that, we generally go out and we’ve had, certainly 

had our summer barbecue and all these regular activities that 

just simply bring good people together, Mr. Speaker, to talk 

about the issues that matter to them, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

where I am able to bring that message back to this legislature. 

 

I would like to welcome the newest member of this legislature, 

the new member for Saskatoon Northwest. I was going to then 

say his name, and I know I can’t do that. But he and his family 

are certainly respected leaders within our province. And I know 

I got out on the doorsteps a couple of times as well, Mr. 

Speaker, during his by-election. And I know I heard quite often 

that in fact constituents felt they had a strong candidate in the 

candidate that’s been elected here and the new MLA. And I 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5883 

want to wish him well. I know he’ll take his responsibilities 

with the kind of sincerity that one must. And I know he’ll 

endeavour to provide the greatest level of service and honesty 

on behalf of his constituents. And I welcome him to this 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I move on to some of the more 

broad-ranging pieces and specifically within the Throne 

Speech, I’d like to mention two specific aspects that are 

important to my constituency that I would be remiss not to 

mention and advocate for, and I know we’ve been continuing to 

do that. 

 

But specifically, the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 

museum within my constituency, Mr. Speaker, is a national 

treasure. A beautiful architectural marvel, Mr. Speaker, but it 

goes much further than that. It highlights the red serge in all of 

its glory and pride, and rightful pride, Mr. Speaker, both 

nationally and within our province certainly, but internationally, 

Mr. Speaker. And we are failing to support this very important 

institution. 

 

In fact, it’s a shame and it sometimes is common when we see 

this kind of failing, Mr. Speaker. But we see a beautiful 

building get built, and then we don’t have the subsequent 

support to make sure that it is able to flourish the way that it 

should. And we’re going to continue to advocate as we have in 

this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, as New Democrats, and I certainly 

will as the constituency MLA, to make sure that we can make 

sure that this institution, this museum is on as solid a footing as 

it should be. 

 

It’s really too bad that it actually hasn’t been designated a 

national museum. And we’re going to have to look at all those 

avenues. I ask, actually, for co-operation of all members within 

this Assembly to make sure that the RCMP museum is on the 

footing it should be, solid footing, and being able to highlight 

the red serge and the history of the RCMP to our world and to 

our province, its great history in the manner that it should. And 

it’s a shame right now that it’s struggling for funding. 

 

On a secondary piece, within Regina Rosemont something 

that’s very, very important and a place that I’ve many, many 

friends and those that stay connected to our discussions here, 

Mr. Speaker, is the Pioneer Village, Mr. Speaker, a seniors care 

facility within Rosemont. This facility is transferred over into 

the Health Ministry, Mr. Speaker. And the reality is, that there’s 

wonderful people in this institution. There’s wonderful people 

that are cared for in this institution. There’s wonderful 

leadership within this institution. 

 

But we need to make sure that the infrastructure needs within 

that facility are taken care of. And making sure that our seniors 

that come from all across the province . . . It’s not a matter of 

providing senior care for those in Regina Rosemont. This is a 

facility that provides senior care, Mr. Speaker, for people from 

your constituency and the member from Melville and the 

member from Meadow Lake — from all across the province — 

that come and spend their last years, Mr. Speaker, in this place. 

We need to make sure we’re supporting that facility in every 

way we can and supporting the lives of those seniors, those 

residents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to say a word, Mr. Speaker. One of the very 

significant, ongoing activities of the official opposition lead by 

our leader, Mr. Speaker, is a province-wide outreach. And 

across the province in communities large and small, urban and 

rural, Mr. Speaker, we as the official opposition of 

Saskatchewan have endeavoured to make sure that the pulse of 

Saskatchewan people is listened to, to make sure that their 

needs have been identified, and that in fact resolutions and 

mechanisms to resolve those problems are sought, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On an ongoing basis, Mr. Speaker, we bring those issues that 

we’re bringing out of those meetings with incredible people 

across this province to both this Chamber but also through news 

release and advocating on their behalf. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

see many, many challenges that aren’t being addressed by this 

government. But the time that we spend criss-crossing this 

province — whether you’re holding meetings in RM offices or 

out on the farm gate in some capacity or with local businesses 

all across the province or with municipalities and their leaders 

from towns and villages and cities to working people, Mr. 

Speaker, right across the piece, to seniors and health care — it’s 

a great responsibility when you are provided the opportunity to 

speak for these individuals. 

 

And certainly here today it’s my opportunity to bring that 

message to this Assembly, and I’m proud to do so, Mr. Speaker. 

And as I do so, I think of the many, many meetings that we’re 

holding on an ongoing basis, sort of in a sleeves-rolled-up 

fashion that we conduct ourselves in as the opposition New 

Democrats. 

 

And we go into corners, Mr. Speaker. We don’t care whether 

it’s . . . When individuals call to meet with us, we don’t care 

whether or not it’s a conservative Sask Party member, as such, 

down in Estevan that holds that seat or whether it’s someone of 

any other party. We head down and hold those meetings. And 

it’s very important because actually what we understand, Mr. 

Speaker, is that many of the MLAs opposite, in fact in those 

Sask Party conservative ridings, in fact are no longer meeting 

with constituents who have a desire to have their issues heard. 

 

And I don’t want to pigeonhole every last member into that 

category, Mr. Speaker, but more often than not the calls that I 

have coming into my office, Mr. Speaker, begin with the fact 

that they had made contact with one of their members and that 

after week after week after week — and in many cases months, 

and in some cases over a year, Mr. Speaker — that they can’t 

get a return call. And it’s not as though it’s just made one 

contact, Mr. Speaker, it’s many, many attempts to do that. 

 

So as we’ve been out across the province meeting with 

individuals and RMs and community leaders, what we’re 

hearing as most critical to our province right now and as 

failings of the Saskatchewan Party government, this Sask Party 

government, is in health care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this government rode into office with simple promises on 

this. Straightforward commitments, Mr. Speaker, something 

they’ve failed to deliver on, Mr. Speaker. And it’s caused no 

end of grief for members opposite, nor should it, Mr. Speaker, 

because members of various communities across Saskatchewan 

took those members at their word. When they said they were 

going to fix the rural doctor shortage, Mr. Speaker, they 



5884 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

believed them. And they gave them that opportunity to go out 

and set a plan and to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we see is a government in fact though — the Sask Party 

government — that has failed rural health care across 

Saskatchewan. We see a government that has gone backwards 

as it relates to rural doctor shortages. In fact we see 

circumstances across this province that are exacerbated, Mr. 

Speaker. Specifically, I regularly conduct meetings throughout 

the Southeast, Mr. Speaker, and I know now we see regular, 

regular bidding wars, Mr. Speaker, that are now going on within 

this province. 

 

And we see municipalities that are now having to take that local 

tax dollar, Mr. Speaker, to provide the very service as it relates 

to a doctor or medical services within their community, Mr. 

Speaker. And this isn’t their responsibility. Now they’ll do it 

because they care about their community. They’ll do it because 

they know they can affect some change, Mr. Speaker. But that’s 

the responsibility of the provincial government, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s the responsibility of this Sask Party Premier who has 

failed rural Saskatchewan on this front, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now we see in fact sort of a unique circumstance of double 

taxation, Mr. Speaker, where municipalities are taxing their 

citizens and bidding with other communities and outbidding 

other communities and in conflict with other communities, Mr. 

Speaker, to bid on services that should simply be taken care of 

by the provincial government. Mr. Speaker, and that’s too bad. 

 

We see surgical wait times, Mr. Speaker. We don’t see the kind 

of advance on this front that we should be, Mr. Speaker. We see 

individuals languishing on wait-lists, Mr. Speaker. We know in 

the Premier’s own riding the numbers have and the wait times 

have dramatically increased, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This isn’t the kind of leadership that Saskatchewan people 

thought they were getting when they elected the slick-talking 

member from Swift Current who offered them great promise on 

that front, Mr. Speaker. What they see are broken promises. 

Broken promises, Mr. Speaker. And what they’re learning is 

that you can’t trust, Mr. Speaker, many of the commitments 

made by this government. You can’t trust the Saskatchewan 

Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look across this community, we see long-term health, 

Mr. Speaker. There might not be anything more important to 

many individuals, certainly not any more important when 

you’re getting to a point when you’re planning for your family, 

to be looking at long-term health care, Mr. Speaker. This Sask 

Party government announced 13 rural projects back just a year 

and a half ago, Mr. Speaker. All those projects now have been 

put on the shelf, Mr. Speaker, because of a government that let 

its finances hit the ditch. Mr. Speaker, put themselves into 

deficit, and in fact then told the health regions to spend the 

money that they had transferred for those health care facilities 

on operational expenses because they had mismanaged the 

finances. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people shouldn’t be the ones 

to pay the cost, pay the price for this Premier’s and this Sask 

Party mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. Yet they’re the ones that 

are bearing that burden. 

And those 13 facilities, Mr. Speaker, what we recognize that the 

contribution at the local level is still 35 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

And I raise this today, and the member from Estevan addressed 

this today in the Chamber here, Mr. Speaker. Now the problem 

with the 35 per cent local contribution, Mr. Speaker, is, one, 

many of these communities have already met that level. 

They’ve worked incredibly hard — held bake sales, community 

projects — to get that money in place. But then they had their 

money transfer from the province, which is now . . . basically 

it’s been clawed back or deferred or punted as a result of the 

financial mismanagement. Other communities that are still 

working incredibly hard to raise that money, Mr. Speaker — 

and we’re talking about millions of dollars for communities like 

Radville and Kipling and Redvers, Mr. Speaker — these aren’t 

small dollars, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Yet but at the same time as we see that going on, Mr. Speaker, 

we see a one-off sweetheart deal go on in Saskatoon where $27 

million is being one-time secured to one institution, one facility 

in Saskatoon. This facility has jumped ahead of the queue, Mr. 

Speaker, of all of those other 13 facilities, Mr. Speaker. And 

guess, Mr. Speaker, guess how much that facility in Saskatoon 

had to fundraise locally. You would expect that it would be 35 

per cent because that’s the norm across Saskatchewan. That’s 

what they’re asking the community of Radville to do. That’s 

what they’re asking the community of Redvers to do. That’s 

what they’re asking the community of Kipling to do, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But guess how much this Sask Party government asked this 

project to be provided by locally. The answer, Mr. Speaker? 

Zero. Zero. So we see a project in Saskatoon that jumps the 

queue ahead of all of these other projects that have been punted 

and put on the shelf, Mr. Speaker, and in fact they’ve ripped up 

the formula for what a local community has to put onto the 

table. 

 

But not for those rural projects, Mr. Speaker, that are still out 

there working hard. Likely this weekend here coming up, long 

weekend, many people will be coming home, and they’ll likely 

be holding many of their bake sales and many of the charities 

and projects to bring those dollars together. 

 

And I go down and I meet down there at the Marian Health 

Centre down in Radville, and I see that facility and the need of 

that upgrade and the community leadership that has put that 

community in a position to be able to finally upgrade that 

project. And it doesn’t sit well, Mr. Speaker, with those 

community leaders when they see this kind of treatment, a 

sweetheart deal that jumps the queue in Saskatoon, Mr. 

Speaker. And we’re going to take this government to task for 

what we see as inequitable and unfair treatment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Across the piece, Mr. Speaker, long-term care is a concern. And 

I am going to spend a little bit more time in a circumstance in 

Wawota, specifically, where we see both the terrible math and 

financial mismanagement of the Wall government — my 

apologies, the Sask Party government — in action, Mr. Speaker, 

with the cuts to five beds in Wawota, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to 

spend some time speaking to that. But I never want to miss the 

point to speak for those fine community leaders within Wawota 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5885 

who are fighting, Mr. Speaker, for the livelihood of their 

communities and for the most common sense use of those beds, 

Mr. Speaker, that are now sitting empty in their space to be 

utilized for those community members. Mr. Speaker, a facility 

that has a wait-list, Mr. Speaker, a wait-list, yet they’re cutting 

those and going to build sweetheart deals in Saskatoon, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we talk about health care and then we talk about the cost of 

living, Mr. Speaker. And this is where there’s a huge 

disconnect, Mr. Speaker, with the out-of-touch Premier for the 

Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, and Saskatchewan people; 

Saskatchewan people that are working and trying to build their 

lives in Saskatchewan and that are getting hit on every side by 

the growing costs of living. 

 

And I see young people. I see the Pages that are sitting in here 

today, Mr. Speaker, and I think of the lives that they have 

before them here as they try to find housing for themselves and 

navigate and move forward into the world ahead of them here; 

as they’re paying tuition, I suspect, Mr. Speaker; as they’re 

looking at home ownership. And there is a huge barrier and 

burden that has been placed on this generation, Mr. Speaker, by 

the Saskatchewan Party. A young group of people who are 

going to be the leaders in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And housing is a concern across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

And I know many of the members from the Sask Party shout 

across, well, housing isn’t a problem in my constituency, is 

what they offer. Many of the members from the Sask Party say 

that housing costs are not a problem in their areas. 

 

What I know from meetings across Saskatchewan — whether 

I’m in North Battleford through Carlyle to Weyburn, right 

across the piece — whether it’s rent or whether it’s housing on 

the house purchase side, Mr. Speaker, there’s very big barriers 

and huge stress placed on families and young people and 

seniors, Mr. Speaker, and a huge pressure on the middle class, 

Mr. Speaker. A huge pressure. 

 

I hear the member from Lloydminster shouting out from his 

seat suggesting that there’s no problem with housing 

affordability in Lloydminster. Mr. Speaker, I suspect, I suspect, 

Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Is that, is that what 

I suspect? Is that what you’re trying to offer?  

 

What I would offer to the member from Lloydminster, now a 

minister, Mr. Speaker, is that he needs to understand the 

priorities of Saskatchewan people and certainly his constituents, 

Mr. Speaker. Housing, Mr. Speaker, is a huge burden for 

families and for the many, Mr. Speaker. And for a member to 

arrogantly dismiss it as the out-of-touch Premier, Mr. Speaker, 

does, is disappointing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look across the piece we see the increases that we’ve 

seen in utilities, Mr. Speaker, over the last two years that 

compound with housing, Mr. Speaker, as a result there the . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . The minister who’s now heckling 

from Lloydminster is the Minister from the Crowns. If he goes 

back and now goes and looks at his files, what he’s going to 

recognize is that huge equity has been stripped out of his Crown 

corporations unrightfully, Mr. Speaker, and irresponsibly. And 

now he’s got a challenge, Mr. Speaker, and the only way he has 

to deal with it is to go back to the consumer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And he should be shamed, Mr. Speaker, as the Minister for 

Crown Investments Corporation, to oversee that kind of gutting 

and stripping of equity, Mr. Speaker. And something that’s 

passed a direct consequence to Saskatchewan people, 

businesses, and communities, whether or not they’re trying to 

heat their business, heat their home, or trying to heat their 

community rink, Mr. Speaker. And we see it in electricity. We 

see it in natural gas. Saskatchewan people have been hit hard by 

the Sask Party’s financial mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. And 

it’s a real burden for Saskatchewan people. 

 

We see the challenges as it relates to post-secondary and tuition 

increases exacerbated by Sask Party financial mismanagement, 

Mr. Speaker. Instead of taking a historic financial opportunity 

and advancing the quality of life in Saskatchewan, we see a 

government that’s relentless on . . . in fact causing challenges to 

the many, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we see this across cost of living. And specifically, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to mention elements of senior care, Mr. 

Speaker, and many individuals on fixed incomes that are now 

seeing extra costs as a result of this government — an 

out-of-touch Premier with the Sask Party and a government that 

can’t manage its finances — are being handed extra costs, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s unfortunate. 

 

I have a whole piece, of course, that I want to spend and look at 

the state of our finances, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to come back 

to that, but of course finances are something that we hear about 

all across this province of huge concern to Saskatchewan 

people. And Saskatchewan people, quite simply, Mr. Speaker, 

just can’t figure out how this government has squandered such a 

historic opportunity, Mr. Speaker. Revenues higher than ever 

before, historic highs in revenues, Mr. Speaker. Billions of 

dollars of surplus handed to this government as they took office, 

and an economy that was furnishing record levels of revenues 

each of those years, Mr. Speaker, to this government. A historic 

opportunity in the billions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. And what do 

we see for it, Mr. Speaker? Well not much, because we see the 

price of mismanagement, Mr. Speaker, and misplaced priorities. 

 

We need to be very aware. We hear regularly, and it would be 

wrong not to bring it to this Assembly, but we are very 

concerned as we hear community and individuals and 

businesses raising concerns about the privatization going on 

under this government, whether that be within the Crown 

corporations, within health care. What they’re standing up and 

saying is they know that it’s not in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people. They know that it’s not going to allow us 

to have the kind of quality of life and achieve the kind of 

circumstance that we’re hoping to as a province, bettering 

ourselves, bettering our proud province as we move forward, 

Mr. Speaker. And it’s too bad to see that agenda being 

advanced so rapidly under this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then we see a government that’s relentless on their attacks 

on working people — on working people, Mr. Speaker. The 

Premier that once said he was going to go to war with the 

working people of this province, Mr. Speaker, and we see that 

this is one of the promises that, shamefully, this Premier has 

fulfilled, Mr. Speaker, that he’s kept. And when you go to war 



5886 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

with the working people, Mr. Speaker, those that toil and labour 

and build your economy, Mr. Speaker, it causes huge harm, 

both to those families, Mr. Speaker, but also to our economy. 

 

And it doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Speaker. When you go to 

war with working people, taking money out of the economy, 

impacting unionized workers and non-unionized workers and of 

course small business, Mr. Speaker, who lose a dollar that 

would be otherwise potentially put into their operation, Mr. 

Speaker, taken out, we see huge concern. 

 

So when that Premier, out of touch, as we say, with 

Saskatchewan people and what is really going to build a 

modern, thriving economy, Mr. Speaker, go to war with 

working people, we say that that’s an absolute shame, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re going to fight him on that one tooth and nail in 

every corner we go. And this is a message we’ll bring to every 

community no matter where we are, Mr. Speaker, because it’s 

one that has to be heard. And it’s something that we’re hearing 

from individuals all across this province and many, many, many 

working people in members opposite’s seats that are going to be 

speaking out and acting out, Mr. Speaker, to stand up for their 

quality of life. 

 

We see a government that has been non-responsive as it relates 

to flooding crises that have hit our province here this summer, 

Mr. Speaker. And I know it was an absolute natural disaster that 

no one can contemplate, Mr. Speaker, when we’re looking at 

the circumstances in Maple Creek or in Yorkton or in Carlyle or 

in North Battleford. All across the piece are cities, Mr. Speaker 

. . . The damage that was done this summer isn’t something that 

you expect or can plan to forecast, Mr. Speaker, but you have to 

be ready to respond to the needs of Saskatchewan people. 

 

I want to say to the resilient leaders in each of those respective 

communities, fantastic work on the work that they’ve done here 

this summer to come together and rally together in a way that 

only Saskatchewan people can do, Mr. Speaker, to repair and 

rehabilitate their communities. 

 

I hear members heckling, Mr. Speaker. I can’t make out quite 

what they’re saying but what they do need to listen to, Mr. 

Speaker, is that these inadequate response that this government 

provided communities this summer . . . And many families in 

communities are still feeling the effects, are impacted and are 

displaced, Mr. Speaker. It’s something that’s of shame, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I know communities like Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, that 

rallied together, and I know we were out there on the ground 

right after the disaster and making sure that community needs 

were advocated for. And I want to just say that the local level 

— the mayor, James Wilson, his committee there, his fire chief, 

his team, Mr. Speaker — did just a fantastic job in rallying 

together and responding to the needs of Saskatchewan people. 

It’s unfortunate that the city and the volunteers and the 

individuals in Yorkton and in all the other affected communities 

didn’t have a willing and dynamic partner at the table in the 

provincial government, Mr. Speaker. But just as Saskatchewan 

people do, Mr. Speaker, they rallied together and they put 

together their communities and homes as best they can. 

 

Now this is far from over though, Mr. Speaker. And as 

highlighted from the member from Regina Dewdney here 

today, we have many families that still don’t have furnaces, that 

have mould throughout their house, Mr. Speaker. That is 

absolutely inadequate when we think of the young children and 

seniors that are in these circumstances. Something that we 

simply shouldn’t tolerate — not a single one of us — that is 

now imposed upon individuals, Mr. Speaker. Many individuals 

that are displaced from their homes without housing as we 

come around, if you can think of it, Mr. Speaker, to the winter 

season. I believe it’s supposed to be minus two on Wednesday 

and snow, Mr. Speaker, and I believe this is just the start. And 

here we have a government that has failed Saskatchewan people 

in communities in such a massive way. 

 

But I do want to say to all the volunteers that came together 

across this province and community leaders to deal with a 

circumstance, in spite of the lack of response from the 

provincial government to assist their communities, I just want 

to say, job well done on their behalf, Mr. Speaker. I was 

absolutely impressed when I was able to join the Yorkton 

emergency response team in their new facility, Mr. Speaker, 

just after the flood, and sit in on the meetings and watch these 

individuals do what they could with the resources that they had, 

Mr. Speaker. And a resourceful bunch they were and committed 

to their community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see failure to address agricultural needs across this 

province, Mr. Speaker. We see that as the inadequate support 

for flooded land and for unseeded land, Mr. Speaker. We hear 

the member from Kindersley heckling here, Mr. Speaker, and 

I’m not sure what he’s saying, Mr. Speaker. But what I know is 

that individuals across Saskatchewan in the agricultural 

community need a response beyond what they’ve received, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve been advocating for $100 an acre for unseeded 

land or flooded land all the way through the summer, Mr. 

Speaker, dragging that Agriculture minister every step of the 

way to get what we can out of him, Mr. Speaker, and asking 

him to make his voice heard with the federal government, Mr. 

Speaker. To date, we’ve seen nothing but weak response from 

that Agriculture minister and absolutely nothing from this 

Premier, Mr. Speaker, who’s out of touch with Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

We noticed that the one day the Premier pulled on a pair of blue 

jeans and headed out to Yorkton area here with the Prime 

Minister, Mr. Speaker, but they didn’t even provide the 

courtesy, Mr. Speaker, to be accountable to the public and to 

either eat, meet with the public, or to answer questions of the 

media, Mr. Speaker. That’s how out of touch, Mr. Speaker, this 

Premier and this Prime Minister in this circumstance, as it 

relates to the agricultural response, Mr. Speaker, have been. 

And that’s unfortunate. 

 

And where we are, we’re in a provincial Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s why I simply call on that Premier to make 

sure the case is made federally, and it hasn’t been to date, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We also see those needs on the side of the livestock producers. 

We heard today specifically again, the leader of the 

Saskatchewan New Democrats, the official opposition, called 

for the adequate support needed — $150 a head to beef 

producers, Mr. Speaker, and as well a program for grassland 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5887 

seeding, Mr. Speaker, that’s been devastated as it relates to 

weather, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on these two circumstances, these aren’t things that you plan 

for. You don’t forecast weather in the sense of knowing that 

you’re going to be devastated with tornado or by flooding. But 

what you have the responsibility as a Premier or as a 

government to do is to respond to the people of your province, 

regardless of the circumstance that you’re dealt. And the 

inadequate and slow response that’s been offered up by this 

Sask Party government has been shameful and disappointing, 

Mr. Speaker, and we need to provide both those communities, 

those families, but also the agricultural producers the support 

that they require, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see many challenges as it relates to employment. And part 

of the challenge is that this Sask Party government, all they 

seem to want to do is trumpet any positive piece they can out of 

any glimmer of positive statistic and try to cheerlead that back 

to the Saskatchewan public. But, Mr. Speaker, that is tough to 

do when many individuals in this province are actually without 

work or in fact underemployed, Mr. Speaker. And the numbers 

speak for themselves. 

 

[15:30] 

 

There’s a massive increase in individuals that are looking for 

work, that are out of work right now, Mr. Speaker. We also see 

a major shift, Mr. Speaker, from full-time work to part-time 

work and in fact casual work, Mr. Speaker. And we have to get 

our heads around this sometimes as we sit in this Assembly. But 

when we’re talking about individuals working two or three jobs, 

Mr. Speaker, and some of those jobs being casual — meaning 

that they can’t even count on the dollars that they are bringing 

in on that front, Mr. Speaker — this is a circumstance that has 

some problematic employment trends, Mr. Speaker. And we see 

an out-of-touch Premier that is more wanting and more willing 

to simply trumpet anything he can and to spin anything he can 

to paint employment in a positive light in Saskatchewan. 

 

What we need is real leadership on this file, Mr. Speaker, to 

identify where we might have some strengths, but then to be 

able to identify that we have this huge group of people that’s 

growing, Mr. Speaker, that’s growing, that are coming into this 

province and not able to find work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it gets to my other point, is that we need to look at the 

circumstance of social assistance right now, Mr. Speaker, and 

we need to look at those numbers. Because the Premier likes to 

talk about people coming into the province, Mr. Speaker, but he 

doesn’t talk very often about the skyrocketing social assistance 

caseloads in this province, Mr. Speaker — more people that 

can’t find employment and in fact are having to rely on the 

public purse, Mr. Speaker, to get by. And this seems to say that 

we need some real leadership on this front, Mr. Speaker, and 

not what we’ve seen to date. 

 

As we see the circumstance in housing, Mr. Speaker, we 

simply, we need to have strong policies on this front. We see 

the huge pressures that folks are dealing with in rent and it’s — 

whether you’re in Kindersley, I know, I look to the member 

from Kindersley; I know that rent is a huge pressure in his 

community — but across Saskatchewan. And I know some 

members of this Assembly from the Sask Party like to pretend 

that somehow housing isn’t a problem, Mr. Speaker. And we 

need to make sure that at the very . . . priority of this 

government is that we’re looking out for the needs of housing 

within our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So those are a few comments I’ve had, Mr. Speaker, within 

each of those areas. But I do want to speak a little bit more to a 

couple of other circumstances. And I see the member . . . I 

guess I can’t speak of a member’s presence within an Assembly 

or not in the Assembly. But I will mention that we have a very 

unfortunate circumstance that’s gone on in Wawota, Mr. 

Speaker, something that amazingly we haven’t seen any 

resolution to, Mr. Speaker. And that would be when this 

government went and cut five beds from Deer View Lodge in 

Wawota, Mr. Speaker. And this has caused a great concern 

within this community, Mr. Speaker, and great outcry. 

 

And what doesn’t make any sense about this, Mr. Speaker — 

and I look to members opposite — is that at the same time as 

they’re cutting five beds in Deer View Lodge in Wawota, 

they’re spending $27 million in Saskatoon to jump the queue of 

all the other rural projects that have been shelved, and to do so 

in a way that doesn’t expect that community to put any sort of a 

community portion forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s inequitable. It’s unfair. But it’s also terrible math, Mr. 

Speaker. And we know that this government is renowned for 

their terrible math, Mr. Speaker, launching us back into debt 

and deficit, miscalculations on revenue forecast, Mr. Speaker. 

Anyways this group is renowned on this front. 

 

But terrible math in the sense that you have beds open in 

Wawota; you have a waiting list for those beds, Mr. Speaker, 

and then you cut them. And they’re going to go and build those 

beds now in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, to the tune of many 

hundreds of thousands of dollars per bed, Mr. Speaker — per 

bed — maybe 200 to $300,000 per bed, Mr. Speaker. Well 

you’ve got beds, Mr. Speaker, in one of these regions, and we 

simply need to leave them open. Now they’ve been closed by 

this government in a irresponsible, foolish cut, Mr. Speaker. 

They need to be reopened. And we’ve been calling for that from 

the moment that they’ve been cut, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I just want to highlight some of the words that the 

community is saying about these cuts. Just as I look here, 

“Wawota residents voice frustrations,” Mr. Speaker. Of course 

this is from the Moosomin World-Spectator, Mr. Speaker. 

You’d be familiar with this fine newspaper. And we see some 

of the comments here of people. Now this is as it relates to the 

actual meeting, Mr. Speaker, and the headline was “Wawota 

residents voice frustration.” The secondary headline was “No 

resolution at Wawota meeting.” Now this was a meeting where 

they expected action, and rightfully so, of their elected 

government, Mr. Speaker. That would be the members of the 

legislature for that region, Mr. Speaker, and the Premier of this 

province, the Sask Party Premier, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But they found no resolution at the Wawota meeting and I know 

. . . I just have a line here says, “The province blamed” is the 

title, and I quote, “Province blamed. Don Dean says he believes 

the provincial government is underfunding health districts.” In 

his quote, “the province is short changing the health districts,” 



5888 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

he said. It goes on, “There’s a lot of lying around the whole 

issue.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m just going to go back to this again 

because this is a community that’s frustrated and angry and 

trying to get resolution to something that should simply be able 

to require leadership of an MLA within the region, Mr. Speaker, 

or the Premier. And what this individual offers in the 

Moosomin Spectator on August 2nd, obviously frustrated in 

trying to lead within his community, he states, “There’s been a 

lot of lying around the whole issue.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a problem. This is a problem, Mr. 

Speaker, and we need resolution. Here in this region itself 

where the member for Cannington’s actually tried to pass the 

buck to the health region, Mr. Speaker, which he hasn’t been 

successful in doing so. There’s actually been two individuals, 

senior leaders within that health region dismissed, Mr. Speaker. 

Those are the individuals who were a part, along with the MLA 

for the region, and of course the Premier and the Finance 

minister who cut the budget, for cutting those beds, Mr. 

Speaker. And you would think that if there was an opportunity 

to fix those beds and to bring those back into operation, it 

would have been once they ended up terminating two senior 

leaders in their health region. Yet we see no leadership from the 

members opposite. 

 

I’ll continue on here with frustrations in July 12th. Now this 

hasn’t been something that just arose and that we’re looking for 

leadership today. This is something that’s been ongoing, and we 

were looking for leadership in July, Mr. Speaker, but we’re still 

looking for leadership today. So we would welcome the 

announcement that those beds are going to be reopened. 

 

From July 12th in the Moosomin World-Spectator, “Wawota 

beds now closed.” That’s the headline. Now what’s important 

about that headline, Mr. Speaker, and it says “Wawota beds 

now closed.” The reason that’s important is because the Health 

minister who just last week revealed that he didn’t know that 

the beds were actually closed. Now this is a problem because 

many of the RMs in the area as well, the Save Our Beds 

committee and many individuals had been writing the Health 

minister all summer long, trying to meet with the Health 

minister, Mr. Speaker, to have their voices heard. And they 

were dismissed every step of the way by that MLA opposite, 

the member from Cannington, Mr. Speaker. They have been 

dismissed all the way along by the Health minister, Mr. 

Speaker, and the Premier. 

 

And that member, the member, the House Leader from the Sask 

Party, did such a poor job of standing up, Mr. Speaker, for these 

residents that his own Health minister didn’t even know that the 

beds were cut. But I’ll verify for the Health minister here today, 

and the member from Cannington who I believe knows the beds 

have been cut: July 12, Wawota beds now closed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’ll move along here, Mr. Speaker, and the community on 

July 12, “Wawota is still fighting bed closures.” So, Mr. 

Speaker, here we have Saskatchewan people that are standing 

up and fighting a government that can’t manage its finances and 

are asking Saskatchewan communities to pay for their own 

mismanagement, Mr. Speaker, their misplaced priorities, at the 

same time as a sweetheart deal in Saskatoon, $27 million, is 

allowed to advance, Mr. Speaker. This is something that does 

not sit well with residents. Residents who I might say, Mr. 

Speaker, who are saying on July 26th from the Spectator — this 

is the headline — “Wawota senior worried about husband’s 

health,” Mr. Speaker. It goes on to talk about the huge concerns, 

Mr. Speaker, and the impact of changes at that stage of the 

game, Mr. Speaker, on those seniors and the impact on the 

families, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m just going to go on with the article here, Mr. Speaker, on 

July 12, where it highlights where Wawota residents are 

standing up and fighting for fairness, Mr. Speaker, fighting for 

something that doesn’t make sense, Mr. Speaker, and something 

that only reflects the terrible math of the Sask Party, a 

government that came to office with more revenues than ever 

before and has now put itself into debt and deficit and is 

causing Saskatchewan people to pay the price for their 

mismanagement. 

 

I’ll quote here from the Spectator: 

 

Two people Easton says he is not counting on for any 

help are Cannington MLA Dan D’Autremont and 

Moosomin MLA Don Toth. 

 

“The local MLAs have been very frustrating,” he said. 

“They don’t seem to be giving any effort to move forward 

for us.” 

 

And I’m still quoting from the article here: 

 

He singled out D’Autremont, whose riding includes 

Wawota, for criticism. “The man is very unintelligent,” he 

said. “In our opinion, people should not re-elect the man. 

He refuses to return our phone calls. He won’t do 

anything for us. He doesn’t deserve to be our MLA.” 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, these aren’t individuals that are looking for 

something ridiculous of any sort, Mr. Speaker. They’re looking 

for the beds that they had within their community, the quality of 

life that they’ve grown accustomed to, the hard work that 

they’ve done, whether they were homesteading for many years 

as families, Mr. Speaker, to have those services provided . . . 

 

Now the member from Cannington is shouting across the floor 

here, Mr. Speaker, instead of informing the Health minister that 

the beds are actually closed and then sitting down with him and 

the Premier, Mr. Speaker, to see how they can’t get these beds 

opened back up, Mr. Speaker, which would be the common 

sense thing to do. Instead he’d rather let a project in Saskatoon, 

at $27 million, jump the queue. And it cost him 2 to $300,000 a 

bed when he has beds that are operational, efficient, in his own 

community with a wait-list, Mr. Speaker, and with individuals 

and loved ones that count on those, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m just going to go back that quote one more time. 

 

He singled out D’Autremont, whose riding includes 

Wawota, for criticism. “The man is very unintelligent,” he 

said. “In our opinion, people should not re-elect the man. 

He refuses to return our phone calls. He won’t do 

anything for us. He doesn’t deserve to be our MLA.” 

 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5889 

He doesn’t deserve to be our MLA. And you know what, Mr. 

Speaker? We’ve met with these individuals. I know that the 

Health critic has been down there, Mr. Speaker. I know that the 

Leader of the Opposition has been down there, Mr. Speaker. I 

know that I’ve certainly been down there, Mr. Speaker. And 

these individuals are certainly not partisan individuals of any 

sort. At least they’re not partisan supporters of the New 

Democrats, I can tell you that. 

 

What they are is common sense, hard-working people that are 

looking for decisions to be made in their communities out of 

their best interests — the public good, Mr. Speaker. And yet 

they have the MLA that won’t even return the phone call. 

 

And now we learn last week in this Assembly that that MLA, 

Mr. Speaker, and MLAs from the region, had not even informed 

the Premier and the Health minister, Mr. Speaker, on something 

that could have been nipped in the bud and fixed from day one 

with very little commitment as it relates to money, Mr. Speaker. 

And we’re going to spend more, as I said, to build beds 

elsewhere, than keep the ones open that we have that are the 

most efficient beds in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now this is just highlighting Wawota. We see the 

circumstances with the hospital in Leader. We see emergency 

services in Neilburg, Mr. Speaker. We see the fighting within 

many communities where they’re using the municipal 

taxpayers’ dollars, increasing those property taxes, Mr. Speaker, 

so that they can provide services that that government will not 

provide, something that that government should be providing, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m just going to move on a little bit further here with this same 

article. This is what the member from Cannington, I guess, had 

to say: “Which do they want, highways or health care?” 

Highways or health care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In a prosperous Saskatchewan, with a new, historic opportunity 

of unprecedented revenues, Mr. Speaker, we have an MLA who 

goes in and instead of actually mentioning to the Premier the 

circumstance in his riding, instead of kicking the door down of 

the Premier or the Health minister as an MLA should, standing 

up for the public good in his riding, he sits quiet, doesn’t say 

boo. Not a word to the Premier, Mr. Speaker, or to the Health 

minister. And instead, Mr. Speaker, he wants to go back and 

say, well what do you want? You have to choose — highways 

or health care. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people, and in that region, 

they want both. They want both and they want a logical plan 

and a responsible plan to achieve both, Mr. Speaker . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh and now the member is heckling 

from his seat that some of the members of the committee should 

run against him and . . . I mean that’s not what this is about, Mr. 

Speaker. This is about providing the people of Wawota with the 

services that they count on and that they deserve, Mr. Speaker. 

That being said, there’s other ways to make these decisions, and 

it is a democratic process. And I would fully expect that he’ll 

have a hot contest with that as part of the platform, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been hearing a lot about potash lately, 

Mr. Speaker, rightfully so. It’s a resource that’s fundamental to 

our prosperity as a province into the future, Mr. Speaker, and 

we’ve had this discussion go on as a province. 

 

Now we’re happy at this point in time to see the decision to not 

allow BHP to take over this critical strategic resource, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, to see the Premier go and 

take a position of a social democratic . . . I might say, Mr. 

Speaker, that this is a strategic resource that we need to 

maintain control of. But it’s not very credible, his position. That 

being said, we stand shoulder to shoulder to make sure we had 

our voice heard, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

But here we have an individual who is engaged in what’s been 

described as a tawdry shakedown, Mr. Speaker, that might 

compare to the kind of behaviours that go on in many Third 

World countries, Mr. Speaker. This is our Premier that was 

engaged in these discussions, Mr. Speaker, then looking for a 

very short-term, very short-sighted $1 billion, we understand, 

Mr. Speaker, so that he would sign off and approve the 

takeover, Mr. Speaker. Then only a day later when he didn’t get 

his way and when businesses said to him, well this isn’t how 

you do it, then he comes out as the great protector, Mr. Speaker. 

And we’re glad that he ended up calling for the federal 

government to say no. But the problem, Mr. Speaker, is it’s 

simply not credible. 

 

Here you have a Premier who was right there in the stage when 

this critical resource was being privatized, Mr. Speaker, sold 

off, sold off by the Grant Devine administration and for . . . As I 

understand, the Premier worked directly with that ministry of 

privatization, Mr. Speaker, and now he’s supposed to be the 

great protector. Now, Mr. Speaker, what we saw with the 

Crown resource that we did have was the ability to be one of the 

wealthiest jurisdictions, if not the wealthiest jurisdiction in 

North America, had we not gone down that route of 

privatization. 

 

When we think of the opportunities that we could be fulfilling 

as a province right now, not out of the pocket, not out of the 

pockets of the taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, not out of the pockets of 

people in Wawota or individuals fighting over doctors, Mr. 

Speaker, and pooling together dollars in Arcola, but these 

services being provided in a top-notch fashion in health care 

and in child care, Mr. Speaker, as the wealthiest jurisdiction in 

North America. But that was squandered, that opportunity back 

just a few short years ago when the current Premier, Mr. 

Speaker, was fully involved in the privatization of this resource. 

 

Now as we move forward, there needs to be a critical 

discussion, Mr. Speaker, that we’re going to fully engage in 

here and make sure that we’re getting the maximum benefit for 

Saskatchewan people as it relates to our resources, and certainly 

potash being one of those, Mr. Speaker, and how those should 

be managed, Mr. Speaker. And what we see the problem out of 

this government, Mr. Speaker — and we saw it as they came to 

office with billions of dollars of surplus, more revenues flowing 

than ever before — is that even when they’re provided all these 

record circumstances of surplus and billions of dollars in 

revenues, they find a way to put themselves back into debt and 

deficit. 

 



5890 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

But it’s not them that are in debt and deficit, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re putting us as a province, each and every individual and 

business and community across Saskatchewan, that have been 

launched back into debt and deficit, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 

unfortunate. 

 

I would like to take just a moment here to highlight some of the 

circumstances as it relates to our finances, Mr. Speaker. We 

hear often as we go across this province the people of this 

province and business leaders speak out and say, well this 

government was provided billions of dollars, and where has that 

gone? And it’s a very difficult activity to engage and figure out 

how this government that came in with billions of dollars of 

surplus — over $2 billion — booming revenues, Mr. Speaker, 

unprecedented revenues furnished to government, could find 

themselves a way to launch us back into debt and deficit. And it 

causes people huge concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know . . . or Deputy Speaker, I recognize here in 

the budget summary, Mr. Speaker, page 62 of the 2010-11 

budget, that debt under this government, the Sask Party 

government and this out-of-touch Premier, is in fact projected 

to rise by 55 per cent or $4.2 billion over the next four years, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now this is simply deferring taxes for down the road. It’s a cost 

to Saskatchewan people and it’s unsustainable, Mr. Speaker. 

This at a time where we have more revenues than ever before, 

Mr. Speaker, a time where, if we look back and just move it 

back and look at where we were in 2007, 2008 when the torch 

of managing the people’s resources was passed to this 

government, the budget at that point in time was $7.8 billion. In 

fact this government has a 28 per cent increase in revenues 

flowing to government this year over what it did just a few 

years ago. 

 

How you outspend that, Mr. Speaker, is basically 

unexplainable, and it’s disgraceful, Mr. Speaker. The most 

reckless fiscal government across Canada, in many ways, Mr. 

Speaker, that has been blessed and lucky to have the revenues 

that they have at this point in time. Increase in spending by 32 

per cent, Mr. Speaker, actually outstripped the massive 

increases in revenues. And I know what Saskatchewan people 

are starting to do is, they call it opportunity squandered, Mr. 

Speaker. They talk about the rightful prosperity of our 

resource-rich province — and we are one resource-rich 

province — and they look at the revenues and they look at the 

opportunities that are being squandered, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look over the last three years, is this a government 

that’s done something incredibly bold, Mr. Speaker? Well 

certainly not — certainly not. Yet it was provided an 

opportunity that no government before in this province had the 

opportunity to do. 

 

In fact, if I even just do the math and I go back and I look at the 

Sask Party election platform that they put forward in 2007, had 

this government simply kept its own spending promises, Mr. 

Speaker — what I mean by that is they put out a spending chart 

and costed all their promises they had made to Saskatchewan 

people, and they had forecast what they needed to spend in each 

of those years — had this government simply kept that promise 

to Saskatchewan people, we’d be in massive surplus. 

And now the question would be, to what tune? Because what 

we know is we’re into our second year of deficit. Well to the 

tune, Mr. Speaker, that we would have accumulated over 7 

billion in surplus had they only kept their promise. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, did you get that? They would be in an accumulated 

surplus position of $7 billion had they only kept their promise. 

 

Now of course, they didn’t keep their promise. They ripped up 

that promise that (a) put out spending projections and their 

commitments there. They ripped that up. They ripped up fiscal 

responsibility. They increased spending by 32 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. I know it’s categorized as reckless, unsustainable, 

runaway — those are all fair statements, Mr. Speaker — but 

they blew a historic opportunity. And instead of having $7 

billion for which to do something incredibly bold, Mr. Speaker, 

we see ourselves back into our second year of deficit, which is 

almost unfathomable when you look at these circumstances. 

 

And when you think about $7 billion, and I know . . . I think I 

saw a couple of the members gulp over there when I gave that 

number, $7 billion squandered. I saw them gulp because it’s 

such a large sum. We could have simply, had it become the 

priority, and I’m not saying that this necessarily was where all 

of the dollars should have gone, but had they wanted to, they 

could have eliminated all of the GRF [General Revenue Fund] 

debt, Mr. Speaker, in this province. They could have eliminated 

it. That means 400 to $500 million of debt servicing costs, Mr. 

Speaker, could have been eliminated. 

 

I see one member back there that’s fully engaged in this right 

now. Just to dial back the discussion again here, what we’re 

talking about here is had the Sask Party simply kept the 

spending promises that they put forward in their platform. 

Instead, they ripped that up. They instituted a reckless, 

unsustainable spending program, Mr. Speaker. They’ve spent 

all that money and have put us back into our second year of 

deficit, Mr. Speaker, and are increasing debt by the billions of 

dollars. This is a hugely unfortunate circumstance. 

 

We talked about the shameful Minister of Crown Investments 

Corporation that had all of his equity stripped out of those 

Crown corporations. Now Saskatchewan people are paying the 

price for that, Mr. Speaker, through their costs of heating and 

through their power and energy, Mr. Speaker, and all of our 

Crown services that now only have one other way to retrieve 

those dollars, and that’s through the consumer, Mr. Speaker. 

And we see a government that’s been in and out with the rainy 

day fund and in years that have been in unprecedented highs. 

Simply a reckless, irresponsible government. 

 

And I know that institutions across Saskatchewan are 

identifying this. Certainly business leaders are identifying it. 

And it’s a shameful position for this province to occupy. But I 

know that the Fraser Institute has recently done some rankings 

and some evaluation, Mr. Speaker. You’ll know that the Fraser 

Institute, Mr. Speaker, certainly is probably a right-of-centre 

organization, Mr. Speaker. And they’re not willing to offer any 

mercy to this reckless government, Mr. Speaker. In fact what 

they’ve said is that this government, as it relates to reckless, 

irresponsible spending, is at the bottom of the heap, Mr. 

Speaker, with provinces of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, 

Mr. Speaker. And this is a ranking of the premiers. 

 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5891 

Now we know what’s happened to those other two premiers and 

to both of those jurisdictions that couldn’t get their finances in 

order and that were irresponsible and reckless spenders, Mr. 

Speaker — that those two premiers have been ousted. Ousted, 

Mr. Speaker. And we’re not sure if that’s a bit of foreshadowing 

for here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I know Saskatchewan people don’t tolerate a government 

that’s reckless with their dollars. Because that’s not how 

Saskatchewan people operate, whether you’re on the farm, 

whether you’re in your business, whether you’re a public 

servant, or whether you’re operating your own family, you 

make sure that you’re planning towards tomorrow. And you 

expect your government to be at least as responsible as you 

have to be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we see the debt mounting out of the irresponsible 

management of this government, Mr. Speaker, what we know is 

that simply defers taxes to another generation, Mr. Speaker. Not 

fair, Mr. Speaker. Not fair. And it’s not the kind of 

Saskatchewan or prosperous Saskatchewan that we should be 

proud to be talking about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see a government in fact that has no ability, and a Premier, 

no ability to manage a prosperous Saskatchewan, no ability to 

put that vision forward. Certainly not to have the plan. He might 

go out and give some pumped-up speeches, Mr. Speaker, but 

has no ability to have that vision or the plan or the ability to 

manage that prosperity, Mr. Speaker — something that New 

Democrats are proud, waiting, and ready to do, Mr. Speaker, 

and something that our history shows a huge strength with as it 

relates to economic development and fiscal stewardship, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s something at the very root of it that 

Saskatchewan people care about in a large, large way, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we talked about the reckless burn rate on equity. We talked 

about the squandered opportunity — billions of dollars — Mr. 

Speaker, by this Sask Party government. And it all costs 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

I wouldn’t mind just referencing a couple of the quotes that we 

have from the media, some of the leaders across this province, 

on this file, some of the third party validators or voices of 

concern. And I can go to a few of them here. And this goes 

back to when we launched into debt and deficit with the 

reckless spending and irresponsible budget projections. This is 

from the Leader-Post on August 26th, 2009: 

 

This happens to be the biggest government miscalculation 

since . . . Finance Minister Gary’s Lane 1986 budget. 

 

Why on earth formulate a budget on such unpredictable 

numbers? Well, perhaps the first thing we need to do is 

get past that idiotic spin that no one could see this coming 

and that it was perfectly reasonable to assume we would 

get $1.926 billion in potash revenue . . . 

 

So if Wall wants to avoid any more such Devine 

comparisons in the future, here’s one alternative: Just stop 

budgeting like Devine did. 

 

We see a government that has presided over a major contraction 

in our economy, which is disappointing, Mr. Speaker. This is 

taking money out of the pockets of entrepreneurs across this 

province. It’s individuals spending less, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

simply taking out the trade and the volume and the activity 

within our economy. And I know on September 5th, 2009 in the 

Leader-Post, the business columnist states, “The provincial 

economy has gone to hell in a handcart. Not only that, but the 

province’s fiscal situation has deteriorated dramatically.” 

 

And then we saw that. We saw it last year when we saw a 

contraction now that I believe has been corrected to 4 per cent, 

Mr. Speaker, that was 6.3 per cent as earlier reported. But 4 per 

cent contraction in our economy, Mr. Speaker, that is a massive 

backward step, Mr. Speaker, within this economy, and it’s 

disappointing. Now we’re working simply to make back gains 

that we’ve lost under this Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know I can highlight a comment or two here from Eric Howe, 

the professor of economics at the U of S, and I quote: 

 

I’m disappointed by all of this. I don’t accept at all that 

there is a problem here, in terms of there not being 

enough money. 

 

[It goes on] . . . Brad Wall government came in to . . . 

inherited an extremely positive, extremely solid fiscal 

position. 

 

[It goes on] If I violate my own budget constraints it costs 

me and it costs my family. When they violate their budget 

constraints it doesn’t cost them, it costs us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, which means that we all end up paying for this 

kind of mismanagement. It goes on: 

 

. . . the Wall government, we have a similar kind of thing 

in that they came into essentially solid, inherited such a 

fiscally solid position that I think they felt they could buy 

anything they wanted with our money. 

 

It goes on and talks about who pays for this, Mr. Speaker, this 

mismanagement that we see on this squandered opportunity 

under the Sask Party. In terms of the economic cost, the 

economic costs are straightforward. We are the ones who are 

going to pay. There’s no one else, so the cost will end up 

coming out of our standard of living, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would just like to highlight a column, Mr. Speaker, on June 

8th, 2010, in our Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker. It goes on here and 

it says: 

 

The debt graph presented by Wall’s strategists in their 

propaganda was at best misleading and at worst 

downright deceitful for trying to pass off general revenue 

fund debt as being the same thing as overall 

Saskatchewan debt, which is again on the rise [Mr. 

Speaker]. 

 

So this is from June 8th, 2010, Mr. Speaker. And just to 

highlight the pieces there again, the lines here quoting from that 

article is that it’s the propaganda . . . I’ll just read the quote: 

 

The debt graph presented by Wall’s strategists in their 



5892 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

propaganda was at best misleading and at worst 

downright deceitful for trying to pass off general revenue 

fund debt as the same thing as overall Saskatchewan debt, 

which is again on the rise. 

 

This was June 8th in the Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Causes huge concern for Saskatchewan people. And something 

that I’ve had many, many, many meetings in all the parts of this 

province to talk about, where we’ve sat down with industry 

leaders and financial leaders and community leaders, Mr. 

Speaker, who know how to read a balance sheet — farm 

leaders, Mr. Speaker — who have sat down and have seen this 

unprecedented fiscal opportunity squandered by this 

government. And they’re disappointed, Mr. Speaker, and 

they’re going to have something to say about it. 

 

[16:00] 

 

We’ll go on with another comment here. And I’ll quote: 

 

The disadvantage Premier Brad Wall’s government has is 

that unlike the other right-of-centre governments, there is 

no automatic assumption that its strength lies with fiscal 

management . . . the Wall government will forever be 

haunted by its damning lineage to Grant Devine’s 

Progressive Conservatives of the 1980s who ran one of 

the most fiscally incompetent governments in Canadian 

history [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

And then as I said, the other comment we had was if . . . from 

one of the commentators was, if you want to stop the 

comparisons to Devine, just stop acting like him, Mr. Speaker. 

Just stop acting like him. Just stop budgeting like him, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we see, Mr. Speaker, opportunities being squandered across 

this province. We see a historic financial opportunity where all 

Saskatchewan people have participated in building, Mr. 

Speaker, to generate and furnish those revenues to our public 

purse, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve seen nothing bold, nothing 

historic, nothing significant done with that opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Instead, we’ve seen the opposite. We’ve seen a government 

launch an unsustainable spending pattern that has put us back 

into debt and deficit, Mr. Speaker. We’re awaiting right now the 

mid-year report, Mr. Speaker. And we know that going into the 

year, we had a 600-and-some million dollar deficit, Mr. 

Speaker. We’d expect to see massive improvements on that, 

Mr. Speaker, because simply maintaining what we . . . This 

general fiscal direction is not healthy. It’s a trend line that is 

damaging to the future prosperity of Saskatchewan people, our 

communities, and our livelihoods here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what Saskatchewan people seem to be telling me more 

often than not, and everywhere I’m going, is that we need a 

government to provide that kind of leadership. And what we 

have with this current Premier is a populist, Mr. Speaker, who 

simply polls and chases the smell of the day, Mr. Speaker. And 

what we need is real leadership that addresses the needs of 

Saskatchewan communities and people. 

 

We see the middle class, Mr. Speaker, under this government, 

getting hammered as we’ve talked about, whether that is how 

we pay for the recreation that enriches the lives of our children, 

Mr. Speaker, or as we look at the cost of tuition, the cost of 

senior care, the cost of utilities, and the cost of housing. We 

need to advance as a province and advance the quality of life for 

all, Mr. Speaker, and we’re on a reckless track with this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would suspect that at this point in time you 

would understand that I won’t be supporting the Throne Speech 

and that I’ll be supporting the amendment put forward by the 

opposition. We’re going to continue to keep our sleeves rolled 

up as an opposition, continuing to meet all across this province, 

Mr. Speaker, in communities — whether they’re held by the 

Sask Party or the New Democrats or . . . of course there’s 

nobody else, Mr. Speaker — but because the stories and the 

circumstances that we’re able to advance and advocate for 

Saskatchewan people are just far too important. Circumstances 

like in Wawota, Mr. Speaker, where the MLA won’t take any 

accountability and had every opportunity to correct that 

situation, Mr. Speaker, who didn’t even inform the Health 

minister and the Premier that these cuts were going on, Mr. 

Speaker, when you had a community that was irate and looking 

for action. And a very simple thing to fix, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going in the wrong direction under the Sask 

Party. The Saskatchewan New Democrats have a vision, have a 

plan, and the ability to manage a prosperous Saskatchewan. 

We’re committed to doing so. Today I’ll be supporting the 

amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Meadow Lake. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. One thing I’ll note before getting into the body of my 

remarks is that during that entire incoherent and 

incomprehensible rant from the member opposite, there’s one 

thing you didn’t hear him talking about, Mr. Speaker, and that 

was his leader. Not one reference to the Leader of the 

Opposition. And you know, it might not be a huge surprise why 

he didn’t refer to his leader or make any positive comments 

about his leader, considering his leader is the choice of premier 

of 17 per cent of the people of this province. 

 

I suspect, Mr. Speaker, actually that member would have a 

higher approval rating to be premier of this province, maybe. 

Maybe that might have even factored into his decision not to 

mention the Leader of the Opposition during that speech. 

 

I know the member opposite. He’s one of the talented young 

members over there, unlike the member for Northcote. But the 

member from Coronation Park probably has his eye on the main 

prize I suspect, Mr. Speaker, and for that reason didn’t 

reference his leader once. And we’ll get into a little bit more 

about the massive unpopularity, the catastrophic leadership for 

that party provided by the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

First though, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank . . . I want to do some 

thank yous. My family, firstly my wife, Alaina, who’s been a 

great support to me over the years, supported me through now 

six nomination processes, three general election campaigns, 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5893 

going into our fourth general election campaign in Meadow 

Lake this coming up November, Mr. Speaker. So I want to 

thank her. 

 

My son, MacGregor, who’s now nearly two, going into his first 

campaign. He’s been to a number of political events, although 

mom and I tell him that he can do anything he wants when he 

grows up, but not be a politician. So we’ll see how that pans 

out. Alaina is due as well in February with our second. We’re 

still discussing names yet and we’ll see how that turns out, but 

it’s something I’m very much looking forward to. 

 

Thank my constituency assistant, Sharlene Beaulieu, who does 

a great job for me working in the Meadow Lake constituency, 

one of those wonderful CAs. And I know members from both 

sides of the floor have wonderful people that work for us and 

work with us. Sharlene is one of those people that knows 

everybody in northwest Saskatchewan and does a fantastic job 

and is a great ambassador for me when I have to be down here 

in Regina. 

 

I thank my parents as well, Tom and Lorna, both of whom live 

in Meadow Lake. My dad, a 37-year civil servant, just retired as 

a director with the Environment ministry. My mom’s a 

small-business owner in Meadow Lake. Again, two people that 

I think know everybody in northern Saskatchewan, which again 

is a testament to the dedication they’ve had to our community in 

Meadow Lake over the years. My sister Jennifer who’s an 

executive with Coca-Cola; my brother Jordan who’s an 

electrical engineer with Telus in Edmonton — I thank them for 

their support over the years. 

 

I know my grandfather will be on watching TV. He’s an avid 

watcher of the legislature. He figures that we’re doing pretty 

good these days, Mr. Speaker. He’s nearly 90, a 

third-generation resident of Saskatchewan. Still kind of putzes 

around out on the homestead, our family’s homestead near 

Quill Lake. He was down here for one of our sessions last 

session, and I took him to the Premier’s office and he got to sit 

in the Premier’s chair, and he thought was quite the experience. 

 

I also, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest, the newest member of this House, who’s 

a lawyer, which I appreciate having another lawyer here in 

caucus despite the ridicule that we get from the member for 

Cannington. It is good to have Gord — or sorry, the member for 

Saskatoon Northwest — joining us here in Regina. And I know 

he’s going to make an incredible contribution to this Assembly, 

to this government on behalf of his constituents in Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

I wanted to talk a bit about what’s going on in Meadow Lake 

right now, Mr. Speaker. We, I think, are experiencing some of 

the best times in the history of our city which we became only 

two years ago. One of the proudest days I know I’ve ever had in 

public life, to stand with the Premier and sign the official 

declaration making Meadow Lake Saskatchewan’s 14th city. A 

great day. A wonderful summer day. It was something that I 

know people back home are still very, very proud of, that our 

community, in only 50 years, has grown to be a city here in our 

wonderful province. 

 

Some of the exciting things happening. I think if you were to go 

to Meadow Lake these days, it almost looks like a construction 

zone, the entire city. Private sector home construction at near 

all-time highs, only over the last two years would be rivalling 

what’s going on in terms of that. That and we have a new 

courthouse, which I thank the Minister of Justice for moving 

forward with, something that’s a real centrepiece for our city. 

We’re going to be doing the official opening in only a couple of 

weeks, which is going to be again, a wonderful, a wonderful 

event for our city and something I very much look forward to. 

 

We were able to move forward on municipal infrastructure 

projects. And I thank the former minister of Municipal Affairs, 

the current minister. And I had some input as well during my 

time as minister. A great deal of municipal infrastructure 

projects moving forward, a record amount of municipal 

infrastructure projects moving forward in northwest 

Saskatchewan. Whether it be a water treatment in Dorintosh, in 

Goodsoil, Meadow Lake, Loon Lake, there’s a tremendous 

amount of activity on that front. 

 

We have a new spray park actually in Meadow Lake which we 

were able forward with under the Recreational Infrastructure 

Canada program. We did the official opening this summer, 

which I know my son’s going to be very much enjoying next 

summer, Mr. Speaker, along with young people from right 

around town. 

 

We have a brand new student housing complex that’s going to 

be opening in the near future that was funded by the Minister of 

Social Services; partly by my ministry at Enterprise 

Saskatchewan; Advanced Education, Employment and Labour; 

as well as contributions from the federal government and the 

city. A wonderful project. Going to be housing over 40 families 

that are attending Northlands College which is, again, just an 

incredibly positive development for the city of Meadow Lake. 

 

In terms of highways, I know only three, four years ago all you 

heard about was how terrible the highways were in northwest 

Saskatchewan. I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, today all you hear 

about is how great the highways are in northwest 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We have Highway 3 . . . I just actually got an email from a 

gentleman from Livelong complimenting the government on the 

complete repair of Highway 3, which previously had broken 

pavement signs littered along its length between Turtleford and 

Glaslyn. 

 

Highway 4, which has been a massive project — about 60 

kilometres completely, completely repaved. Something that 

actually shocked people, how quickly this project was able to 

move forward with. And I thank the Minister of Highways from 

that. 

 

Highway 55 west of Meadow Lake near Goodsoil had been a 

goat trail ripped up for years and years despite my predecessor 

having been a Highways minister. He never could get the job 

done on Highway 55 or Highway 26. Within three short years 

of our government being elected to office, those highways have 

all been repaired, Mr. Speaker, and it’s been a great benefit for 

northwest Saskatchewan. As we know, there’s increasing 

economic activity. 

 



5894 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

The forestry industry is moving forward in a . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, point of order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, to raise a point of order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And thank 

the hon. member for Meadow Lake for allowing this 

interruption, but it’s his very speech that I’m referring to. 

 

In it, he started saying that the member for Coronation Park had 

not referenced my leader. I checked Hansard and, for nearly 

half a page, I’ve reflected at great length about the leader. And I 

spoke to the hon. member for Regina Rosemont who was also 

named by the member from Meadow Lake not referencing the 

leader in his speech, and he did so repeatedly. 

 

I refer you, sir, to page 5724 of Hansard. and I’ll just quote one 

sentence that I said, “Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier shut out an 

expert in the Leader of the Opposition, shut out an expert . . .” 

Clearly I’m speaking highly of my leader, the Leader of the 

Opposition. I am proud to do so today. I was proud to do so 

then, and I know I’ll be proud to do so well into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my point of order is, the member is directly 

misquoting myself, saying I didn’t reference the Leader of the 

Opposition, my leader. And he did exactly the same thing with 

respect to the member of Rosemont. I’m wondering how much 

else in his speech is patently not true. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, clearly what the member opposite is raising is 

not a point of order. It’s a matter of debate in the House, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, clearly there has been 

many references to comments in Hansard, Mr. Speaker, over 

the years, which have been interpreted by members on either 

side of the House. And, Mr. Speaker, this is not a point of order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I’ve listened to both arguments, not 

having viewed Hansard, but I will agree that there is many — 

this is not a point of order — that there is a lot of give-and-take 

on speeches on that. And with that, I will not rule a point of 

order. I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. And I would admit that I misspoke in terms of the 

riding. I was referring to the speech of the member previous 

from Rosemont who shouted from his seat that he actually did 

mention his leader. 

 

He said twice, Mr. Speaker, in an hour-long speech, which 

again reinforces the point I made about why wouldn’t he be 

talking about his leader who right now . . . I know in Meadow 

Lake, I was back home over the weekend, Mr. Speaker, and 

down on coffee row. And they actually came up with a new 

name for the Leader of the Opposition. They were calling him 

captain 17 per cent, which obviously is a reference to the 

approval rating that that member has, which has to be seen as 

one of the most catastrophic stints of leadership in the history of 

the province. 

 

[16:15] 

 

He’s the most unpopular Leader of the Opposition of any in the 

entire country. He is leading . . . And I think members opposite 

should be worried about this, Mr. Speaker. And I suspect that 

behind the scenes, they are very worried about this, that there’s 

some conversations going on amongst members opposite that 

maybe this thing isn’t going quite the direction we thought it 

was going to be going in. 

 

They have, as I indicated, a leader who has lurched from 

catastrophe to catastrophe, Mr. Speaker, telling them all the 

while that he had a plan, that he was the guy that was going to 

win. And where are they . . . He was going to win the 

by-election in Saskatoon Northwest. He was telling his own 

caucus that, Mr. Speaker, that they were really close. The 

numbers were close. Seven points or so, he was telling his 

caucus members. And what happened, Mr. Speaker? They lost 

by 30. They lost by 30 points, which is exactly how far behind 

this government they are today. 

 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, if, say, the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow had been successful in her leadership campaign, I 

can assure you that they would be higher than 17 per cent right 

now, and their leader wouldn’t be a laughingstock on coffee 

row in Meadow Lake. 

 

But, you know, they made their decision, Mr. Speaker. They 

had . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . As the Minister of Energy 

said, the leader’s in Kamsack looking for a potash mine right 

now. So I suspect he’s going to have a difficult time finding one 

because there isn’t one there. 

 

But, you know, again we reference potash. Under the leadership 

of this Premier, Mr. Speaker, we had a tremendous win for the 

province of Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan last 

week. 

 

A former deputy premier of this province, not of my party, a 

former deputy premier of this province phoned me subsequent 

to the decision and said that there’s going to be three names in 

the lexicon of Western leaders when it comes to standing up for 

their province on resource issues. And the three names that that 

former deputy premier, not of my party, referenced were John 

Diefenbaker, Peter Lougheed, and the Premier. And that’s, you 

know, I think that speaks to the non-partisan nature, the fact that 

this was an issue that cut across parties. 

 

And we do appreciate the support that the members opposite 

gave. Even though their position shifted about six times during 

the course of two months, they did support our motion to send a 

clear message to Ottawa to speak with one voice in terms of the 

position of this legislature on potash. 

 

And I also wanted to, I also wanted to thank our 13 

Conservative MPs from this province, Mr. Speaker, a number 

of whom are my former colleagues who I served with in 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5895 

parliament who really did — despite having some very real 

constraints imposed on them by the Canada investment Act in 

terms of their public comments — I can tell you, work very, 

very hard for this province behind the scenes and making clear 

the views of their constituents in fighting for the people of this 

province. And I think we’re going to have the opportunity to 

have some of them in the legislature here this week, and we can 

extend that thank you in a more formal sense. 

 

But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, they were working very hard on 

behalf of the people of this province. The Minister of Energy 

and I met with them a number of times, and we’re in constant 

communication with them. I particularly would like to thank 

one of my best friends, Andrew Scheer, who’s the MP for 

Regina Qu’Appelle, who worked hard on this, along with Tom 

Lukiwski and the other Saskatchewan MPs as well, who all 

worked hard and advocated on our behalf. 

 

In terms of the reference I made earlier to captain 17 over there, 

Mr. Speaker, it really is . . . And I think that the members over 

there who — the more veteran members I can certainly tell, 

from how they’ve been sitting in their seats over the course of 

the last week or so — know very clearly that the Leader of the 

Opposition is leading them into oblivion. 

 

And I’m sure, I’m sure it must be demoralizing. You know, a 

proud party, and I mean it’s a party with a very proud history. 

Every leader up until this point had become premier of 

Saskatchewan. It’s clear that’s not going to happen with the 

current Leader of the Opposition. It does have to be 

demoralizing for those members. And even now, looking across 

the floor, Mr. Speaker, I can tell that they’re very aware that 

their current leader is not doing them any favours. And I’m sure 

they’re hearing about it back in their ridings as well. 

 

Like I said, I was on coffee row in Meadow Lake over the 

course of the weekend. And in public life, it’s one thing when 

people are criticizing you, and you’re going to get that no 

matter what party you’re in or what decision you make, but it’s 

quite another thing when they’re laughing at you. And that’s the 

point that the Leader of the Opposition has found himself in. 

His tactics, his tactics have been counterproductive. 

 

Here I’ll actually read a quote from Murray Mandryk’s column 

in the Leader-Post on Saturday: 

 

Two years of being caught up in petty bickering with his 

enemies, both real and imaginary, and of his tiresome 

dogma has put off voters. His no-holds-barred-attack 

approach and the nastiness he seems to have mentored in 

his younger Opposition MLAs has created a visceral 

negative reaction — especially when contrasted to Wall’s 

very evident likability. 

 

And I can suspect which opposition younger members that Mr. 

Mandryk was referring to. I think it was the member for 

Rosemont and the member for Northcote, P.A. [Prince Albert] 

Northcote. And as a bit of friendly advice, what I would pass 

along to those members, is you might want to re-evaluate the 

tactics you’re taking. Do you really, you know, are you really 

going to keep doing what your leader is demanding of you, 

which is to stand up and launch vicious attacks day after day in 

this legislature? Again as Mandryk says, Murray Mandryk says 

that this is the reason you’re at 17 per cent. These type of antics, 

both in the legislature and outside of the legislature, particularly 

when compared to the statesman-like behaviour of our Premier, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know you go out there. And I know that they do know this, 

even if they won’t admit it publicly, that the Premier’s done a 

good job. The Premier is liked from one end of this province to 

the other, even amongst those that don’t necessarily vote for us 

or don’t necessarily support us electorally. Nobody’s buying the 

nonsense that they’re putting out there about our Premier. 

People can take the measure of leaders, whether that be through 

the news or whether that be in person. And people have taken 

the measure of our leader, and they’ve taken the measure of 

their leader. And that’s why our Premier is the most popular 

Premier in the entire country. And that’s why their leader is the 

most unpopular Leader of the Opposition in the entire country. 

 

The member for Rosemont is shaking his head. But all he did 

. . . he stood up for an hour and ranted and raved. He’s still 

shaking his head. Well I mean, you know, the facts are the 

facts. And that member’s not doing himself any favours either. 

Like I said, I think that member has talent. I think that member 

has a future in Saskatchewan politics. And he’s not doing 

himself any favours by being the attack dog for the Leader of 

the Opposition. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I think the voters are going to give him 

timeout. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Voters could very well give him a 

timeout in the next election, and his conduct in this Assembly is 

going to be part of that. The Leader of the Opposition, what 

does he do on last Wednesday? He flies to Ottawa — purely for 

political reasons — to meet with Jack Layton, the leader of the 

NDP. He admitted it was to plot election strategy. He wasn’t 

there to advocate for the province in terms of the decision that 

would be coming later that day. He went there to gain personal 

political advantage. 

 

And what do we see happened? We have the decision, which is 

one of the best days of this province has ever had, and the 

Leader of the Opposition looks like he just lost his dog on 

national television, standing behind Jack Layton, kind of 

ducking in and out of the camera shot, embarrassing himself, 

embarrassing that party. He doesn’t speak for us. That’s the one 

thing we were happy about is that the . . . Kady O’Malley from 

CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] thought he was a 

backbencher she’d never seen before, who’s a veteran Ottawa 

journalist. I mean he embarrassed himself. 

 

One piece of advice I’d offer to the Leader of the Opposition is 

that centre mike in the foyer of the House of Commons, the 

centre mike in the foyer of the House of Commons is a tight 

angle. It’s a tight angle, so you need to make sure that you’re 

really right behind the leader. And I can only imagine the 

microphone between Jack Layton and the Leader of the 

Opposition, that little fight for who got to go to first to the 

microphone. That would’ve been something to witness. 

Obviously Jack Layton won that fight though. And the Leader 

of the Opposition had to kind of duck in and out of the camera 

shot. 

 



5896 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

So again he embarrassed himself. He embarrassed that party 

with a long and proud history. His members are embarrassing 

themselves in this legislature on a daily basis. And I think that if 

I were to give them any friendly advice, Mr. Speaker, it would 

be to sit down and have a very serious discussion about how 

they’re conducting themselves is working because clearly, with 

the people of this province, it’s not working. 

 

The people of this province appreciate the leadership of our 

Premier who goes about his business in a statesmanlike way, 

who conducts himself like a premier. And obviously the Leader 

of the Opposition isn’t conducting himself in that fashion. 

 

Again another Murray Mandryk quote, “Lingenfelter is doing 

major damage to the NDP brand.” Judging by the looks on the 

members opposite, they know that’s very, very much the case, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Mandryk actually says the worst-case 

scenario for the government is if the Leader of the Opposition 

retires. When people are writing that, long-time observers of 

politics in this province are writing that the worst thing that can 

happen for the government is the Leader of the Opposition 

quits, you haven’t had a very good day. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we know these things are going on. The 

Leader of the Opposition is lurching from catastrophe to 

catastrophe. Members opposite are desperately trying to talk 

down the economy when everybody out there knows that the 

economy’s stronger than it’s ever been. I can tell you in 

Meadow Lake people are sure very cognizant of the fact that we 

have the strongest economy that we’ve ever had. 

 

Just again from the poll that was in the paper on the weekend, 

who’s the best party for encouraging economic growth? Who’s 

the best party? Sask Party, 70; NDP, 20. That’s a pretty 

significant number. Ensuring taxes are low: Sask Party, 64; 

NDP, 26. Advancing agriculture . . . I heard the Leader of the 

Opposition raise an agriculture question in QP [question period] 

today for, I think, only the second time since he’s been the 

leader. Who do the people trust to advance agriculture? Sask 

Party, 61; NDP, 27. Again the people of this province are 

comfortable with the leadership of our Premier. The Premier’s 

approval rating, 55; disapprove 19. The Leader of the 

Opposition’s approval rating, 10. Ten. 

 

You know, any one of those members, whether it be the 

member for Rosemont, whether it be the member for Moose 

Jaw Wakamow, whether it be the member from Fairview, The 

Battlefords — maybe not Northcote, but any of those other 

members — if they were the leader, I guarantee they’d have a 

higher than a 10-point approval rating. It doesn’t take much. 

The Leader of the Opposition running at 20, 30 points behind 

the NDP brand, again, as Mr. Mandryk said, “doing irreparable 

damage to the NDP brand”. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, obviously it wasn’t, wasn’t a good week for 

the NDP. It was a fantastic week for the province of 

Saskatchewan — as I said, one of the most historic weeks that 

we’ve ever had. A former deputy premier, not of my party, 

saying the three people that are going to be remembered for 

defending Western Canada resource wealth: John Diefenbaker, 

Peter Lougheed, and the Premier of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I obviously won’t be supporting the amendment. I 

will be supporting the motion, and I encourage all the members 

to do so. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to once 

again stand before you in reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

And I’d like to express my gratitude to all the people that 

helped me get here, the people from the constituency of 

Saskatchewan Rivers. And I’d also like to welcome and 

congratulate our newest member from Saskatoon Northwest. 

Congratulations. 

 

Now I would be amiss if I did not talk about my staff at home in 

the office of constituency of Sask Rivers. Marcus Abrametz is 

my full-time and he’s been with me for three years now, and 

then Cora Malenfant. And I’d also like to welcome our newest 

part of the team, Joan Strube. Now their services are invaluable 

and I’m very, very grateful for them. They treat the constituents 

very well, and I’m proud of their work and the dedication to the 

people of this province and in particular Sask Rivers 

constituency. 

 

Now the services of the legislature staff are also greatly 

appreciated because they treat me very kindly. They’re helpful 

in many ways, from finding a snowbrush, to Ray at the front 

desk, trying to teach me Afrikaans. Ray heard that my future 

son-in-law is South African, and every morning he faithfully 

teaches me “good morning,” and when I leave he teaches me 

“good night.” 

 

And because this is November, I’d like to acknowledge all the 

war veterans. I had a very nice visit with one war veteran 

selling poppies in the mall and he was 92 years old. He told me 

a lot of stories and they were very interesting. So I’d just like to 

acknowledge the war veterans. 

 

Now hello to my dear dad who is 82. He is trying to retire, but 

like most of Saskatchewanians, they love to work, and that’s 

what got this province to where it is. So he’s trying to retire at 

82. Now I also need to put on the record a deep thanks to my 

husband, Doug, for keeping the home fires burning and 

watching over our four grown children and two young 

grandsons. Now I’m not as active on the farm since I entered 

politics, but I did enjoy the hands-on of combining and working 

with the cattle, and I enjoyed the work in teaching our children 

a good work ethic. So I’m very happy to have had that part of 

my life. 

 

Now over the summer, our newest addition was born. Reid 

Douglas Wilson, a 3-month-old, chubby, little fellow — very 

cute. And our daughter, Brigitt, became engaged to a fine young 

man, Chris. So there’s just more people in my family to love, 

more people to love. 

 

[16:30] 

 

So thank you to the constituents of Saskatchewan Rivers. And I 

cannot help but recall the great guidance, encouragement, and 

affection that I’ve received from special people in one of the 

most diverse and beautiful constituencies. There’s lots of resorts 

and tourist spots, pristine lakes, friendly people. And I want to 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5897 

thank them for helping us travel a new road for our province. It 

has helped make all the difference. It’s a road marked by 

growth, strength, and optimism. Without strong support and 

appreciation, it would make this journey almost impossible. 

 

And journeys go at their own speed. In my other life, I was a 

snowmobile racer on the oval track in cross-country. And as the 

members from Carrot River Valley and Rosthern-Shellbrook 

and Yorkton can attest to, it was an adrenaline rush. We all 

enjoyed racing. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Did you win? 

 

Ms. Wilson: — And it was very competitive. And yes, I did 

win a lot of races. I was very good. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Including an election race. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — That’s true. However as our journey 

progresses, we realize we must go at a different pace with 

checks and cautions and recommendations and life experiences 

to balance and fulfill our life as we should. I have found politics 

to be like that — slow and steady, fulfilling the quality of life 

for all people in this province. 

 

And we have the capacity to make this the best generation in 

the history of Saskatchewan. If we do our duty, if we meet our 

responsibilities head-on and fulfill our obligations to the 

citizens of Saskatchewan, whether it’s in local towns or farming 

communities, then this generation of young people is going to 

have the best that Saskatchewan has to offer. Saskatchewan has 

been blessed with rich resources, and one of the resources — 

the most important one — is our people. 

 

With Saskatchewan resolve and a strong vision, our province 

has begun down the road less travelled with optimism and 

strength. Our strong economy has enabled our government to 

respond in times of need this summer in the wake of devastating 

flooding and excess moisture while still keeping the budget on 

track. 

 

Our government was also able to announce significant 

improvements to the provincial disaster assistance program so 

that it’s more responsive and provides better compensation to 

those affected by the disasters. The final result was $360 

million made available to those hit hard by flooded croplands. 

It’s estimated that this year’s agriculture budget could be the 

largest in Saskatchewan history. 

 

The many farmers I’ve spoken to in Sask Rivers have spoken 

praise about our government and our Premier and all our 

cabinet ministers for the work we are doing to improve farm 

programs for producers and are thankful for initiatives like the 

largest education tax rebate in the history of the province and 

the continued implementation of phase 2 of the education tax 

reduction plan. Many farmers and landowners in the eight RM 

councils in my area told me this was a long overdue initiative. 

The people of Saskatchewan had to wait far too long for some 

changes. 

 

And this summer our government committed to funding clinical 

trials of the liberation procedure for those affected by multiple 

sclerosis. Saskatchewan has the highest rate of MS in all of 

Canada, and I believe our province should and can take a 

leadership role in this regard. The Saskatchewan Rivers 

constituency has a very high MS rate, around Albertville, 

Spruce Home, and Henribourg. And we at home look forward 

to and deserve the best answers that science can provide. Our 

government is committing 5 million to fund MS liberation 

clinical trials. And I’ve had several people call me at home from 

my area, very happy to see that our government cares. This is 

another example of our government taking an active role on 

Saskatchewan’s new road. 

 

Now in recent weeks, the news of BHP Billiton’s takeover has 

been flooding our media outlets. Our government has made it 

known that no matter who owns the mine, the resource of 

potash belongs to the people of Saskatchewan. Our government, 

with the best interests of the citizens for Saskatchewan, will be 

guiding us, will guide our actions and deliberations on this most 

important resource and issue. 

 

Our population increased by the most since 1953. There are 

16,498 more newcomers calling Saskatchewan home. And 

many of these families I have had the chance to meet. I am the 

Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Immigration, so I’m 

able to visit with a lot of these newcomers. And visiting with 

the new immigrants helped increase my awareness of how 

fortunate we are to call Saskatchewan home. These wonderful, 

diverse families will help our workforce expand and grow while 

creating a more dynamic and cosmopolitan province going 

forward into the future, another example of how our great 

province is heading down a new road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a new road also means improvements and repairs 

to Saskatchewan highways. And this has been long, long 

overdue. I have travelled many miles in my constituency. And 

I’m so proud of our government and the direction it is going. 

 

My home constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers has and will 

continue to benefit from the work being done by our 

government within the Highways file. There has been an 

additional 793 kilometres of safety improvements completed by 

the ministry as of the end of this summer. In the first three years 

since we took office, we’ve committed 1.7 billion to 

Saskatchewan highways. Our government will exceed the 

commitment we made during the last election campaign to 

invest 1.8 billion in our province’s highway system in our first 

term. Mr. Speaker, there’s still more work to be done, but our 

government will continue to work to upgrade our highways and 

make Saskatchewan roads safer for everyone throughout the 

province. 

 

Along with safer highways, our government is moving forward 

to ensure a higher quality of life in Saskatchewan and continue 

to make our province a great place to live and raise our families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we travel down Saskatchewan’s new road, our 

government is committed to improving educational outcomes 

for our First Nations and Métis leaders. A strategy was created 

to fit the needs of these students, enabling them to participate in 

all the great opportunities that Saskatchewan’s future prosperity 

will bring. 

 

The Big River First Nation in Saskatchewan Rivers 

constituency will now be home to the centre of excellence, a 



5898 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

new project to be constructed, and will serve as a central 

location for the incubation of small businesses and offer skill 

development and job training. I had the pleasure of being out 

there and announcing it on behalf of the minister, and the chief 

and council were very, very appreciative of it. This facility will 

help strengthen economic opportunities and help create a better 

future for young people in that community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, First Nations are also part of our government’s 

new and innovative approach to development of 

Saskatchewan’s forests under a new forestry management 

agreement. Industry partners will co-operate together to manage 

the forest in an environmentally sustainable manner. 

 

I wish to sincerely thank all of the people of Saskatchewan and 

Saskatchewan Rivers once again for the great opportunity they 

have given me. I am honoured to be able to travel down 

Saskatchewan’s new road with my colleagues under the 

leadership of our Premier, and I am humbled by the opportunity 

to make a difference. I am proud and able to assist my 

constituents by representing them here in the legislature. 

 

I wish to extend best wishes to each one of you in this 

Assembly, and lastly, I look forward to continuing to work hard 

and achieving more successes for the people of Saskatchewan. I 

know that the best is still ahead for our great province, and I 

support the Speech from the Throne. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s good to be 

able to enter into the debate, and I’ll be making a number of 

comments on the Throne Speech. But before I get into that, I’d 

just, as most of the members have done, I too as well want to 

make some comments about my constituents in Saskatoon 

Fairview and thank them for their support, Mr. Speaker, thank 

you also for their welcome on the doorstep, and thank you for 

their welcome into their homes and into their lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have in the Saskatoon Fairview 

constituency a number of . . . as people mentioned. We also 

have one thing that I’m very proud of, the new two high 

schools, Mr. Speaker, with the . . . What we have is the Shaw 

Centre, a world-class swimming pool in between the two high 

schools in our constituency, which has been . . . Just 

tremendous things have been happening here. World-class 

events coming to the city of Saskatoon and that’s right in the 

constituency. 

 

And the two high schools, the Bethlehem and Tommy Douglas, 

situated there with a lot of green space, playgrounds or football 

fields and everything for the students, along with all the other 

elementary schools, Mr. Speaker. And also a good number of 

times you get to go to the schools and to meet with the teachers 

and the support staff and all those and to see all the good work 

that they’re doing. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, a good number of the immigrants 

who’ve come to Saskatoon end up in Saskatoon Fairview and 

area. And if you go to the schools, they hold what we hold in 

Saskatoon Folkfest. Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to go 

there and witness. And I would think it matches Folkfest on 

some given nights, when you see all the people from all around 

the world come there. And it is, as somebody said, a miniature 

UN [United Nations]. And that is something that I’m very 

proud of, that Saskatoon Fairview’s home to a good number of 

these people. 

 

I would also like to mention, and I think as everybody else 

does, the work that my constituency assistant does, Tracy 

Goodheart. Tracy is a dedicated and committed individual, Mr. 

Speaker, and provides an excellent service to the constituents of 

Saskatoon Fairview. I know I’m totally unbiased when I say 

that she is definitely the best constituency assistant in the 

province. And I know Tracy is hard at work and not watching 

this so, you know, I’ll have to send her the Hansard to show her 

the words that I have said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this summer a very special event occurred in my 

life. I got married to a very wonderful and beautiful woman, 

Ann Riley, who has now, is determined to take my name, and, 

Mr. Speaker, is finding out the different types of pronunciations 

you can have on Iwanchuk, when she goes shopping; and that 

has been her experience. But I want to thank her and her 

daughter Jaclyn for the support that they give me so that I can 

be here representing people. I guess she had her eyes wide open 

when she walked into this and understood quite clearly what the 

demands are of the position. And to her a big thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also we added a son-in-law into our family this 

summer. My daughter got married. I also want to acknowledge 

my other daughter has got engaged. And they’re talking 2012, 

Mr. Speaker, so it’s definitely keeping this father busy. Also a 

prize for me is my grandson, Drake, who’ll be celebrating his 

fourth birthday come November, I don’t want to miss him. 

 

What we also gain is some wonderful and amazing people. I’ve 

gained in-laws, Bill and Iris Riley. They’re amazing and 

wonderful people. Amazing in their, Mr. Speaker, amazing in 

their support and how they’ve welcomed me into their family. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, I cannot forget my number one 

fan. And that is my mother who watches in North Battleford a 

lot of times the goings on here and gives me advice, and 

sometimes advice that I might not want, but advice nonetheless, 

Mr. Speaker. And so it is. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Before I start my comments, I’d like to welcome to the 

legislature the member from Northwest who ran an excellent 

campaign. And I welcome him to the legislature and I wish him 

the best here. Mr. Speaker, obviously I didn’t work hard enough 

and convince all those voters that they shouldn’t vote for him, 

but as it turned out, we accept the decisions of the voters of 

Northwest. And I welcome that member to this Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in entering into the debate on the Speech from the 

Throne, I see that even, I guess my . . . The one thing I would 

say about this is even the quote from Robert Frost would not 

save this, Mr. Speaker, because of the lack of vision. And I’ll be 

getting into that lack of vision because when I read this and 

looked at it, it certainly seemed to be there was a disconnect in 

terms of the people of this province, and it contained perhaps a 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5899 

lot of re-announcements. 

 

Now one of the things that just came up the other day, Mr. 

Speaker, was the Conference Board of Canada because I heard 

the member from Rosetown talking, going on about the 

economics of this province. And, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business took a barometer of 

business confidence in Saskatchewan and found that the 

small-business people or the business people in the province 

were placing us seventh across the country, Mr. Speaker, 

seventh across the country in that. And they were clear that it 

was in the spring of 2007 that there was the most confidence in 

this province. So they can try and paint the things that are going 

on in the province and talk about Robert Frost and his poetry, 

but the facts are that we are now seventh. 

 

The other fact is, is that they hide and say that there is no 

deficit. There is a deficit, and they are adding $4.2 billion to the 

provincial debt by 2014. And, Mr. Speaker, the fact is that that 

is a 55 per cent increase in the debt. And as they say, the 

chickens are going to come home to roost on that. Because now 

when people are . . . There are needs, which I’ll be talking 

about, in this province. Those needs, they are unable to meet 

them because in fact of the mismanaged finances. And they can 

hide behind that, but people will see through that, Mr. Speaker, 

because people in Saskatchewan understand finances. And 

when they finally see that, there will be, I’m sure that that’s not 

going to be a good day for that government. 

 

Now again, just like last year again here, they predicted the 

economy would grow by 2.1 per cent, and it actually shrank by 

6.3, Mr. Speaker. So people are feeling these things in the 

economy and, Mr. Speaker, that is not something that you can 

hide from because that is when people start reacting to that. 

 

I mentioned that when I go on a doorstep, people are saying that 

everything is fine. And they are. I mean I can tell in my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, when there’s new half-tons or 

whatever with the small-business names on them. And there are 

homes come up for sale, and a month or less later, they’re sold. 

That’s my constituency. I gauge that. That’s economic activity 

there because things are going well. And so, so they are. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there are clouds on the horizon. And some of 

those clouds, in terms of the economics of this province and the 

needs of people, are not being addressed. And those are piling 

up. And they’re piling up, but they’re still . . . Acknowledge 

that people are still hopeful that they can work things out with 

this government. But, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t look very good. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this summer I had an opportunity with our 

Health critic to tour the province. We went on this tour, and we 

talked about, talked to a lot of working people, talked to health 

care providers, talked to RM councils — whoever, Mr. Speaker, 

would talk to us. It was amazing how these people welcomed 

us. 

 

And there were many stories of what occurred, and I won’t bore 

you with those. But I think what I would like to talk about here, 

because what’s important here is they would like to know not 

the personal stories and the connections we made, but they will 

like to know that we carried their message here to the 

legislature. So it will be important to me to get this on record. 

For example, Mr. Speaker, we sat in a . . . I start my story in 

Big River, a wonderful community situated . . . We were in a 

café overlooking Cowan Lake right after we toured that health 

care facility — an amazing, amazing facility, Mr. Speaker. We 

walked in. It’s built. There was a lot of . . . almost a dome kind 

of ceiling effect in there, so it was very, very nice for a health 

centre. 

 

But what were the local . . . When we got there, what was 

happening? They were getting rid of a nurse. There was a 

doctor shortage. And we talked to the local people who met 

with us in the café there, and walked from one group of people 

to the next. And they were angry. They were completely angry 

and saying that they had been let down, and we had to do 

something. And they were going to run against this government. 

 

And the people from across can take some comfort in the way 

that they’re governing. Or as the member from over there was 

saying earlier that, well let him run against me, you know. Let 

him run against me and that kind of attitude. That’s going to 

come back because those things . . . People read about that. 

 

And in fact I guess perhaps I should be happy about that 

because there’s nothing better than that for us to get candidates 

— good candidates, quality candidates — to run in those areas 

because they are so frustrated with the lack of action. There’s 

lack of action because there’s lack of money. And I noticed the 

Minister of Finance was not necessarily looking as chipper 

these days as he might be, because he knows what he’s sitting 

on. 

 

Now there are problems, recruitment problems. Those were 

promises here. We can have our exchanges in the legislature 

here, but at the end of the day people want to see what is 

happening. Because, Mr. Speaker, you know, I know after 

being there that this is central to those communities. They know 

if they lose that doctor, they know if there’s no doctor, that 

people will start moving out. They look at that, and that is sort 

of a barometer much like the CFIB [Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business] had a barometer of how the 

community’s going to do. Is it going to grow? What’s 

happening? All of these things. 

 

It was amazing for me to find this out, Mr. Speaker, to know 

how much the communities pull together. People said things 

like, you know, well just tell us and we’ll all come to the 

Legislative Building on an issue like health care. And so there 

is a simmering issue. They shouldn’t be lulled into a false sense 

of security that everything is fine because it’s not. Because 

they’re waiting to see what’s going to happen. And the Minister 

of Finance is sitting there knowing that he’s got a problem, a 

huge problem, because he has no money. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I can talk about Meadow Lake, doctor 

shortages in Meadow Lake. And we have the member from 

Meadow Lake saying, all is fine. Not enough special care aides 

in Meadow Lake. They can’t find special care aides in Meadow 

Lake. Unity — the workers are short-staffed there, been 

working short-staffed. Lab techs’ hours are cut. 

 

And again, in each of these places people who we sat down to 

explained to us what these cuts meant. They weren’t telling us 

trying to be destructive, Mr. Speaker. They were concerned. 



5900 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

They were concerned about their health care because they’re 

concerned in those communities . . . People know each other. 

They’re concerned about their parents. They’re concerned about 

their family members. That’s who they were concerned about, 

and that was important to them. 

 

Neilburg. I’m sure this story has been told. Went to a huge 

meeting in Neilburg with the town. An ambulance service that 

would cost $50,000. All around they have oil, and an 

ambulance service is being cut. People are offering solutions 

that, well we’ll put up some money to do this. But, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s not what people want to hear because what they want to 

hear is, how do you get to the oil patch? There are regulations 

around occupational health and safety. 

 

And it’s downloading. Mr. Speaker. This is nothing other than 

downloading by this government, of downloading and having 

Saskatchewan residents pay twice. They’re paying twice. 

 

And I’ll tell you, driving back to Saskatoon late one night after 

hearing a number of these stories, and an ambulance and a 

police car passed us — the member from Eastview and I — and 

passed us, and we talked about seven minutes response time to 

get to a situation that required that ambulance. And there was a 

fire truck. So in Saskatoon we have seven minutes, but people 

in Neilburg were going over half an hour. It’s going to now be 

38 minutes to do that, to get out there and to do that. 

 

So in these communities, people are talking about leaving. And 

these people are disappointed. That disappointment will turn to 

anger because nothing is being done, Mr. Speaker. Nothing is 

being done, and people think life will go on, but it isn’t. There’s 

a simmering out in rural Saskatchewan that’s going to overflow. 

And it’s going to overflow, and it’s going to surprise these 

people. 

 

Yorkton. Numerous bed closures going on as I speak today. The 

other day I heard there’s 80 more layoffs in Yorkton and bed 

closures. People are doing that. 

 

Perhaps they’re not reacting and saying that, but people have a 

way in rural Saskatchewan of taking this in, and they 

remember. They remember what is being done to them. And, 

Mr. Speaker, they might forgive, but they won’t forget when 

this happens. 

 

So how long will they put up with that? We went into a number 

of places. I think I was probably . . . I’ve never seen so much 

water in rural Saskatchewan in terms of where we went. And 

somebody asked me, where’s the epicentre of this thing? And I 

think I was there. I think I was at the epicentre of that in rural 

Saskatchewan in a place in northeast Saskatchewan. 

 

And I’ve never seen anything like that, because we were there 

and it was raining again. And I remember walking into that 

hospital and asking the person that was behind there, was the 

government giving enough money. And she kind of bent, and 

this was really to me, Mr. Speaker, she kind of put her head 

down and like, you know, kind of nodded a little bit and then 

not. Because they’re supporting . . . This was their promise. 

This was their great promise that the Saskatchewan Party was 

going to represent them after so-called, so many years of being 

not looked after by the NDP. But this person, in her eyes was 

hurt, Mr. Speaker. There was a lot of hurt in that person’s eyes. 

And no doubt when she went home, they were discussing this, 

because never before had people not seeded in some of these 

areas. 

 

And I think I overheard somebody from, I don’t know if it was 

Kindersley or up in Kerrobert, where they said that never before 

had they seen something like this since 1954, 1954 where 

somebody said I’ve never, you know — and I of course, I 

haven’t followed up on that — that people had seen so much 

rain in Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this was all after sitting and talking. And 

sometimes people would be lined up. I would be sitting inside 

the coffee room. I’d be sitting there talking and we were taking 

them in shifts to come in. And everybody was talking about the 

financial mismanagement. Now they might deny that, and say 

that didn’t happen or everything else that did, but it did. It’s 

occurring. And people understood that. 

 

And the other thing people understood right across the piece 

was when they first brought out the essential services 

legislation. They brought out that legislation and it was passed 

because the spin doctors over there could pass that by because it 

was all about, it wasn’t safe for people to . . . That’s what it was 

about; it was about safety and these bad, these bad unions. 

 

But people got a two and half year on-the-job training about 

what essential services was. And you could walk in there now 

and you could go into the dietary, you could go into the labs, 

you could go on the housekeeping, and you know what? 

Everybody could tell you what essential services was. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s an education that the unions couldn’t do, that we 

couldn’t do, because it was this government that educated them 

on what essential services. 

 

And they know now who the essential services, and they know 

now what it’s like to bargain under there and right across the 

piece, whether it was Hudson Bay, it was Melfort, whether it 

was Coronach, all over the place. Or whether it was Kindersley. 

They all know what essential services means now so when you 

talk about that, they’re going to be able to say to this 

government that, this is what is wrong. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have to make emotional pleas or 

emotional speeches now, Mr. Speaker. That rural Saskatchewan 

understands. 

 

So as we drove by, for example, the oil wells around Kerrobert, 

and then went in and looked at the facility there — some of the 

13 that we visited that were on the list — there were there, Mr. 

Speaker, were the drawings on the walls. All these people who 

had talked about, Mr. Speaker, all these people who had talked 

about the fundraising that they did, the fundraising that people 

have to do in these small communities, it’s amazing, Mr. 

Speaker. What an eye-opener for me to go to all those places 

and to see the fundraising and the commitment to community, 

the commitment to community that these people had in 

fundraising. 

 

And then to hear the story of this Amicus deal and now that’s in 

here about some new funding that they did. And they went over 

all of that. They sat there, Mr. Speaker, grimacing. I mean, you 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5901 

could see, no we can’t believe that this is actually it. And now I 

find the arrogance of putting something like that in the Throne 

Speech and suggesting that this is the way that this will go 

amazing that somebody, the brain trust over there, decided that 

this now should be flaunted and go into the Throne Speech. 

 

But I guess it’s there, so I gladly welcome that part in there 

because I can point to that, that this wasn’t something that I was 

going around saying this. Here it is; it’s right here. 

 

So we have on-the-job training about essential services. 

 

Now they’re flaunting the new deal which, if you go to 

Kerrobert, Mr. Speaker, if you go to Shellbrook and you walk 

through those places, if you walk through any number of those 

other places — the member from Rosemont mentioned a few of 

them — and you see why we need this, Mr. Speaker. You see 

why, when you go downstairs in some of those places and you 

see the crawl spaces you have to get into, you know why these 

people are on. 

 

And what do we have? We have a financial problem in terms of 

what is happening here in the province. And so what would we 

do with this, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Minister of Finance is not looking good these days. He’s 

not looking good; he’s not looking happy. He’s got things . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Being now 5 p.m., the Assembly will recess 

until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5867 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5867 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5867 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5867 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5867 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5869 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5876 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5867 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5867 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5867 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5868 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5868 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5868 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5868 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Tribute to Davey Steuart 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5869 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5869 

 Battlefords Interval House Celebrates 30th Anniversary 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5869 

 Veterans’ Week 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5870 

 National Adoption Awareness Month 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5870 

 Premier’s Awards for Excellence in the Public Service 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 5870 

 Resource Revenues 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5870 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Agricultural Producers 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5871 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5871 

 Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5872 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5872 

 Out-of-Province Medical Care 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5873 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5873 

 Support for Flood Victims 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5874 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5874 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 148 — The Animal Protection Amendment Act, 2010 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5876 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5876 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5876 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5878 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5881 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5892 

  Trew (point of order) .............................................................................................................................................................. 5894 

  D’Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 5894 

  Deputy Speaker (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................ 5894 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5896 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5898 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


