




















































Hansard: March 08, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 26B  MONDAY, MARCH 8, 2010, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4007 

 March 8, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land 

Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The House now resumes. I recognize 

the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Before the dinner break, we were discussing a number of Bills 

and got a little carried away and didn’t realize how close to the 

clock I was running, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, there is a number of my colleagues who would wish to 

speak to this Bill, and there are a number of issues that we have 

to do further investigation into and look at the implications of 

the Bill as it touches a number of areas across the province. 

 

So at this time, I would adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow has adjourned debate of Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 101 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 101 — The 

Credit Union Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s my 

pleasure to weigh in and debate discussion of Bill 101, The 

Credit Union Amendment Act, 2009. I don’t know if there’s an 

institution or an organization from the co-operative spirit that 

reflects our social and economic fabric in Saskatchewan more 

wholly or more significantly than credit unions within 

Saskatchewan. And so it’s my great honour to speak here today 

about legislation as it relates to credit unions and how they’re 

governed, how they’re legislated, how they operate. And it’s 

pointing to that great history that these organizations and these 

institutions have played within our province that we need to 

ensure and keep a mind on the important role that these 

institutions, these co-operative organizations will play into the 

future. 

 

You know, as we look across our province’s history, when 

farmers and farm families couldn’t rely on the big banks, it was 

the credit unions that were able to step up and to serve the needs 

of communities. And in fact it’s the story of Saskatchewan in 

many ways when we look back to the collapse, the market 

collapse of 1929 that gave rise to some challenges here in 

Saskatchewan. Of course subsequent to that, there was the 

drought that occurred that caused great pains for Saskatchewan 

producers and families. And in our homesteading state that 

Saskatchewan was, of small farms, that was a huge challenge 

for Saskatchewan people — a story, of course, that’s ingrained 

in each of us as we move forward and sort of a shared 

experience unique to Saskatchewan. 

 

But not only was there drought, Mr. Deputy Speaker, within the 

land as it affected agriculture. There was a drought in lending as 

a result of the market crashes. And what we recognized was that 

the big banks, all centred for the most part out of eastern 

Canada, quit lending and the economic calamity was 

exacerbated by this fact. 

 

Had the credit unions not been in place to be able to take up this 

space — this lending — the economic calamity that was the 

stock market crash, the drought, the depression of the '30s 

would have been far more trying than what it was already. And 

there was huge growth and opportunities for which credit 

unions were able to fill that role. When eastern banks quit 

lending and sort of pulled out some of the supports that they 

offered, it was our local credit unions and our organizations that 

delivered to Saskatchewan families. 

 

You know, and I look to the member from Melville who’s 

listening in, and of course my family at that time was actually 

homesteading in around Melville. And I know at that point in 

time the reliance on the credit unions to be able to access the 

credit needed, the cash needed to be able to put forward basics 

for running the farm operation, the fuel, the machinery, the 

inputs, the seed . . . But even beyond that, Mr. Speaker, there 

was families that were relying on our credit unions for food, for 

money for groceries, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they’ve played an incredibly important role, and I would 

argue that they’ve played, as many institutions do, a vital part of 

our history, and it’s important that they play a vital part of the 

future. There’ll be different roles, Mr. Speaker, but we need to 

make sure that legislation that’s put out allows them to play that 

relevant and important role that they have in Saskatchewan’s 

economic and social fabric. 

 

I think it’s worthwhile to talk a little bit about just the 

innovation in technology that has been driven in this province 

by Saskatchewan’s credit unions, its many, many, many credit 

unions. And I think that we can look to some of the 

technological innovations when companies such as CDSL 

[Consumer Digital Subscriber Line] here in Saskatchewan, here 

in Regina, created technologies that in fact advanced the first 

ATM [automated teller machine], and I think many 

Saskatchewan people wouldn’t be aware of that. Secondly, they 

should be rightfully proud to look at the world of e-commerce 

and how that’s developed worldwide to know that that was born 



4008 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

right here on the Prairies, right here in Saskatchewan and out of, 

in fact, innovations that have been supported by the credit union 

movement. 

 

And certainly now, CDSL of course played an important role. I 

believe now they’re part of . . . have been amalgamated or 

purchased by CGI and still have a presence here in this 

province, but that’s an incredible story of innovation technology 

homegrown on the Prairies by Saskatchewan individuals, Mr. 

Speaker. And I know many of these individuals, and I won’t 

cite them at this point in time to embarrass them, but these are 

leaders within our community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it hasn’t just stopped there. In recent times here, we’ve 

seen some of the new chip technologies for member cards that 

Conexus Credit Union has introduced, and this has been another 

display in a short time frame of the kind of innovation and 

technology that’s been driven and born on the Prairies, here in 

Saskatchewan, led by Saskatchewan people and led within our 

credit unions. 

 

So we’ve had these credit unions that have played such a vital 

role for families, for farmers, at times where credit had dried up 

and at the time where their crops had dried up as well. And now 

we see it into our knowledge-based economy, when we talk 

about the innovation agenda and the technology, what that 

means for our economy moving forward and world-wide. We 

can be incredibly proud with the evolution of credit unions in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, we would never as well want to ever dismiss the 

absolutely huge economic impact that credit unions have on 

Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan communities, and 

Saskatchewan’s way of life. And I can point to . . . of course 

this number has dwindled over many years through 

amalgamation and through this process, but even at this point 

we still have well over 60 credit unions in Saskatchewan and 

that’s impressive. And each one of these credit unions of course 

represent in many ways a specific community. Now we’re 

moving a little bit away from this, going to a bit of a larger 

amalgamated credit union base with still strong local presence 

of course within the province. 

 

But many of these credit unions have served their communities 

so incredibly well because of the local governance structures 

that were in place that allowed them to serve communities’ 

needs, in understanding the unique and dynamic differences in 

our vast province. And I think they’re really something that, 

when we look at Saskatchewan and our thriving private sector 

which is something we’re all so proud of, we should be also just 

as proud of that strong co-operative organization that exists, 

that in many ways has ensured the success of our province. 

 

And we can look and think of, as it’s changed — even the 

landscape of Saskatchewan, the physical structure — and the 

role credit unions have played in providing the resources to be 

able to see hoteliers develop in all sorts of communities, see the 

commerce develop, and see lending that has really changed our 

landscape. And many, many physical structures today and 

yesterday and 50 and 80 years ago were lent from credit unions. 

 

And it’s still a thing of pride when you go out to various 

communities — whether that be in Moosomin or Fort 

Qu’Appelle or wherever, and you sit, and use Moosomin for an 

example — where they’re looking at some of the development 

of the hotel there. And of course it’s a thing of pride to the 

credit union that they were able to supply that project with its 

financing, and I think that it is something that we should all be 

proud of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The economic impact also speaks for itself. We talk about the 

fact that in a province of 1 million people that we have 500,000 

members of credit unions in this province. When you think 

about the employment aspect, we have 3,600 employees — 

more than that — within this province that are of course playing 

vital roles within their communities, distributed across 

Saskatchewan, small communities and large, rural and urban, 

and that are paying taxes, buying their goods, raising their 

families within all these communities. And I believe right now 

the assets of the credit unions are beyond $12 billion here in 

Saskatchewan, so we’re not talking about a small entity of any 

sort. 

 

And of course they distribute proportionately their lending. And 

it also provides a bit of a snapshot of the importance of that 

lending because it represents the activity of where those dollars 

are flowing and, in many cases, vital resources to industries and 

to our economy as a whole. And to break that down, we can 

look at the almost $2 billion in lending that relates to 

agriculture, something that we should be proud of and 

something that certainly serves our community and our 

implement dealers and our seed dealers and our chemical 

dealers — such a very important purpose here in our province, 

$2.4 billion in commercial lending. 

 

And of course it’s so exciting — in the span of, you know, 

particularly this last decade — to see the kind of development 

that’s occurred in this province and much of that being 

commercial. And it’s inspiring to realize that the institutions 

that, in my case, that my grandfather and great grandfather 

worked to be good stewards of and leaders within still play a 

vital role here today in our modern Saskatchewan. 

 

So when we look at credit unions, we need to look at the social 

fabric, the social impact that they’ve offered, the change to the 

physical landscape, and the economic impact. Specifically from 

a social stewardship or a community goodwill aspect, we know 

that when we go to our events across this province, one of the 

most recognized name on the placards is the sponsor of the 

local credit union. And they’ve supported communities in being 

able to provide recreational facilities, local culture and arts, and 

programs that are vital to communities. 

 

Much of that, Mr. Speaker, I believe comes from the strong 

local governance and their ability to understand the needs of 

local community, something that we should all recognize and 

something that I’m sure that we do, but sometimes you have to 

step back and realize these things just don’t happen by chance. 

And we need to make sure an institution such as our credit 

unions are as strong moving forward, as is relevant moving 

forward, as they have been to our history, and I’m confident 

that we, as legislators, will strive to ensure that that’s the case. 

 

We should never look past the impact of the fact that people are 

actually able to keep their money here in relative ways within 

our own province. And I think it’s important, you know, we 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4009 

speak often with great pride — and rightfully so — about the 

good regulation on the banking industry. And as we’ve looked 

at this most recent economic calamity worldwide, nations from 

around the world have looked to Canada and its regulations and 

its structures, its governance over its banking system, 

something that we should rightfully be proud of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the big banks and the regulation goes beyond that here in 

Saskatchewan where our credit unions also play an incredibly 

vital role. So it’s a proud day when we see Canada’s banking 

system and the protections and securities that have been put in 

place being highlighted in forums such as the G20. But we 

should never be shy, Mr. Speaker, to also point and tell the 

story unique to Saskatchewan, unique to credit unions because 

they have been incredibly resilient. We need to ensure that 

legislation ensures that they will be into the future, that they’ll 

be as secure into the future, and learning the lesson of other 

countries, through their banking systems, to make sure we 

always, always make sure that Saskatchewan and Canadian 

residents have the confidence and the security in their banking 

system. 

 

So it’s through that lens that we need to make sure we 

understand this legislation, that we analyze it. It’s through that 

lens that we need to make sure that we’ve done our due 

diligence as government and opposition MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] in making sure that the kind of 

discussion and dialogue has included a discussion of potentially 

unintended consequences of this legislation and making sure 

that we very clearly delineated and highlighted the impact of all 

of the changes that are here. So it’s with that that we study the 

actual purpose of some of the legislative changes, but then we 

also have to make sure we understand what the effect of the 

legislative changes are. 

 

And we do know that at times the current government has 

struggled significantly in understanding that — the 

consequences of legislation. And we want to make sure we get 

something like this right, Mr. Speaker, because these are 

organizations that have been vital to our past, and they will be 

vital to our future as well. 

 

You know there’s provisions in the Bill around services and 

coercive tied selling which appear to be similar to the previous 

Bill or the existing provisions. But upon closer inspection, Mr. 

Speaker, the insertion of a phrase, I quote, “a group of products 

or services” may give credit unions greater scope to offer other 

financial services such as insurance, and this has traditionally 

been prohibited in Saskatchewan. 

 

[19:15] 

 

And I think what we need to do at this point in time, if this is a 

consequence of this Bill, is that we need to understand and 

consider the potential ramifications of these provisions for 

consumers and for other financial service providers in this 

province before rushing to judgment on this Bill. 

 

It’s incredibly important that we understand because there’s 

new phrasing that’s been placed into here. We see words and 

with emphasis being placed on product. We need to understand 

we know what that means specifically. What does this allow 

for? And what’s going to be the impact? How does that affect 

the current landscape, the current individuals and businesses in 

Saskatchewan? We need to know this before we can proceed, 

and that’s certainly some of the questions that we’re going to be 

seeking both from government and from industry and from 

individuals. 

 

Further we need to understand exactly what the word that’s 

been added here, I believe, as it relates to affiliates. We need to 

understand what that means because, on this front, credit unions 

have a substantial interest, but so do Saskatchewan people and 

businesses, and we just fully need to understand what those 

consequences are, Mr. Speaker. To date we haven’t had the 

information that would allow us to understand these fully. 

 

The opposition New Democrats always, always practise very 

thorough oversight, very thorough scrutiny, and very thorough 

understanding of what a legislative change, what that impact 

might be because sometimes a Bill might be well intended 

enough — and this one quite rightfully could be — but we need 

to make sure we always understand as well what the other 

impacts and consequences are, as I say, for Saskatchewan 

people, and on an institution that, I think I’ve wanted to make 

sure I’ve highlighted, have played such a vital role in our 

province. 

 

There’s provisions in this Bill as well as it relates to creating 

processes for handling disputes between credit unions and their 

members. And of course we spoke of the 500,000 credit union 

members in Saskatchewan. That’s a real thing of pride, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I’m not sure if you’re a credit union member 

or not, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and you’re not offering me any 

signals here right now — but certainly I would assume that at 

least over half, if not probably a greater proportion, of the 

members sitting in this Assembly would be members. And 

certainly that’s reflective of the general population. 

 

But we do need to make sure we understand how these new 

dispute resolution mechanisms . . . What does this mean? How 

is it going to operate? And it specifically relates to the 

termination of membership. It’s certainly appropriate that credit 

unions be involved in this process, absolutely, but at the same 

time it’s important for people to have access to an independent 

process in the form of a registrar that serves Saskatchewan 

people well. Now I think that there’s an ability to marry these 

two concepts and to maintain balance. We need to make sure 

that the new provisions in this Bill allow for that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In closing on this, Mr. Speaker, I can say that, you know, just to 

wrap up, the credit union system, the co-operative organizations 

in this province have played such a vital role to our history. 

They, in the same way but in different ways, are going to play 

an incredibly important role into the future, and we need to 

make sure that the kind of legislation that we put forward 

doesn’t impede that and that in fact it allows them to be relevant 

in our modern environment. They have played such an 

important role in transforming our physical landscape, the 

structures, the buildings that are in the end fixtures within our 

communities and buildings that we look to. Many of those 

buildings, the money was borrowed from credit unions. 

 

And of course we’ve talked about the important and vital role 

that credit unions have played and do play as it relates to 

agriculture, the historical place that they have, and their role as 



4010 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

economic drivers. The economic outcomes that come out of 

credit unions with over 3,600 employees is significant, with 

over $12 billion worth of assets in this province is huge, and 

never, ever to dismiss the role of these in developing socially as 

well because proper lending to families and to entrepreneurs, to 

small business is vital in a strong and healthy and progressive 

economy. It’s also important to the well-being of individuals. 

And of course the community and social stewardship that these 

institutions, these credit unions have played in our past has been 

huge. We know that it will be into the future as well. 

 

This opposition is going to continue to consult with our 

stakeholders, continue to ask the questions that aren’t answered, 

continue to make sure that credit unions are empowered to be as 

meaningful into the future as they have been in our past. And I 

know many of our members will be wanting to speak to this 

piece of legislation. We’ll also be having many questions of the 

government of which aren’t answered at this point in time. But 

at this point in time, I will adjourn debate on this Bill, Bill 101, 

The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2009 for further debate at 

another time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 101, The Credit Union 

Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 103 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 103 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

this evening to enter into debate on Bill 103, the miscellaneous 

statutes professional discipline Act. Now essentially what the 

Act does is allows an organization to pursue disciplinary action 

against a person who was in a profession but leaves a profession 

and is found out to have committed some sort of misdemeanour 

against the . . . well against somebody, anyway, and perhaps 

within the organization. 

 

So what it means is effectively that the organization that’s 

represented is able to provide some sort of sanctions against 

that person. For up to a period of two years, they can commence 

an action against that person after a resignation. 

 

So what happened in Bill 103 is that it affects 40 self-regulated 

groups around the province. And I’ll list those groups after, 

interestingly, who’s in and who’s out. And we’ll certainly be 

asking questions at some point in terms of how the decisions 

were made to include one group and disclude another. 

 

Now a situation that might exist, where a person is wronged by 

somebody who’s part of a profession and is interested in 

sanctions against the person who committed the wrong who 

then would choose to leave the profession in some manner to 

avoid a sanction. You can understand how it would be very 

frustrating for an individual who’s been wronged when the 

person that committed the wrong can simply resign from the 

profession to avoid any disciplinary action. 

 

So certainly we’re largely in favour of many aspects of the Bill. 

And when they brought forward similar legislation but was 

limited — only judges — one of the members from the NDP 

[New Democratic Party] basically called for exactly this Act. 

So it’s interesting because professional organizations in 

Saskatchewan play a very important role in society for a 

number of reasons. They are essentially the keepers of their 

own profession, whether it’s the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical 

Association] or any other body like that. 

 

And so it’s in their own best interest as a professional group to 

ensure that the highest standards are met by the professionals 

within that group. Different professional organizations will 

provide mentoring and support of people who are new to the 

profession. But one of the other very important roles of a 

professional organization is to provide discipline to their own 

members. And if you look at the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons, they will be a body that will investigate and defend 

the professionals in their group, and so they play an important 

role in discipline. 

 

Now whenever legislation is brought forward, it’s incumbent 

upon the government and the opposition to look at who exactly 

has been consulted in conjunction with the legislation. We have 

found on numerous occasions from the pony Act, the Bills 5 

and 6, the Bill 80, that one of the large flaws in legislation with 

the Saskatchewan Party government is that they refuse to 

consult with nearly anybody in respect to their legislation. 

 

So we certainly have some major concerns about who might 

have been consulted, considering the very large number of 

groups represented or affected directly by the legislation. As I 

had mentioned, there are 40 groups directly affected, and what’s 

just as interesting as the number of groups that are affected are 

the number of groups that are left out. I’ll get to that a little 

later. 

 

Now this government has brought forward or supported TILMA 

[Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement] in many 

different forums because the Premier on one occasion said that 

they wouldn’t sign on to TILMA. They ran to British Columbia 

and changed the name, and then they signed on so that he 

wouldn’t break his promise, but effectively it’s TILMA. Now 

one of the things that TILMA allows, that is interesting with 

respect to Bill 103, is it allows movement of professionals 

inter-jurisdictionally across the country. It enables a 

standardization of rules and procedures that would affect any 

profession so that if you are certified in one province, you’re 

certified in all. And so TILMA enables people to move 

inter-jurisdictionally rather easily. 

 

And so you have to ask yourself, when you introduce Bill 103 

that affects some of 40 different professional organizations, 

what exactly can be done to ensure interprovincial standards for 

each of these groups? Because one thing that has been learned, 

at least recently, is that it’s been allowed that a professional will 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4011 

quit whatever discipline they were engaged in in one 

jurisdiction and effectively escape any sanction and then are 

able to move to another jurisdiction in Canada and practise the 

same profession. And so we would go to see something in this 

legislation that decreases the possibility that that will happen. 

And I don’t see that in any of the Bill, as far as I’ve read it. So 

we’d like to see something considered, especially in light of the 

ease of mobility of professionals in Saskatchewan. 

 

And so when you’ve got a TILMA-like agreement signed onto 

by a government and you bring forward legislation such as Bill 

103, you have to ask, are we duplicating something, or does this 

legislation already exist in another jurisdiction where it’s seen 

success? And then you ask yourself, well who’s included in that 

jurisdiction and who isn’t? 

 

And so in order to strengthen legislation here and anywhere 

else, it’s important to look at other jurisdictions and how they’re 

doing things. And so I think that it’s incumbent upon the 

government in this case to look at where else this legislation 

exists in order to strengthen their own. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Now one thing that seems to be unclear in reference to this 

legislation is what sanctions are able to be meted out. So you’ve 

got somebody in a profession who commits a wrong. They 

choose to quit, but two years less a day later there are sanctions; 

there’s an investigation launched to determine what the wrong 

is. And in some cases — in most cases, it wouldn’t be 

taxpayers’ money that’s being spent — but in some cases, I’m 

sure out of the 40 groups, it would be. And so you have to ask 

yourself, is there a possible outcome after the investigation 

takes place? 

 

So if you have somebody who is in an organization, a 

professional organization, who commits a wrong, resigns to 

avoid any type of sanction, and they effectively become a 

private citizen and aren’t interested in practising that profession 

any more, and then within two years less a day you launch an 

investigation. And after the findings come back, it’s determined 

that there was indeed a wrong committed, but since the person 

has left the profession, there are no sanctions available to that 

organization, professional organization. 

 

So you have to ask yourself how effective the legislation will 

be. And are we essentially creating legislation that has no teeth, 

where somebody could do what was done before and the only 

difference is now we can investigate and determine wrongdoing 

after they’ve quit, but you still can’t mete out the appropriate 

sanction? And so I think that’s an important question in relation 

to Bill 103. 

 

Now I’d like to, if I could, talk about the groups that are 

encompassed by the legislation, and for the benefit of the folks 

who are affected or who think they might be affected and who 

are watching at home, I’ll go through the list. It’s agrologists. 

It’s architects. It’s assessment appraisers. It’s Canadian 

Information Processing Society of Saskatchewan. It’s certified 

general accountants. It’s certified management accountants. It’s 

certified management consultants. It’s chartered accountants. 

It’s chiropractors. It’s community planning professions. It’s 

dental disciplines. It’s dieticians. It’s engineering and 

geoscience professions. It’s forestry professions although they 

are becoming an endangered species in Saskatchewan. There 

might not be any left to provide sanctions against, the way the 

Saskatchewan Party government treats the forestry industry in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It’s funeral and cremation services. It’s interior designers. It’s 

land surveyors and professional surveyors. It’s League of 

Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents. It’s 

LPNs [licensed practical nurse]. It’s management accountants. 

It’s medical lab technologists. It’s medical radiation 

technologists. It’s midwives, occupational therapists, opthalmic 

dispensers, optometrists, paramedics, physical therapists, 

podiatrists, psychologists, registered music teachers, registered 

nurses, registered psychiatric nurses, respiratory therapists, rural 

municipality administrators, science technologists and 

technicians, social workers, speech language pathologists and 

audiologists, and urban municipal administrators. 

 

Notably in that list you will note that for some reason the list 

doesn’t include teachers. More interestingly than that is the 

exception of the police service of Saskatchewan. Now the 

people engaged in the police profession are by and large a 

tremendous group of folks who do no wrong. You could say the 

same thing about politicians in Saskatchewan, but it’s been the 

occasion in Saskatchewan’s history that it happens. And so 

what’s interesting is, with three members of the police service 

on their side, why police aren’t included on this list. 

 

It’s interesting to note that dieticians and agrologists and rural 

municipal administrators are included, but folks engaged in the 

police service aren’t. And so we’ll be asking these questions 

and many more in committee when this Bill is sent there. 

 

And so with that, I move to adjourn debate on Bill 103. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 

Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 103, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) Amendment 

Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 108 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 108 — The 

Cities Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s my 

pleasure to join debate and discussion here tonight as it relates 

to Bill 108, The Cities Amendment Act, 2009. And it’s always a 

pleasure to enter into debate to ensure that the purpose and the 

objective of legislation that’s been put forward is clear but then 

to also ensure that the effect of that legislation, the 

consequences of that legislation, are the intended ones that are 

desired. 



4012 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

And to do that, Mr. Speaker, of course we’re always engaging 

our wide group of stakeholders across the community, the broad 

community, asking questions, seeking questions from 

government, and bringing forward the kind of transparency and 

questions that Saskatchewan people so deserve to have as it 

relates to laws that in the end govern our cities, our institutions, 

or individuals themselves. 

 

In this case, it would appear the legislation reduces the 

provincial’s role in approving street closures in certain 

municipalities in the case of provincial highways that travel 

through cities. And certainly on face value, this would seem to 

make a lot of sense. It would seem to be very reasonable in 

principle, and I certainly think that we need to consider the 

specific provisions of this piece of legislation very carefully. 

But at first blush and with the thoughtful consultation that we 

will embark on on this piece of legislation throughout the 

various stages of this Bill . . . and we need to ensure that it in 

fact is reasonable, but not just reasonable, that’s it’s practicable 

and that it serves both municipalities, towns, cities, and people 

well in the end, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On that note, I think it’s fair to say that we have huge faith and 

huge trust and huge confidence and huge pride in the 

governance of our municipalities within Saskatchewan, urban 

and rural. And it’s something that, in many ways, I believe, it’s 

something that we can all be very proud of. And we each come 

from different places within the province. But we can point to 

strong governance, and whether that be our rural municipalities, 

Mr. Speaker, who do such a good job of the services that they 

are responsible for, the scope of their responsibility, and being 

accountable in a very, very close way to the taxpayer . . . has 

served Saskatchewan very well. 

 

And the governance structures are something that sometimes I 

hear members opposite talk about . . . are cumbersome. And 

then we see them sort of try to shove school boards out of the 

way and take away their autonomy. 

 

But when we look at municipalities, as we do with school 

boards, Mr. Speaker, we think that local governance is good 

government. And it’s not perfect, and it’s not always incredibly 

efficient to deal with many levels of government, Mr. Speaker. 

But we know when you’re elected in a regional fashion for a 

very specific purpose, it has served Saskatchewan well in its 

development for many, many years, Mr. Speaker. We would 

urge the government to make sure they’re always recognizing 

that and that in legislative changes they do as well. 

 

So we’re proud of the governance of our cities, of our towns, of 

our rural municipalities, Mr. Speaker. But further than that, 

we’re very proud of the administration of those entities — of 

those cities, of those towns, of those rural municipalities. And 

in some ways, the capacity we have in this province as it relates 

to administration of municipalities is huge, Mr. Speaker. And 

you can walk into RM [rural municipality] office after RM 

office in this province, Mr. Speaker, and expect to meet 

competent, strong administration that delivers those programs 

and services that are vital to local taxpayers. 

 

So it’s on that note, when I talk about good governance and 

strong administration, that we have faith in being able to work 

with municipalities in looking at roles such as further roles as it 

relates to street closures and looking at ways that the province 

doesn’t duplicate some of that and that some of that 

responsibility can be abdicated possibly on the provincial end. 

But we need to make sure that that makes sense. And certainly 

those questions will continue to be asked in our thorough 

meetings and consultations, not just in the cities, Mr. Speaker, 

but across the province. 

 

Another aspect of this piece of legislation relates specifically to 

the power to seize mobile homes in cases where property taxes 

have gone unpaid, are in arrears. And there’s a concern that the 

mobile home could then be moved. On the face of this, Mr. 

Speaker, as well this certainly doesn’t seem to be an 

unreasonable piece of legislation. And certainly this is one of 

those pieces, though, that I think specifically we need to make 

sure we’re very clear of the problem that this is the answer to, 

and the objective of this specific provision. And then we need 

to make sure that the objective of that provision is being met 

with the legislative response that’s within this Bill and making 

sure that the proper oversight and scrutiny was provided as this 

legislation was put together, and certainly affording it the 

thoughtful deliberation, discussion in consultation that Bills 

deserve as they proceed through their various stages of reading, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on the face of it, this aspect as well does not seem 

unreasonable, but we need time to consider this proposal further 

as well, and we need to ensure that it’s applied fairly, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think that’s the same with any piece of 

legislation that we’re looking at. And as we look at the 

potential, unintended consequences — hopefully never intended 

— but making sure that legislation is set up to be applied in a 

fair manner . . . and it might be the objective . . . I would never 

believe that the objective would be to have legislation go 

forward that could be manipulated and applied in unfair ways. 

 

But we need to make sure at this end, when we create laws, 

when we put forward Bills and we put forward provisions, that 

those Bills, those provisions in effect have been double-checked 

and scrutinized and vetted to make sure that in their application, 

in the practical application of these Bills, that fairness will be 

ensured and that’s there’s no ability to exploit any aspect of this 

or for it to be misunderstood, Mr. Speaker, because we certainly 

want to make sure that there’s not inequitable treatment for 

mobile home owners as compared with other residential 

property owners, many of whom are facing some of the similar 

concerns as it relates to tax arrears or unpaid taxes. 

 

And of course these are certainly big problems for 

municipalities who rightfully are seeking those dollars for the 

services that they provide. It’s also, you know, in some ways a 

reflection of . . . because I don’t think most people would try to 

not pay their taxes. I think it’s a reflection of a broader theme 

that we’re recognizing across this province, and that is one of 

cost of living. But I would argue, Mr. Speaker, that’s not for the 

purview of municipalities. So we need to make sure they have 

the tools to be able to effectively and fairly and efficiently 

provide the services and collect the taxes that they need. 

 

[19:45] 

 

But for us as provincial legislators, I think there’s a huge 

take-home at this, one that the opposition New Democrats raise 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4013 

regularly on behalf of Saskatchewan people in all communities 

in Saskatchewan, and that be the rising cost of living, Mr. 

Speaker, that is of huge hindrance to the social well-being and 

economic well-being of many, many families in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. And we need to make sure we have a mindful eye 

to that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we have a piece of legislation like this that highlights 

specifically a problem that exists in society . . . And it’s not 

necessarily a completely new problem, unpaid taxes, but 

certainly we know that problems like unpaid taxes are 

exacerbated in circumstances where cost-of-living increases 

haven’t kept pace with or have exceeded the revenues in 

average households. 

 

And this is a real problem, Mr. Speaker, and we hear about it 

regularly in every community across Saskatchewan. And in fact 

it’s a pretty bold statement, Mr. Speaker. And we have travelled 

to hundreds of communities — the opposition New Democrats 

— in the span of the last few months and of course through the 

last couple years as our role here in opposition. And what we’re 

hearing in every single one of those communities — and again I 

repeat, every — is that cost of living is a major challenge. 

 

And I think it’s important that I highlight “every,” Mr. Speaker, 

because sometimes members opposite often overlook their own 

constituencies on this front, Mr. Speaker, and I think that they 

sometimes believe that this is somehow just an urban problem 

contained within the larger cities of Regina and Saskatoon. But 

I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, the issue and challenge is profound 

in some of our smaller urban centres as well — Swift Current, 

Estevan, Weyburn, Nipawin, Melfort, Yorkton, right across the 

board, Mr. Speaker, North Battleford, Lloydminster. But it 

doesn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking about some of 

our smaller towns within this province, Mr. Speaker, where 

we’re sitting in meetings and we’re hearing about the cost of 

living. It’s a major, major challenge. 

 

And when we’re talking about a piece of legislation that in the 

end provides tools to collect taxes for which families aren’t 

paying, what I would make sure, I want to make clear, Mr. 

Speaker, is that we also recognize the broader problem. That’s 

not necessarily for municipalities to respond to because they 

don’t have the resources, Mr. Speaker. I do think that it’s 

always important when municipalities — and most do — take a 

mindful approach of ways they can partner and ways that they 

can be mindful of cost of living and these aspects, affordable 

housing and whatnot, but these are roles for the province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So while this seems to be a very reasonable piece of legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the seizure of property, we need to 

make sure what that process means and to make sure that it’s 

treating people fairly, making sure that Saskatchewan people 

have the peace of mind and the rights and the dignity and the 

personal space, socially and economically, that allowed them a 

productive life in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I look at some of the other aspects of this Bill, it also speaks 

of annexation. And annexation for a number of cities and their 

neighbouring RMs have run into some challenges with this 

process. And I would never believe, Mr. Speaker, that this is a 

process that would ever take any level of adversity and 

challenge or take all adversity and challenge out of it. I don’t 

believe there’s a system that would allow that to happen 

because when you’re talking about land development and 

whose land is it and compensation and services and who will 

provide those and for what costs and historical territory, these 

are things — and property — these are things that people and 

communities take great ownership of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would never suggest that there’s a way that the province 

could simply make a process that takes away the adversity and 

challenge that exists. But I do believe, do believe that a better 

process exists than what we have here today, Mr. Speaker, one 

that puts huge challenges on neighbouring municipalities 

whether that be the rural municipalities, Mr. Speaker, who in 

many times are feeling encroached upon by their growing, 

sprawling urban neighbours or whether that be even the 

challenges that relate to those urban municipalities, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we hear these concerns raised at the annual conventions of 

these organizations, the representation when we meet with the 

mayors and councils at SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association], and they’re certainly not in an 

adversarial way with the rural municipalities, but they’re 

looking for a process. And I know when we go and we meet 

with SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities] . . . And tomorrow I look forward to going and 

meeting with the rural municipalities that are in Regina for their 

annual convention. We welcome them to Saskatchewan. They 

play such a vital, vital role — SARM itself — in representing 

those rural municipalities but also those rural municipalities 

themselves in delivering the programs and services in a very 

accountable way back to the local ratepayers. 

 

And when we go to SARM, I know that we will certainly be 

hearing some of the challenges from their end as it relates to 

annexation. And I don’t necessarily say that there’s simple 

changes to be made, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t think it’s the 

simple changes that are the worthwhile ones, Mr. Speaker. I 

don’t think that good public policy is always easy, Mr. Speaker. 

I think when you’re looking . . . about good public policy and 

looking at the kind of mechanisms that can make processes like 

this better, I think in fact you’re dealing with terrain where you 

really need strong leadership, where you need strong 

consultation, and where you need a bringing together of really 

good minds. 

 

I’m confident of the ability and the people that exist within the 

province to provide that consultation. I’m not confident in any 

way on any front, financially or other, Mr. Speaker, with the 

Sask Party government who’s ham-handed on all these fronts 

and is always chasing a populist agenda as opposed to moving 

forward with the kind of meaningful public policy, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s been derived in a format that is going to be 

conducive and lend itself to providing legislation that achieves 

the kind of goals that we want. 

 

So I hope that this legislation isn’t just some grasping of low 

hanging fruit, Mr. Speaker, because I do think that when you 

have an opportunity to look at, say, The Cities Amendment Act 

as this does, and it’s opened up . . . there are some bigger 

opportunities to go in and address some of the real big 

challenges that exist in the province. And I think that this is 



4014 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

very siloed, this government is very siloed in the way they look 

at some of these circumstances. 

 

The government is very, very pleased to try to continue the kind 

of economic growth and development that the previous New 

Democrats had under way and the upswing of that 

development. And they like to speak of that message of 

economic growth that was exemplified by New Democrats, but 

speak of that often. But at the same time, they seem to have 

trouble with then understanding its consequences and planning 

for it. And some of that relates specifically to issues and 

challenges around annexation specifically, Mr. Speaker. Not 

simple answers on this front, but leadership is needed. And you 

can’t advance one without thoughtful deliberation and work on 

the other. And they have impact. 

 

And again I go back to the piece about the cost of living, Mr. 

Speaker. That is exemplified in a piece of legislation that 

provides an important tool, that being a remedy for properties 

that don’t pay taxes. We do need to make sure we understand 

that process as well and make sure it’s one that lends itself to 

being fairly applied. But it speaks to a broader issue in this 

province. And it speaks very clearly again to a government who 

sees things in silos and misses the interconnectivity that needs 

to go on if we’re going to go beyond a cheap populist message 

of simply growth, but one of development and progress for 

which growth is a vital part of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The legislation also gives municipalities the authority to request 

criminal record checks for candidates seeking public office. The 

government says that voters deserve to have all of the 

information they need to make an informed decision. We 

support that principle, Mr. Speaker. We’re certainly not 

opposed to that principle. However the specific changes the 

government has chosen to make give rise to a whole other set of 

questions, Mr. Speaker. If we’re going to impose and provide 

this tool to local communities to be able to impose on 

individuals to provide criminal record checks, should we not be 

looking at this same procedure provincially, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Is it fair for us to create legislation that says if you want to run 

as a city councillor or as a reeve or as a mayor that you need to 

have a criminal record check and have that examined by the 

people, and to assist them in making their decision, but then we 

don’t ask that of ourselves, Mr. Speaker? On these fronts, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that we need to be very mindful of not being 

hypocritical. 

 

So as I say, I think it’s a sensible thing to look at, but I think it’s 

backwards. I think that when you make changes like this, you 

start with yourself. Start with yourself and looking at the 

processes that govern us. And it’s surprising to me that you 

would advance this upon municipal elected officials and 

communities but not on provincial officials, not on provincial 

MLAs, Mr. Speaker. So that’s, I think, questions and I think 

that I would argue that by doing what the Sask Party has done 

on this, they run a huge risk of being able to be challenged that 

they’ve provided a real double standard, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think that we should be beyond reproach on these fronts, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It’s the same thing, I believe, that if a government’s going to go 

in and say, well we’re going to . . . We screwed up the budget. 

Now we need to find some cost savings, and we’re going to 

constrain certain aspects of a budget such as on health care 

workers, which this government is trying to make the health 

care workers pay for their mistake. 

 

Where is the accountability at the highest level of government? 

If you are going to squeeze wages for one of the lowest paid 

groups in this province and you are not going to do it for 

yourself, your own salary, your own office, then I think you’ve 

got a huge leadership void there, Mr. Speaker. And I hope it’s 

something this government addresses before budget day, but it 

doesn’t appear at this point that that’s something that they’re 

too interested in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, when you open up a question such as criminal 

records as well . . . It was interesting at one point. It was of 

great concern to hear that the government was trying to proceed 

to mandate that criminal record checks would only be required 

in the North, Mr. Speaker, in the North, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t buy that kind of stuff, Mr. 

Speaker, as opposition New Democrats. We buy equity. We 

buy fairness. And when you apply something, it needs to be 

applied across your province and equally to people, just as the 

same I said, that if you’re going to expect that of your mayors 

and of your reeves and of your councillors, you better darn well 

expect that of yourself and your colleagues as MLAs. So I think 

the cart is ahead of the horse on this front, Mr. Speaker, and 

certainly it was shameful to hear that there was advancements to 

have this mandated to northern municipalities but to somehow 

have free rein in the South. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you’re doing it for the right reasons, you’ve 

done your research and it says that that’s good public policy and 

you’re advancing that, not for some populist agenda but 

because it’s providing good public policy, then you do it across 

the board, Mr. Speaker, in a fair treatment of all residents, not 

just up into the North where you have a very distinct population 

and a very real possibility of having individuals feel as though 

they’re being treated differently for certain reasons. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m glad to see the government’s retreated on that 

front, but I think that they still have questions as it relates to a 

double standard and provincial politics. 

 

So when you look at some of these aspects, you always have to 

look at the . . . basically make sure you’ve got them in the right 

order as well and to make sure that what you’re doing is in the 

public interest. And I think that if you’re making changes that 

have implications on individuals in the province, it’s far more 

well received if you can take that own responsibility yourself, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess just on one other aspect here, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

talking about The Cities Act, and we talked about different 

opportunities to evolve and change. We talked about 

annexation. We’ve seen a government probably advance a Bill 

here with kind of the easy stuff, Mr. Speaker, populist agenda, 

but doesn’t bring the real kind of governance and difference that 

we actually need, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess I look to one other area, and that’d be the joint 

planning commissions, Mr. Speaker, that exist between 

neighbouring municipalities — rural and rural, rural and urban. 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4015 

And these planning commissions of course have been in place 

for many, many, many years, and they provide equal 

representation on either side to make sure they understand each 

other’s development plans, to make sure that their development 

plans in fact are respective of one another’s, in some cases 

complementary to one another’s. 

 

I think this is important on many fronts, Mr. Speaker. From a 

very prudent perspective, from a taxing and service efficiency 

perspective, Mr. Speaker, RMs and neighbouring RMs and 

urban municipalities need to understand what kind of 

development they’re having, to make sure we’re developing in 

an orderly way that brings about the maximum types of 

efficiency, the types of communities that we wish to see 

develop, that are done in a very even-handed, thoughtful kind of 

way. And that I think that orderly planning, Mr. Speaker, is 

something that I believe is very important. 

 

And again this is where you can’t look at these things in silos. 

You can’t cheer for growth — not really know how to do it, to 

be frank, Mr. Speaker — but cheer for the growth that was put 

in place by a good balanced economy but then deal with all 

these other aspects and silos such as . . . One of the 

consequences of growth which can be quite positive, Mr. 

Speaker, is development within municipalities, rural and urban. 

These are exciting opportunities, Mr. Speaker, for rural 

municipalities and for cities, for towns. 

 

[20:00] 

 

But it’s important that, as we develop and we look at the 

borders of these communities, Mr. Speaker, of these 

municipalities, that the planning is sequenced and understood 

with one another. And this isn’t necessarily expeditious at 

times, Mr. Speaker, and it certainly takes time. But I believe 

that, when we’re planning communities and the services that 

they provide, we’re planning something that’s going to be 

serving us in 10 years, in 30 years, in 50 years, and 100 years. 

And if there’s a time to get it right, Mr. Speaker, it’s in those 

planning stages. If there’s a time to take the capital and the 

investment and to ensure it returns to us the kind of living 

environments and communities and efficiencies of services that 

municipalities and rural municipalities and cities are striving 

for, that that’s achieved. 

 

We don’t do that in silos, Mr. Speaker. And I scold the minister 

for not providing a tool. This could be done even at the 

regulatory level. But to provide to Saskatchewan communities, 

to municipalities the ability to ensure that orderly planning is 

achieved . . . and like I say, it’s not always a process that will be 

free from an adversarial environment. It won’t be free from all 

challenges but, Mr. Speaker, I believe the time, the energy, the 

thought, the oversight, the scrutiny will serve us well, Mr. 

Speaker, into many, many generations into the future. 

 

The failure to do so, Mr. Speaker, speaks to sort of that real 

right wing, scattered, unfettered-type growth that achieves sort 

of a state that — honestly, Mr. Speaker — I think very few 

desire. And I’m not looking for overburdened regulation here. 

What I’m looking at is a meaningful role for municipalities to 

continue to work together as they have for many years and for 

the current government to take a leadership role in this front to 

make sure that, as communities see capital flow in, that their 

services that they’re providing, the plans that they put forward, 

reflect one another’s understanding of that and, as I said, in 

many cases complementary. 

 

And it’s not just the services. Certainly it’s, as well, 

environmental understandings, environmental impacts, 

understandings of watersheds, understanding of land usage and 

best uses for that land. I’m confident, Mr. Speaker, 100 per cent 

confident, that we have the governance in our rural 

municipalities, in our urban municipalities, in our towns, in our 

villages to achieve this in balance with one another. Just the 

same, I have the same confidence in those administrations to 

work in the best interests of their communities, their ratepayers, 

but the province as a whole. And this gets to the whole point of 

making sure that, as we move forward, we are achieving the 

most desirable place to live, work, raise a family. 

 

And we have an exceptional opportunity here in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, and Saskatchewan New Democrats are going to 

ensure that that kind of oversight is maintained. What we’re 

concerned . . . is right now it would seem that the Sask Party 

government is abdicating itself of any responsibility on this 

front, and we see it a bit more of a go-it-alone approach, Mr. 

Speaker, which might be expedient in the sense of saving a few 

months in planning, but we don’t think it serves our province 

well as a whole. And I look to stronger leadership from the 

government on this front. 

 

At this point in time, I’ve stated some of our concerns, some of 

the fact that certainly on first blush some of what’s put forward 

seems to be sensible, seems to have a purpose or an objective 

anyways. But we need to make sure that the objectives are 

being achieved, that we’re not duplicating another piece of 

legislation or another level of government on some of these 

aspects, that we aren’t creating some consequences that are 

something that are not desirable, that are a direct consequence 

of these changes here. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I challenge the Sask Party government to 

quit just simply opening up Bills and picking the low hanging 

fruit that exists, the stuff that isn’t going to have much 

pushback on either front. But they need to dig deep and work 

with the exceptional talent we have in our municipalities, in our 

rural municipalities, in our urban municipalities and to be able 

to bring about address of the problems that they’re seeking 

solution for. 

 

At this point in time, I will adjourn debate on Bill No. 108, An 

Act to amend The Cities Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 108, The Cities Amendment Act, 2009. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 121 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 121 — The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009 be now 



4016 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 

me great pleasure to join in the debate on Bill No. 121, The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act. And I want to 

point out, Mr. Speaker, when I listen to my leader speak about 

the premise of building a successful economy and a successful 

province, there’s a number of cornerstones he identified. And I 

thought it was very, very important that people of 

Saskatchewan hear some of what he thought was important and 

the reason why he chose to be the leader of the NDP. 

 

The three components, of course, is talking about business and 

private investment and allowing the economy to attract that 

investment. I think that’s something that he is really quite 

frankly very knowledgeable about and very experienced about. 

 

The other matter he spoke about is also making sure we talked 

about the unions and the labour movement. And the people that 

can certainly run the economy and the oil of the economy, 

economic engine so to speak, was certainly the unions and the 

working people. He certainly highlighted that particular aspect 

of what he thought were cornerstones of the economy that 

Saskatchewan needed. 

 

He also spoke about that private business and the government’s 

role. He spoke about Crown corporations. He spoke about 

unions, the working people. He spoke about investors. He spoke 

about all the different avenues that ought to be supported and 

ought to be certainly acknowledged when you’re trying to build 

an economy. 

 

And one of the things that he also spoke about was a need for 

environmental regulation and environmental protection, and to 

point out that the resources are certainly part and parcel of a 

successful equation for environmental and certainly for 

economic building for Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I look across the way, I look at the whole 

notion of credibility. And right now I can tell the people of 

Saskatchewan are fast and very quickly losing any kind of 

respect that they once may have had. They may have had 

lingering thoughts of, well maybe we’ll give these guys a break 

to see what they’re about. And after their fiasco with the 

budget, we are now starting to see that they don’t have any 

concept of how to manage the province’s finances. They don’t 

have any concept of how to work with the working people, with 

the unions. Look at Bill 5, Bill 6. You look at Bill 80. All these 

are meant to hurt the working people. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you look at trying to attract investment, and 

well a lot of investors will not come to a province that is 

basically broke. So not only are you killing your unions; you’re 

also hurting your working people. You’re also trying to debase 

your resources, and you’re also trying to discourage investment. 

So one after another, you get a big fat F on all three fronts. 

 

And now we’re looking at the environmental perspective, Mr. 

Speaker. How does the environmental perspective work when it 

comes to this particular government? And I was quite struck by 

one point raised in some of our discussions when this 

government said, by 2010 we promise to stabilize greenhouse 

gas emissions. Well we have a news flash. It is now 2010, Mr. 

Speaker, and there’s no stability in our finances. There’s no 

stability in our economic thinking, and there’s certainly no 

stability when it comes to greenhouse gas emissions or action 

on the environment by that government across the way, Mr. 

Speaker. Absolutely none. 

 

And as I mentioned the leadership aspect, it’s just very apparent 

to the people of Saskatchewan that the confidence that they’ve 

had — lingering confidence that they had — and the hope that 

there’ll be some environmental movement from that 

government, they quickly dashed it, Mr. Speaker, because 

obviously with this Bill 121 there is no action on the 

environment. Quite frankly, there’s been never any actions in 

environment for the past number of months that that minister 

and that party have been in charge, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let me tell you what I think is really important that people 

ought to know. And I can remember the point that they raised 

is, they said we will implement the NDP’s target for greenhouse 

gas emissions. The reductions of those emissions are pretty darn 

important. So that party across the way said we will copycat 

what the NDP promised, Mr. Speaker. They said we’ll copycat. 

We’ll follow that lead of the NDP to see what we can do to 

address the greenhouse gas emission problem that 

Saskatchewan’s had. 

 

And not only did they try to follow our leadership, Mr. Speaker; 

they then found out that they couldn’t do it. They couldn’t do it. 

They said, oh no we better not do that. We can’t follow that 

leadership, so what we’ll do is we’ll say well now we can’t. So 

first of all you establish this goal, and then you say oh well 

maybe we can’t. Maybe we’ll follow the NDP’s plan. Then you 

turn around and say, well we can’t follow the NDP’s plan as 

well. 

 

So now we’re back to square one. So what do we do? What do 

we do? And now they’re saying, now they’re saying, now 

they’re saying, we’ll just rag the puck — as the Premier put it 

— when it comes to environmental protection and to reduce 

those greenhouse gases, Mr. Speaker. And I want to point out 

on Bill 121, for that member’s information, Mr. Speaker, on 

that point, on that point, Mr. Speaker, as they talk about looking 

at the environmental challenges that the province of 

Saskatchewan face, they are really, really coming from an angle 

where credibility is not their strongest suit, Mr. Speaker, 

whether it’s on the economy, whether it’s managing our 

finances and now building a step towards what people are 

talking about to protect the environment, to protect the 

environment. That’s what their language is over there. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the plan, quite frankly, the plan, quite 

frankly, is . . . [inaudible] . . . and look. People are asking for 

leadership on the protection of the environment. They’re asking 

for a leadership from that government. They’re asking for 

standards. They’re asking for targets. They’re asking for a lot of 

things to see if this government is serious about protection of 

the environment. And what we tell them is they’re so busy 

fighting the unions. They’re so bloody busy trying to clean up 

their fiscal mess. They’re so bloody busy trying to attract new 

investment . . . 

 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4017 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the member to be 

mindful of the language he uses in the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize for the 

phrase bloody, and I won’t use it in the future. 

 

But they don’t have no plans whatsoever to deal with the 

environment. And, Mr. Speaker, looking at the convention this 

weekend . . . Well I wouldn’t call it a convention. I’d call it a 

staff barbecue. But the convention itself where you set the tone 

at the staff barbecue, where you set the tone. There is not one 

resolution to deal with the environment — not one, not one. 

And the people of Saskatchewan are saying, well why are you 

guys talking about the environment when you don’t have one 

resolution to deal with the issues? 

 

You got to get with the program, you guys. You got a news 

flash. You’re the government. You’re the government, so set 

the tone, set the motions, set the action and direction. And why 

don’t you for once follow through on what you say you’re 

going to do on the environment? And I look at this document, 

Mr. Speaker. No targets, no reduction. We’re going to turn to 

industry. We’re going to turn to industry to see if they can help 

us in that regard. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got to have a strong government 

because last time you guys went to industry, they told you 

they’re going to have — what? — $3 billion in potash? Oh no, 

it wasn’t 3 billion. It was 1.9 billion. Then it went down to 100 

million. Then it went down to zero. Now it’s minus 202 million 

or 204 million. What’s a couple million here and there? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I guess the message on the environmental 

front is that if you’re going to, if you need leadership on that, 

then what you guys ought to do is provide it or get out of the 

way and we will provide it, Mr. Speaker. That’s the important 

message when it comes to environmental protection. The 

government has to provide the leadership. It has to provide that 

leadership, and you guys are failing on every count when it 

comes to environmental protection, every count, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:15] 

 

Now what I can’t understand on Bill 121, you know, the people 

are asking about standards. What are the standards under your 

Bill? And so far, no answers. Who is going to help to 

implement those standards? Who’s going to monitor, make sure 

these standards are there? Well we hope to have a relationship 

with industry. That’s fine to have a relationship, nothing wrong 

with that, but don’t you need staff as well to monitor the water? 

Don’t you need staff to monitor the air? Don’t you need staff to 

monitor how our forests are doing? Don’t you need staff for 

that? So the question we have is, show us the money. Where is 

the money to hire all these people to follow these standards that 

you talk about under the environmental protection? 

 

Now I look at this, and I noticed from some of the discussion, 

the minister talked about engaging the FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations] and the Métis Nation on his 

environmental regulations and see how they can add to it. But at 

the same time, they’re asking for advice on environmental 

protection which they’re not serious about, that government 

over there. In the meantime, they’re ignoring First Nations and 

Métis people under the duty to consult, as they issue permit 

after permit after permit. 

 

And not one bit of discussion or consultation to the Métis 

Nation, but they’re putting rules and regulations in. Hey come 

on, let’s come on to the tent; we’ll talk about what’s important 

on this particular front. So, Mr. Speaker, as you issue permit 

after permit after permit to different companies without the duty 

to consult, the people of the First Nations communities and the 

Métis communities, they know that you guys are just playing 

with them. They know exactly what your game plan is. And 

once again, as you issue permit after permit after permit, the 

duty to consult means nothing to you guys. 

 

So I would say to the Métis Nation, to the FSIN, under their 

so-called environmental plan with no clear guidelines, no 

targets, and no standards and no way to implement those 

standards and to police them, why would you engage them in 

this process when you’re ignoring them on a bigger front and 

that’s on the duty to consult? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, allow me to say that on the environmental 

front, you’re not providing leadership. You are just simply 

using the people that want to take this issue and matter 

seriously. You’re using them for something that you’re not . . . 

don’t have any resources nor political will to implement. So 

why put Bills like this forward? For what? For what reason? 

And that’s why I say to you today, the people of Saskatchewan 

are quickly finding out that you’re the great pretenders of 

government. You don’t know how to do it, step off the way, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the other point that I think is important is that we’re 

asking for leadership. And you guys promised that; you 

promised to do something on the environment. That was your 

promise. We’ll do this. And, Mr. Speaker, they broke that 

promise. They broke that promise. They promised to be fiscally 

accountable. They broke that promise. They promised they 

wouldn’t bring in the whole notion of back to work. They broke 

that promise. So whether it’s the economy or whether it’s the 

finances, whether it’s the unions or whether it’s Bill 80 or 

whether it’s the environment, they’ve broken every province 

that they found convenient to do so, Mr. Speaker. And once 

again on the environmental front, another promise broken. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a recap of what I think is really 

important. The people of Saskatchewan and the world is saying 

to all of us, our environment is radically changing. It is radically 

changing. And the one point that I made in this Assembly was I 

hate that word adapting to environmental change because it 

almost insinuates that we can’t reverse what is going on with 

our atmosphere, with our environment, almost like we are 

giving up. And that language is being used by many 

governments: adapting. I think we ought to address it, Mr. 

Speaker. And not only is this government not even accepting 

the word adapt; they’re not doing a thing about the challenges 

that we face on the environment. 

 

Now as the minister gets up and as the forest in northern 

Saskatchewan is burning and as our water resources are 

dwindling, she’s going to come along and say, oh we’re going 

to do a consultation with industry, and that’s going to be such a 

wonderful exercise. So as the forests are burning up and the 



4018 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

rivers are drying up and our greenhouse gas emissions go up 

and as you continue paying the potash company money you 

owe them, people are going to say, well what’s up with that? 

 

So that’s why when you bring forward your strategy through 

Bills to deal with a political promise you had no intentions of 

ever filling, people are seeing right through that. This 

opposition is seeing right through it, Mr. Speaker. So the 

minister, as I look at the minister, we’re telling them, look, 

don’t pussyfoot around. These are real, serious issues. You 

should engage, engage the public in a very thorough and a very 

comprehensive and a very powerful position to get them all 

engaged in this whole notion of meeting the challenge of our 

environment. You ought to do that. You ought to do that. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, they talk about this so-called new air 

management system. Now that’s a good one — air management 

system — sounds almost like an aviation company. Mr. 

Speaker, what is that? What is an air management system? Is 

that the same thing as your potash price analysis? Is that the 

same thing as your duty to consult when it comes to the First 

Nations, this fancy terminology that you use to confuse people? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s got to happen, is you guys 

have to wake up. You’ve got to wake up because what happens 

is . . . from our side, from the opposition side, we asked you to 

do one thing when we handed you a booming economy and 

three billion bucks or two and a half billion bucks in the bank. 

Everybody was working. Things were moving. The workers 

were protected. Things were moving along. We asked you to do 

one thing: please don’t mess it up. That’s what we said. Please 

don’t mess it up. 

 

So we came along, and us in the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

circles say, well we’re pretty sure they will make the same 

mistake that Grant Devine did. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s worse, is 

right. At least Grant Devine even had a couple of balanced 

budgets before he started going haywire there, Mr. Speaker, and 

built some buildings. And I go back to my leader’s comment, 

the Conservatives of the ’80s went broke at least building 

things. These guys are going broke just talking about it, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s worse. That’s worse. 

 

Now what I’m trying to figure out, what I’m trying to figure out 

is let’s look at the environmental point. You guys are going 

broke just talking about environmental reductions that are 

non-existent. 

 

Now I’m just trying to figure out, Mr. Speaker, again I go back 

to this, to the whole point of what did the NDP do about this, 

Mr. Speaker. What did the NDP do? They put some targets that 

people could look at and measure against. As tough and as risky 

as that was, we put targets down, Mr. Speaker. What did the 

NDP do about this, Mr. Speaker? They worked with industry. 

And a good example of that is the northern mine sites, the 

abandoned mine sites. We worked with industry and the federal 

government and put $30 million into reclamation of old 

uranium mines and other smaller gold mines. And we worked 

with the federal government and industry, and they’ve come 

along, and they’ve done a lot of things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What happened? We worked with the Watershed Authority to 

make sure our water source was taken care of, was protected, 

Mr. Speaker. We looked at how we were able to man up and to 

build up a system for forest fire fighting. We worked with a 

number of industries to make sure that not only did we protect 

our environment, but we absolutely made sure that they had the 

place that they could thrive in terms of bringing their business 

forward. 

 

We always thought, we always believed that balance was the 

most important word when it came to the economy, and it came 

to the environment, Mr. Speaker. The balance is something 

that’s really, really important. And what we see, what we see is 

that they don’t have balance on the environmental front. They 

don’t have balance on their budgetary front. And, Mr. Speaker, 

they don’t have balance in their commitment to the people of 

Saskatchewan on many of these things that they brought 

forward in the last election. So I think you guys are way out of 

whack when it comes to balance. 

 

So I think one of the most important things, one of the most 

important things is that when you talk about working with the 

companies . . . And companies want to be responsible. 

Companies want to be responsible. They said — and we believe 

it to be the truth — that we want to make sure that we come to 

Saskatchewan; we take the resource base that belongs to all the 

people of Saskatchewan. We create an economy with it. We 

create jobs. We pay royalties on it. And after we leave — 

whether it’s 20, 30, 40, 50 years, for as long as they’re here — 

that they decommission those sites. And all companies took the 

responsible position saying, yes we will set aside money to 

make sure that we take care of the environment long after we’re 

gone. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what these guys have done with this 

particular Bill, this so-called government, they have turned 

around and said, oh we’re going to just go to a different system. 

We’re not going to set targets; we’re going to consult. And, Mr. 

Speaker, there is absolutely nothing here under Bill 101. . . oh 

I’m sorry, under the Bill 121. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the point that people are talking about 

is that the greenhouse issue, folks across the way, the 

greenhouse issue has got to be dealt with. It’s got to be dealt 

with. We’re hearing time and time again that not only do we 

need protection of our air, of our soil, of our water, and of our 

forests. People are saying we need to protect that; that’s 

something that’s very, very valuable. 

 

And you guys come along and you say, okay we’re fine; we 

have this air management system, air management system. 

Wow, that’s a nice exchange for the greenhouse gas reduction 

targets that we had, you know, because it’s all connected, you 

guys. It’s all connected. The big thing that’s important is that 

people don’t understand that when it comes to the environment, 

it is all connected, and we are connected. 

 

And if you guys can’t do anything and if you can’t provide 

solid leadership, get out of the way. That’s my point. Get out of 

the way. We’ll show you how it’s done and that it can be done. 

It could be done. Absolutely it could be done. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I was hoping that the minister would be able 

to talk to the Crown Investments minister and to the agricultural 

minister, kind of have a team approach, you know. Don’t be 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4019 

talking to the Finance minister because, based on his plan, we’ll 

all be in trouble. But in terms of the co-operative approach, you 

should talk to them because there might be a really neat idea 

and a really neat concept. When you look at the Crowns as an 

example, they might be able to help you reduce those 

greenhouse gas emissions. They might be able to help you. 

They’re part of our Crown corporations. And I go back to my 

leader’s comment when he talks about business and government 

Crown corporations establishing a new regime of opportunity 

when it comes to addressing climate change. 

 

Go talk to SaskPower. They have a $15 billion spending plan to 

try and green how we generate our power — to green up, if you 

will. Why don’t you talk to them? Why won’t you talk to them? 

And they would give you an opportunity, $15 billion 

environmental deficit or a $15 billion green opportunity. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we see from this Bill, the inaction, and 

the lack of leadership from that government and that minister is 

that we’re quickly heading towards a $15 billion environmental 

deficit based on what they have been not doing and what they 

have been ignoring, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I point out the fact that the Crown corporations can 

provide an excellent opportunity. The business community, 

industry, they can really add to finding a solution to what ails 

the environmental part of our province. You can’t simply ignore 

it. And if you think the people of Saskatchewan are ever going 

to forget your promise to reduce greenhouse gases, they are not. 

You made that promise and you broke it. 

 

And the next thing you tried to fall back on is you wanted to 

follow the NDP plan. And we tried our darndest to make sure 

we had that balance, and he said, oh we can’t even do that. We 

can’t even do that. And now we’re left with this air 

management system that the minister keeps talking about in this 

particular Bill 121. And, Mr. Speaker, people throughout 

Saskatchewan are asking. They’re going to start demanding 

action on the environment. And so far they have not seen 

nothing, and Bill 121 is very similar to that. 

 

Now what I think happened, what I think happens out there is 

. . . because you’ve got to have that environmental conscience 

throughout government. And what happened is this minister put 

forward a few little details of how she wanted to do this whole 

environmental movement, and she got slapped back in line by 

the Minister of Resources. You got slapped back in line by the 

Minister of Agriculture. You got slapped back in line by the 

minister of Crowns and by the Premier. 

 

We are not going to do something as silly as protecting the 

environment is what they said. When it comes to a quick buck, 

right now we need a quick buck. We need money in a bank 

right now. And I’m sorry; when it comes to the environment or 

getting money from the resource base, guess what? We’re going 

to get the quick buck, and that’s exactly what this Bill is all 

about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:30] 

 

And the people throughout the environmental movement are 

just generally very upset, to put it mildly, that there has been no 

action, no leadership by this minister on many fronts. 

This Bill 121 really isn’t worth the paper it’s written on because 

it isn’t doing anything to address the whole issue of climate 

change. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let me point out as well . . . And I find this 

amazing that the minister wants to try and connect with 

industry, which is a good idea, but she’s just using industry as 

well as the focus to shift away from her and her government 

and say, okay you guys, it’s your responsibility to look after the 

environment, not government . . . [inaudible] . . . governments 

have a big role to play. And why do they have a big role to 

play? 

 

Because I had the opportunity to speak to a number of 

commercial fishermen from Dillon this past week and what 

happened to them was they had a couple of COs [conservation 

officer] come after them. These COs basically charged them 

with overfishing, and I think it was in one week they 

confiscated or they took away well over $10,000 from several 

commercial fishermen in Dillon. And what is that for, Mr. 

Speaker? That was for their claim that they’re overfishing. Ten 

thousand bucks from a commercial fishing, two or three 

families, that’s an incredible amount of money in one week. 

And all of a sudden you’ve got these COs after these 

commercial fishermen. And in the meantime, the Alberta oil 

sands are dumping whacks of . . . just a total amount of 

greenhouse gas in our backyard and acid rain as well. And what 

does the minister do? Oh we’re not, we’re not going to establish 

emission targets. 

 

Why aren’t you guys getting your COs to start concentrating on 

the real damage caused in the northern Saskatchewan 

environment instead of picking on commercial fishermen who 

are just trying to make a living, Mr. Speaker? Why don’t you do 

that, something more tangible, something more realistic, and 

something that the people of Saskatchewan want? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the minister today, will she give that 

money back to those commercial fishermen that lost their 

income from that livelihood? Well will she do that? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member is not to be 

drawing into debate the minister directly. The member is 

supposed to be directing his comments through the Chair. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m going to 

ask the minister if she has enough resources — to the Chair — 

if she has enough resources to send COs after the commercial 

fishermen of Dillon, Saskatchewan and not COs to go and 

address the oil and gas industry in Fort McMurray, Alberta to 

stop putting acid rain in our northern forest. Will she do that? 

That was the question that I had, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this Bill 121 does not in any way, shape, or form do any of 

those things, Mr. Speaker. She doesn’t hold anybody 

accountable for the massive amount of environmental damage 

being done to our northern forest. But to go after commercial 

fishermen and to pick on commercial fishing industry, well 

that’s where she’s spending her time and all the resources that 

she has, Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s just unfair, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So in the meantime as you’re consulting with FSIN, as you’re 



4020 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

consulting with the Métis Nation on this whole notion of trying 

to protect the environment — this Bill that doesn’t do anything 

— maybe don’t mention the duty to consult stuff. That’s pretty 

darn important to the First Nations, to the Métis people. Don’t 

talk about environmental protection of the northern traditional 

lands. That’s pretty important to them too. Don’t talk about 

protecting the commercial fishing industry. That’s pretty 

important to them too. Let’s just say we’re going to consult 

with you guys on trying to set targets when it comes to 

environmental protection, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I just think this whole notion, as the Premier mentioned, to 

rag the puck on addressing climate change, I think that’s really 

patently indicative of what this government refuses to do and 

yet what they promised the people of Saskatchewan to do. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, come next election I’m telling every 

Saskatchewan Party person that give these guys the opportunity 

at the ballot box, they rag the puck on them, Mr. Speaker. They 

rag the puck, and they stay home and don’t vote for a 

government that’s not only going to break their promise on 

accountability on the financial front but to do nothing on 

climate change and to do nothing to address the challenge of 

climate change. And every single aspect of Saskatchewan life 

— whether it’s rural Saskatchewan, urban Saskatchewan, 

Aboriginal Saskatchewan, northern, western — we’re all asking 

the government to provide leadership on meeting environmental 

challenges, and this government is not doing anything about it, 

Mr. Speaker, and that’s a shame. 

 

I go back to the vision and the importance of the four 

cornerstones that our leader spoke about, and that’s attracting 

business. That is certainly working with the unions and working 

people to make sure that we have a strong balance between the 

environment and the economy, and above all else, to have a 

government is willing to show solid leadership on the 

environmental front and on many other fronts, Mr. Speaker. 

And I’ve seen nothing on any of those four fronts to build a 

successful economy — nothing, nothing, nothing, and nothing 

on all four fronts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I go back to the whole notion of the Bill 121. And this 

government’s been in power now going on to three years. And I 

mention the fact that I look at the notion of . . . We left them 

two and a half billion dollars, so they use that money to pay 

down the debt. We left them a whole whack of environmental 

leadership opportunities — nothing on that front. And yet today 

when they overestimated potash from $3 billion surplus to a 

$204 million deficit, the Premier gets around and he says, oh 

it’s you guys’ fault. We’re following your, we’re following 

your regulations. Most people on this side, they try to . . . They 

burst out laughing. They can sure take the money we left them, 

but any problems with the potash industry, it’s all our fault 

again. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, you can’t insult 

their intelligence with that. They know exactly what’s going on. 

They’re very, very intelligent people, and that’s why I think 

next time, next time, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of 

Saskatchewan are going to rag the puck like you guys are on the 

environmental front. They’re going to rag the puck, and you’re 

going feel that. And we’re just pointing out to a lot of folks that 

yes, the chance was given for this government to be a 

government, but quite frankly I think the people of 

Saskatchewan have seen enough, and they don’t want you guys 

any more. They don’t want you guys to be their government 

any more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think the point is, the point is you may not like the 

message, but you ought not to be making promises on the 

environmental front if you have no intention of keeping them. 

That’s my point. If you have no intention of keeping them, then 

don’t make those promises, Mr. Speaker, and that’s all this is. 

Bill 121 is another promise broken, another promise broken 

because the promise was never meant to be kept to begin with. 

And if you don’t think people have memories, let me assure 

you, they have memories. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity of going through Big 

River many times coming to work, and I often sit down and I 

talk to the people of Big River. And the people of Big River are 

absolutely upset. They are not very happy. 

 

I understand that they’re going to have a new Rona store. I 

understand that they have a subdivision going, and they’re 

pretty happy with some of the opportunities that they’ve 

developed on their own. 

 

An Hon. Member: — One little problem. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — But one little problem, that’s right, one little 

problem. Mr. Speaker, they had a mill. And a few of the RM 

folks tell me, well you know, when you guys were in power, we 

were worried about losing our mill. So we were just really 

worried that the NDP would take away the mill. And what they 

said is, we started voting with that fear because we were told 

that the mill might be shutting down under the NDP. 

 

Well the mill is still physically there, and there’s opportunities 

to look at the forestry sector because it will come back. 

Everybody knows in Big River the cyclical nature of forestry. 

It’ll come back, and they’ll get another opportunity. The only 

problem is they got the mill physically there, but these guys 

gave away their wood supply. And I said, well hold it. How 

does that work? How does that work? How does that work for 

Big River people? And I’m not going to mention names, but I 

met with a number of the local leaders there. Just for their 

purpose and for their protection, I’m not going to mention their 

names. But for the Minister of the Environment to give up 

forestry rights attached to a mill and without consulting the 

people of Big River, without doing anything to show respect to 

the people at Big River, there’s going to be a price to pay for 

that. 

 

There’s going to be a price to pay for that because, again, is that 

your idea of consultation on the forestry front? Is that your idea 

of consultation on the forestry front? You go into towns that 

they’re not going to make no change to our forest management 

practice, which is part of the environmental portfolio. And 

before we tell you what’s going on, we’re not going to make 

any decision anywhere, couple of days later, make a decision in 

a different town. 

 

And the people of Big River are, quite frankly, very, very upset. 

And these are the people that reached out to that government 

and that party, and you turned your backs on them. You turned 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4021 

your backs on Big River as you’ve turned your backs on the 

fishermen from Dillon, as you turned your back to many people 

that thought you were serious about the environmental 

challenges that we face in the province. They thought you were 

serious, and here all it was, was a simple thing . . . is to grab 

power, is to get elected. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people in the opposition look at this Bill 

121, and we’ve never bought into any of your promises. And 

that’s why today on Bill 121 we are not supporting this Bill in 

any way, shape, or form, Mr. Speaker, because it isn’t worth the 

paper it’s written on. You guys have made a decision. You 

made a decision that affects Big River and a very dramatically 

adverse effect, and the people of Big River are going to pay you 

back. 

 

You’ve made a terrible decision on choosing between fighting 

commercial fishing industry as opposed to taking on the oil and 

gas sector of Alberta. You have not reached out to the industry 

as you should, to work with them respectfully, and that’s going 

to pay you back. You haven’t reached out to the First Nations 

and Métis community on duty to consult and protecting the 

northern lands. You’ve said, well we’ve consulted you on this 

Bill. Again the Bill doesn’t do anything. Why would you want 

to consult people on that? They want to consult on a number of 

issues that affect the environment, and, Mr. Speaker, you’ve 

failed them at that as well. 

 

So how in the world do you think that the opposition’s going to 

react to some of these points that you guys are raising when you 

bring forward Bills like this? Mr. Speaker, we don’t buy any of 

it. We don’t buy any of it. And I tell every group and every 

organization throughout Saskatchewan that may be listening to 

this, is to tell the Sask Party we’ve seen what you are. We’ve 

seen what you’ve done, and we’ve seen what you failed at. And 

we don’t want any more of that. That kind of leadership ought 

to be exactly where it is, and it’s back in opposition. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you sit back and look at some of the 

challenges that were addressed under the NDP, many were 

addressed. Some weren’t. Some weren’t, no question there. 

 

But the problem is, when you make promises to Big River, 

when you make promises to address climate change, when you 

make promises to Prince Albert, when you make promises to 

hundreds of families impacted by forestry throughout the 

forestry belt, here’s a really big news flash for you guys. You 

ought to keep those promises. You ought to keep them because 

if you don’t there will be a price to pay. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that price is coming up in the next 18 

months, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to come up in the next 18 

months with the people of Saskatchewan when the people all 

along the forestry fringe say, that’s enough of these guys. We 

give them the opportunity and they messed up on many fronts. 

 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I entered the discussion on Bill 

121, talking about our leader’s vision about the economy. What 

makes a successful economy? Very simple. You attract 

business, and you certainly want to make sure you protect your 

workers, and that involves unions. You want to make sure 

you’re taking care of the environment which is really important, 

and that builds an economy. It’s very basic building blocks that 

he explained to you guys, and you still don’t get it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I looked at it with some great interest. And I’d 

seen some of their ads on TV — no mention of the deficit, no 

mention of the lack of duty to consult under the First Nations or 

Métis, nothing on protecting the environment. 

 

And what do they do, Mr. Speaker? They attack our leader. And 

I’ll tell you, if I was the vice-president of a company that had 

many dealings with different countries and my only sin was 

living in Calgary, I’ll tell you, that’s not very much to compared 

to what these guys have failed Saskatchewan on. Nothing 

wrong with being a world traveller, nothing wrong with 

understanding business, nothing wrong with understanding 

Aboriginal people. And if that’s the best you got to attack our 

leader, Mr. Speaker, then that isn’t much. That isn’t much. 

 

So the message, quite frankly, whether it comes to the 

management of our money, you get a big fat F, F minus. You 

were at F because you guys were basically at zero. Then we 

found out you owed 204 million bucks, and now it’s F minus. 

 

You know, on the environmental front you failed on every other 

issue that First Nations, Métis, or people like Big River or 

communities like Big River were hoping that you would do 

something on. Another F minus. 

 

Working with the business people and trying to make sure that 

they’re able to work in relative comfort and to make sure they 

understood the rules and they could make a profit, something 

that we think is a great idea — you’ve failed on that front. And 

now we look at all the other issues that you’ve failed miserably 

on. That includes labour and unions. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 

time that people of Saskatchewan get up and say, about this Bill 

121 or any Bill that this party brings forward, people are going 

to say no. We’re going to say no to you guys. And that message 

will resonate. 

 

[20:45] 

 

And we are still waiting, we’re still waiting for the budget. And 

we noticed, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of unhappy faces over 

there. There’s not the energy and enthusiasm they once had here 

when they had $2.5 billion that we left then. All of a sudden the 

money’s gone; the deficit is here. Oh my goodness, what are we 

going to do? Well I know what we’ll do. We’ll throw up this 

environmental protection Bill and we’ll throw in things like air 

management systems. That might get people to deflect. 

 

Oh I know what’s even better idea. We’ll wrap ourselves 

around the Saskatchewan Roughrider flag. And, Mr. Speaker, 

Mr. Speaker, not only have they made a mess of the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders, they’ve lost a number of good 

players because of you guys. And they lost the Grey Cup 

because of you guys — a pox on them from you guys cheering 

them on. 

 

We told you, leave well enough alone. Please don’t mess up it 

any further. And to the people of Saskatchewan, on the 

economic front, on the fiscal competence front, on the labour 

union front, and now on the environmental front, it is time to 

get rid of these guys. It is time to get rid of these guys, Mr. 

Speaker. 



4022 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

Because at the rate, at the rate that they’re breaking promises 

and at the rate they’re messing things up, after 2011 I don’t 

think the NDP want to clean up another mess, Mr. Speaker. We 

don’t want to clean up another mess. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important to the people of 

Saskatchewan is, well we tried them. They were just a huge 

failure but we’re going to rag the puck when it comes to voting 

for them. But we’re going to come out in good numbers for the 

NDP where the leadership has always been, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So on that front, I want to adjourn the debate on Bill 121, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 121. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 102 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 102 — The 

Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 2009 be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me great pleasure to enter the debate on An Act to amend The 

Personal Property Security Act, 1993, Bill No. 102. Now this 

Act is going to be supposedly updating the language in the 

current Act for a number of reasons, and I just wanted to look at 

some of those. 

 

So under the Act, the minister says that it currently contains 

language that’s outdated and that the new Act should include 

language that’s consistent with the terminology used in 

Saskatchewan personal property registry. So, Mr. Speaker, of 

course that’s not something that anybody would want to 

oppose, in terms of making sure that things are more 

streamlined and that language is updated to reflect the current 

situation as it is today. 

 

Now the minister also claims that the legislation may be useful 

for businesses who operate in the province as it will alleviate 

some of the conflict between laws of multiple provinces. And if 

that’s the case, that’s also something that we would like to 

applaud. 

 

Now the Act was originally designed to deal with local 

jurisdiction and local protection and to ensure that the rights for 

property owners are not lost under those situations. Now the 

Act is also supposed to ensure that there are similar laws for all 

provinces and that it makes it easier then for the situation of 

purchasing goods from one province and bringing them to 

another and making sure that those rights and protections for 

the citizens of the province are not somehow compromised or 

lost under the Act. 

Now I’m told by a very learned colleague from Regina 

Lakeview that the personal property Act was first enshrined as 

it was directly related to the hardship of the ’30s, where 

properties were being seized in the 1930s and this was to 

enshrine the issue of ownership for personal property. So I’m 

certainly going to take the lessons that I’ve learned from my 

colleague from Regina Lakeview under advisement and do 

more research on this in the future as well. 

 

Now there was strong concern for the citizens of the province 

and the rights and protections of the citizens of the province 

and, as I said, some of those rights and protections were 

contract issues that were interprovincial and ensuring that those 

rights interprovincially were something that were of an 

equitable basis for the citizens of the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to just review something that I was 

privy to receiving today. And it’s a document entitled the Sask 

Party Proposed Resolutions 2010 Saskatchewan Party 

Convention. So this is actually the resolutions from the Sask 

Party convention that just recently took place. And it’s fairly 

easy to get through, Mr. Speaker, given that it’s only four pages 

long and one of the pages is, of course, the title page. So, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s not something that took me a great deal of time to 

read through and review, as I’m sure it didn’t take much time 

for the Sask Party convention to review as well. 

 

That in contrary, if you looked in the context of the NDP 

conventions of the past, Mr. Speaker, the resolutions packages 

typically contain about 80 or more resolutions. And needless to 

say, it takes a fairly lengthy period of time to debate. And it is 

actual debate, Mr. Speaker; it’s not something that’s portrayed 

to the convention members on the floor that they should be 

moving to a certain position. But it’s actual debate; it’s 

democratic debate. Sometimes it’s contentious debate, Mr. 

Speaker. But we in the NDP feel very strongly about the fact 

that good debate leads to the best ultimate solutions in terms of 

making sure that we have the right policies moving forward for 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So we invite that vigorous debate, Mr. Speaker. And quite 

frankly, I’m going to look forward to engaging in that vigorous 

debate yet again at the end of March when the NDP holds its 

convention in Prince Albert. And we will most certainly have 

the same amount of resolutions if not more, I’m sure, given that 

we are currently undergoing a policy review within the party. It 

will be a real convention, real debate. And it will take multiple 

days, Mr. Speaker, to get through all those resolutions. 

 

So the one resolution is actually printed on two pages. So as 

I’ve said, since the document is only four pages long and one of 

them is a title page and the back page is actually blank, you can 

tell how many resolutions were actually debated at this 

convention. 

 

This particular resolution talks about an amendment to enshrine 

property rights, which is interesting because that’s what we’re 

discussing under Bill 102. And some of the whereases describe 

what the intent of this resolution is about. It says: 

 

WHEREAS the primary duty of any government is to 

ensure that the rights and freedoms of its people are 

protected. 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4023 

So they are fully acknowledging that it is the government’s 

responsibility to ensure that those rights and freedoms are 

protected and that that’s a government responsibility to do so. 

 

The second whereas is: 

 

WHEREAS property and civil rights are provincial 

jurisdiction under section 92 (13) of the British North 

America Act, 1867; and 

 

WHEREAS the previously enacted Saskatchewan Bill of 

Rights of 1947, now known as the Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code, is inadequate in that it does not protect 

property; 

 

So the therefore be it resolved reads as such 

 

THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED THAT the Government 

of Saskatchewan shall amend the current Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code to enshrine the individual’s Right to 

own property. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, one can see that there is a notion that there is 

some more protections required to ensure that the property of 

Saskatchewan citizens and the freedoms of Saskatchewan 

citizens are properly enshrined in legislation, given that it is a 

government responsibility to do so. 

 

So when one looks a bit further down the page, and it talks 

about existing Sask Party policy and it talks about the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, it talks about a “Bill of 

Rights.” And points 5 and 6 in particular caught my attention, 

because point 5 is “Right to free expression.” 

 

So what I’m curious about, Mr. Speaker, is whether they 

thought about the right to free expression prior to ramming 

through some legislation last year in 2009, namely Bill 43, 

where they did exactly the opposite, where they actually 

removed — removed — the right to free expression potentially, 

under Bill 43, which limits the ability for people to express 

themselves and do so in a very public way. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that this is contradictory that a 

year later these people, the members, are coming to the Sask 

Party convention and saying, you know what? We want you as 

a government to fulfill your responsibility in terms of making 

sure the rights and freedoms of our citizens in our province are 

protected. And here is what we want you to do. We want to 

make sure that the right to free expression is protected. 

 

And yet what did their party, that Sask Party government, what 

did that Sask Party government do in 2009? They actually 

shrunk the right to freedom and expression because they 

introduced . . . they didn’t just introduce, they rammed through 

Bill 43, Mr. Speaker. They rammed it through despite the fact 

that we had phone calls galore on our side of the House from 

citizens across the province expressing their deep concern about 

Bill 43 and how that can be interpreted and how that could be 

limiting to the notion of freedom of rights and expressions. 

 

We made sure that we expressed those concerns with the Sask 

Party government opposite. And what did we get from them as 

a response? Nothing. Matter of fact, even less than nothing. 

They mocked us. They mocked us for the concerns that were 

brought to us by our constituents, by the citizens of this 

province and said, you know what? We’re doing this anyways. 

We don’t care. 

 

Now this expression of, we don’t care or we’re not going to 

consult or we’re going to consult after the fact seems to be 

somewhat of an MO [modus operandi] for this government, Mr. 

Speaker. It seems to be their MO, and it’s very disconcerting to 

the people of this province and it’s especially disconcerting to 

the members opposite in the opposition here who have to listen 

to these individuals on a day-by-day basis, either breaking 

promises or we find out information after the fact that they 

weren’t transparent and accountable for to begin with. 

 

And then what do we have to do, Mr. Speaker? We have to say 

afterwards, why? Instead of saying, what can we do to find the 

best possible solution, the opposition has to constantly say, 

why? Why did you do this? Why did you do that? Why didn’t 

you do this? Why didn’t you do that, Mr. Speaker. And that is 

becoming a modus operandi for the Sask Party government. 

 

Now point 6, point 6 is “Right to free association.” Well as 

soon as I read this, I chuckled to myself, Mr. Speaker, I 

chuckled to myself. And do you know why I chuckled to 

myself? Because right now this Sask Party government is 

wanting desperately . . . I mean you can just see how they’re 

salivating at the notion of ramming through Bill 80. They’re 

salivating at the notion of ramming through Bill 80, Mr. 

Speaker. They are absolutely disregarding any of the concerns 

that are being brought to them again by the people who are 

going to be directly affected by Bill 80, so much so as the fact 

that they’re not willing to speak to them when they come to the 

legislature, they’re not willing to meet with them, they’re not 

even willing to talk to the Premier when he sees them out in the 

public somewhere, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he won’t even speak to them when he just runs 

into them casually in public. Well he won’t meet with them 

when they make arrangements to come here to the building, so 

what chance do these people have to ever express their heartfelt 

concerns about what that Bill will do to their lifestyle, to their 

families, to the future employees of those crafts? How can they 

possibly express to this government, to that Premier, to those 

Sask Party members exactly how it’s going to affect them if 

they refuse to meet with them? And, Mr. Speaker, again, 

another MO for this government. 

 

If I could tell you the countless calls I get in my constituency 

office of people telling me that they’re blocked when they 

phone those ministers’ offices, that they’re actually being 

blocked or that there’s an out-and-out . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Absolutely. There’s an out-and-out refusal to 

meet with them, that their letters are, I mean they’re not even 

being replied to in terms of what the actual content of the letters 

is. It’s basically, you know what? Get lost. Try some other 

agency like, oh I don’t know, the Provincial Ombudsman or 

something. 

 

[21:00] 

 

It is unbelievably unbelievable how dismissive, how dismissive 

the Sask Party government is to the very people that they are 



4024 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

supposed to serve. These are the citizens of the province who 

are bringing them their concerns about the legislation that they 

want to ram through or bringing them concerns about current 

existing legislation or bringing them concerns about numerous 

situations that are going on in the province or going on in their 

personal lives or going on with their personal situations. And 

what are they getting? They’re being blocked. They’re being 

shut out. They’re being blocked. And again another MO for this 

government. 

 

So you have their membership, the Sask Party membership 

coming to a convention for the Sask Party saying, listen, we 

want you to enshrine the right to free expression. We want you 

to enshrine the right to free association under your obligation as 

a government of Saskatchewan because they say, “WHEREAS 

the primary duty of any government is to ensure that the rights 

and freedoms of its people are protected.” And yet their own 

government members for the party that they belong to as 

members are not doing that very thing, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

absolutely deplorable. 

 

Now they provide some background information for the 

resolution. As I said, it’s a resolution that takes up two pages of 

the four page document. And the background information is 

interesting as well because it talks about, again, the British 

North America Act. And it states, “Property and Civil Rights in 

the Province.” Which they go on to say means that the 

provincial governments are charged with protecting these 

rights. 

 

They go on to say, though: 

 

Yet Quebec is the only province that has a Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms that is not a simple 

anti-discriminatory statute, but a genuine fundamental law 

largely inspired by international documents. 

 

What’s interesting about this, Mr. Speaker, and the reason I 

wanted to talk about the situation in Quebec, is that it also talks 

about, they have various points under the Quebec charter of 

rights and freedoms. And point no. 8 is the one that I want point 

out. So point no. 8: “No one may enter upon the property of 

another or take anything therefrom without his express or 

implied consent.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m wondering how that meshes with the fact 

that there’s expropriation of land going on right now for the 

building of highways under the Sask Party government. So I’m 

wondering how that’s all meshing together. I’m not saying that 

there is, you know, necessarily anything that I have great 

concerns about, but obviously it raises the notion of the 

question of how those circumstances are being dealt with, given 

that they strongly believe that there needs to be changes made 

to Saskatchewan legislation. 

 

They cite the desires that they have with respect to the right to 

free expression and right to free association. They cite the fact 

that the Quebec charter of rights and freedoms has that 

enshrined in their legislation. And they cite the fact that 

ultimately it is the primary duty of any government to ensure 

that the rights and freedoms of its people are protected. 

 

So they are fully, fully, fully acknowledging that this a 

responsibility of the Sask Party government, but in the same 

token the Sask Party government has obviously let these Sask 

Party members down last year. They abdicated their 

responsibility last year with Bill 43 when they basically gave 

away the right to free expression with respect to that Bill and 

how it can be used and instituted. So it’s interesting that we’ve 

got this change, Mr. Speaker, in 2010 now, where now they’re 

looking at Bill 102 to potentially enshrine the notion of personal 

property. 

 

So it also raises the issue, of course, Mr. Speaker, of what is 

considered to be property that is affixed to land and what is not 

affixed to land, of course. Because this personal property Act 

talks about obviously property that is not deemed affixed to 

land. So I’m curious to see, Mr. Speaker, what the details of the 

Act will be with respect to, say for instance a grain bin, and 

whether that would then be considered to be something that is 

affixed to the land or not. So there are some details to this Act, 

Mr. Speaker, that require some clarity at this point as well. 

 

So as I’ve said from the onset, this legislation is ultimately 

designed to protect consumers, and that we have to be careful 

that that intent is not lost or diminished through this legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. And there’s going to be a lot of consultations that 

are done obviously by the opposition members to ensure that 

the intent of what the legislation is supposed to do remains 

intact and potentially strengthened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other issue, Mr. Speaker, is that this is a piece of legislation 

that will potentially affect a lot of people with respect to issues 

between provinces. And as the minister alluded to in his 

comments, he said: 

 

. . . but many people come in contact with this type of 

legislation on a frequent basis. It’s the personal property 

security registry that deals with liens on an automobile, if 

you don’t pay a garage bill, or if you finance a new car, or 

if you lease an automobile. All of those things are dealt 

with through this legislation and through this registry. So 

in fact many, if not most, of the citizens of our province 

have a direct interest in it. 

 

And that’s, Mr. Speaker, something that we want to ensure is 

dealt with very carefully in this legislation. Because of the 

potential impact on the amount of people that this legislation 

may have, we want to ensure that the legislation is doing what 

the minister is talking about in terms of protecting the 

individuals of Saskatchewan with respect to these issues, but 

yet not diminishing that protection in any way, shape, or form. 

 

So he goes on to talk about the fact that these changes, “. . . 

where there is a dispute between parties that crosses provincial 

or national borders, determining the location of the debtor and 

the applicable law becomes very difficult.” And he says, “These 

rules will address that concern.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, obviously anything that would be of assistance 

to individuals in the province when they’re purchasing items 

from out of the province or purchasing items from out of the 

country or dealing with potential liens on, for instance a 

vehicle, or the location for instance as he talked about of a 

debtor, those are obviously issues that we would be very much 

in support of with respect to the language of the legislation 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4025 

strengthening those issues. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to see the fact that the Sask 

Party government is now looking at the notion of further 

enshrining potentially the personal property of individuals of 

the province. Like I said before, I’m very disheartened to see 

the fact that the Sask Party government went a step backwards, 

a giant step backwards or numerous steps backwards last year 

with Bill 43, with some of the issues that they raised in their 

resolutions at their convention.  

 

But all in all, our caucus is in favour of simplifying government 

forms and using the Internet for more day-to-day transactions of 

government. We as the government prior to the Sask Party’s 

election, we were going down this path when we were 

government. And quite frankly we’re glad to see that that is 

being continued upon, as long as the legislation does what the 

legislation is designed to do in terms of protecting the 

individuals of this province. 

 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I know that there is much more 

work to be done by the opposition members doing consultation 

with people around the province with respect to this legislation. 

I would encourage the Sask Party government to do so as well. 

It would be a welcome relief for the Sask Party government to 

undergo and engage in consultations with individuals around 

the province before they pass legislation instead of deciding to 

hold consultations after they’ve passed legislation, which quite 

frankly the citizens of this province find farcical and obviously 

ultimately disrespectful. 

 

So on that note Mr. Speaker, I’m going to take my place and 

adjourn debate on the personal property Act, Bill No. 102. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh Acres has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 102, The Personal 

Property Security Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 109 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 109 — The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure on 

this Monday evening to enter into the debate on Bill No. 109, 

An Act to amend The Municipalities Act and to make related 

amendments to The Local Government Election Act, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

All members of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, know of the 

important and the good work that occurs in municipalities. 

Municipalities are a level of government where people’s lives 

are often affected in most direct ways. They have to deal with 

many of the services, Mr. Speaker, that touch people in how 

they conduct their business on a daily basis, determine how 

their households run, determine what sort of additional money 

they might have in their pocketbook at the end of the month, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s clear that the work of municipalities is very 

important. 

 

For any of us who have spent some time door knocking in our 

home areas, in our constituencies either during elections or 

during summers or off-season when we have a chance to meet 

with our neighbours, it’s clear that the issues that people bring 

up on the doorstep are often municipal in nature. They don’t 

necessarily know which level of government deals with what 

service and what issue when you are at the doorstep talking 

about, introducing yourself and asking for their feedback. As a 

provincial MLA, that doesn’t always matter. Often what you 

hear are the stories about potholes in the city streets or the 

garbage collection, all the things that are done at the municipal 

level, or complaints or questions about municipal taxes as well. 

So it’s clear that where the provincial government has 

interaction with municipalities on the local level, we need to 

ensure that the relationship is a smooth one. It’s one built on 

mutual respect, that it’s one that allows both levels of 

government to meet the needs of the citizens in the best possible 

way. 

 

Sadly, Mr. Speaker, what we have seen in the last two years 

under the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, is I think 

additional stress put on municipalities and also a general ethos 

that does not speak to the level of respect that municipalities are 

entitled to, I believe. 

 

So looking at this piece of legislation, Bill 109, An Act to 

Amend the Municipalities Act and to make related amendments 

to The Local Government Election Act, those were some of the 

. . . that was the lens, Mr. Speaker, that I approached this piece 

of legislation: asking myself, these proposed changes, these 

proposed amendments, how will they meet the needs of local 

constituents? How will they ensure that different levels of 

government deal with one another in a respectful way? How 

will they ensure that the ability of both levels of government to 

assist citizens, to help citizens live the best possible lives that 

they’re able to have, how can we ensure that that is in fact 

done? Do these changes, in fact, facilitate that? Do these 

changes encourage a greater level of respect between levels of 

government? And not only respect, Mr. Speaker, but also a 

greater level of efficiency and an ability to get things done. 

 

In reading the minister’s second reading speech in outlining 

some of his concerns, some of his rationale for bringing forward 

this piece of legislation, I have had a chance to go through some 

of the material, Mr. Speaker. And there were some of the 

opening remarks, Mr. Speaker, where I would like to pay a 

compliment to the minister. Where the minister said that the 

changes that are coming forward in these proposed 

amendments, Mr. Speaker, they were done in consultation with 

the municipalities. They were done in consultation with 

politicians at the local level, with the individuals that are in fact 

facing some of the challenges at the municipal level. 

 

And it’s from this consultation that some of these changes have 

come forward. That’s what the minister stated in his second 



4026 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

reading speech, and I think that is a good thing. So when 

consultation takes place, it is a good thing. 

 

[21:15] 

 

We see many examples, Mr. Speaker, in the Sask Party 

government’s two-year record where consultation has not taken 

place, and the result has been very negative. The result has been 

one where individuals have been thrown into confusion, where 

individuals have become angry, where individuals have been 

hurt, where individuals have not received the services that they 

do in fact deserve. When consultation does not occur, the end 

result is not positive. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, to just this afternoon in question period 

when my colleague, the member from Nutana, was talking 

about changes to support programs for victims of domestic 

abuse and how some of these programs were in place, how 

there were individuals, there are a number of individuals to help 

women find themselves in this most difficult situation. Without 

consultation, Mr. Speaker, the government chose to make 

changes to that program, reduce staffing levels, and as a result, 

individuals are not being served as well as they ought to be. 

 

So consultation is one example where when consultation does 

not occur, problems come quickly and they come in a major 

way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another example where consultation is so very 

important is an area of Bill 80. We saw, Mr. Speaker, 

legislation brought forward without consultation with many of 

the men and women on the front lines performing the work, 

allowing for . . . doing the work, allowing for our province to do 

well. Consultation did not occur, and as a result, the outcome is, 

I think, a negative one for the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the best examples we’ve seen in recent 

weeks when consultation does not occur and the end result is 

negative was the trial balloon that was floated by the Minister 

of Education with respect to educational assistants and the 

cutting of those positions, Mr. Speaker, where consultation did 

not occur with many of the families, with many of the students, 

with many of the EAs [educational assistant] and the teachers 

working in our school system providing excellent work, 

excellent care. 

 

Consultation did not occur. The trial balloon went up whether 

or not this was a good or a bad idea, Mr. Speaker. And I think 

the sad part of that type of consultation — consultation only 

through the media, consultation only once a decision is made, 

consultation only when one is trying to make a political 

calculation as to what they can pull off — it causes a lot of 

uncertainty, a lot of unease, a lot of worries, a lot of headaches 

for the families, for the teachers, for the people in that actual 

situation. 

 

So when I’m looking at this piece of legislation, Bill 109, if 

consultation has occurred with municipalities as the minister’s 

second reading speech would suggest, if those remarks are 

accurate . . . And the member is honourable so I have to believe 

that there was consultation, and I do. If that is the case, if that is 

reflective of most people, then perhaps that is a good aspect of 

this legislation, not debating all of the aspects. Perhaps the 

consultation, Mr. Speaker, wasn’t as thorough as it ought to be. 

Perhaps the consultation did not meet every individual that it 

should have or connect with every individual. Perhaps it was an 

incomplete picture. And it’s also a problem when consultation 

is incomplete and inaccurate. That is a problem. 

 

We also want consultation, Mr. Speaker, within government as 

well. I know many members in this Assembly, many people in 

Saskatchewan wishes that the Minister of Finance, the Premier 

consulted with his own ministry officials when it came to 

potash numbers. We’d be in a much better situation if 

consultation with their ministry officials had actually occurred 

in a proper way instead of choosing the information that one 

simply wants to hear. 

 

And I bring up that example, Mr. Speaker, because it has a great 

deal of relevance when we look at Bill No. 109. If the 

consultation is only from the people who you want to hear 

from, it’s not true consultation. If consultation is only from 

those to whom political favours are owed, it’s not true 

consultation. If the consultation is done for strictly partisan 

reasons and not for the best interests of the entire province, Mr. 

Speaker, then that is not true consultation. 

 

So it’s my sincere hope that the consultation that occurred 

around Bill 109 was a true consultation, connecting with all the 

people who need to be heard from, listening to their opinions, 

listening to their advice, listening to their concerns, and then 

bringing forward amendments that truly spoke to the changes 

that were requested or suggested. And that is my hope that I 

hope occurred with Bill 109. 

 

I know as members of the opposition, as we do continued 

consultation with people in the province, whether they be at the 

municipal level, whether they be public citizens, those are the 

types of questions that we are looking to hear information about 

because that ensures that there is true consultation, not quasi 

consultation, not lopsided consultation, not one-sided 

consultation, but true consultation. And that’s the type of 

consultation that needs to occur in Saskatchewan. 

 

In the minister’s remarks at second reading about Bill 109, An 

Act to amend The Municipalities Act and to make related 

amendments to The Local Government Election Act, the 

minister divided his comments up into three areas, stating that 

the changes that were brought forward were addressing the 

three areas that the ministry, the minister had heard from 

municipalities were of greatest concern to them. And so I will 

make some comments, Mr. Speaker, on these three areas. As I 

said, I hope these three areas are the actual three areas that the 

minister heard from in his consultation. I hope that these three 

areas are accurately reflecting the suggestions and the changes 

that were put forward by individuals through the consultation. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I hope that it is not a consultation in name 

alone because that would indeed be a shame. 

 

The first area where Bill 109 speaks to address is the area of 

third party disputes with roads. As you know, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan is a fairly large province. We have an extensive 

road network. And many of us here rely on this road network, 

as do the citizens of this province, to get around, to engage in 

commerce, to pursue education, to visit our loved ones, to 

simply enjoy our parks, to enjoy the great outdoors, Mr. 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4027 

Speaker. So the road network is an important one. 

 

So the changes that were put forward in this first area on roads 

is a mechanism to allow for a more easily resolution of 

disputes. So there might be situations where a municipality has 

contracted with someone to provide services in an area to fix a 

certain piece of road or to provide maintenance in that area. 

 

And this is part of life, Mr. Speaker. Anyone who’s dealt with 

people knows that conflict and differences of opinion and 

people’s recollection of events do vary. So it is expected that 

there will be disputes and differences of opinion on what 

contracts or arrangements were set up and put in place in order 

to ensure the proper maintenance of our road system. But I 

understand that if the municipalities are saying that we need a 

faster way to solve some of these disputes, if there can be a 

faster way to do it in order to ensure that the roads are kept in 

top-notch condition that commerce can be pursued, that people 

can receive the education they want, that loved ones can be with 

their families, that people can get to hospitals in a fast and safe 

way like they need to, then that’s a good thing. 

 

It’s also important, Mr. Speaker, to resolve such disputes in a 

timely manner because the longer disputes carry on, most often 

the case, the more expensive it becomes for individuals, for 

municipalities to take care of the issues at the local level. So if 

there is a dispute with a contractor on a particular issue about 

how a road was to be maintained, not only, Mr. Speaker, can it 

be an inconvenience for those wanting to access the road for 

whatever purpose they are on that road. But it also takes time. It 

takes money. It’s a headache. It’s a burden administratively on 

individuals who already have many things on their plate, as 

people that work at the municipal level are very busy.  

 

So if this can be done, if the disputes can be resolved, if there 

can be some type of process that allows this to occur in a timely 

manner where the issue’s resolved, where people can go about 

their business in a fast and speedy and efficient way, then I 

think that is a good thing. 

 

So there’s the aspect, if a dispute drags on, Mr. Speaker, it 

certainly causes headaches administratively. It’s time that 

individuals need to spend on the issue that they otherwise could 

be putting into more important matters. But it also costs money 

to solve disputes, whether you’re going through the court 

process, whether you’re simply spending energy and time on 

meetings and travel to solve this dispute. That’s the type of 

thing, Mr. Speaker, where if the municipal level of government 

and the provincial level of government can work together, find 

a solution that is quick, that is speedy, that is efficient, Mr. 

Speaker, I would say that’s a good thing. And I could 

understand why municipalities may in fact have requested this 

type of change. 

 

The changes are important because it can save money. And I 

say that it’s always obviously important to always use financial 

resources wisely. I know that’s a lesson that members on this 

side of the House know well. 

 

The other side of the House, Mr. Speaker, I’m not so certain 

that lesson has really sunk in. I’m not quite certain members 

opposite actually realize the severity of the financial 

mismanagement that has occurred under their watch. I don’t 

think that has settled in into their psyche yet based on their 

actions, based on the rhetoric that still comes forward, based on 

their behaviour with individuals. 

 

But I think there might be a few of them over there — one or 

two, three or four — who do understand that it is important to 

be careful with finances and to, whenever spending decisions 

are made, to do so in a responsible manner. And I know perhaps 

it’s some of the individuals that have the most contact with 

individuals at the municipal level of government because 

they’ve heard, they’ve heard about some of the pressures that 

they are facing at the municipal level. 

 

And while those members on the other side were listening to 

these individuals, I’m sure a few of them, at least a few of them 

have heard about the unhappiness that many municipal 

politicians are experiencing right now due to the broken 

promise, Mr. Speaker, of members opposite to give a 

percentage of the PST [provincial sales tax] back to 

municipalities. And I imagine the few that are plugged in at the 

local level and are concerned about how we can have pieces of 

legislation like Bill 109 to make life more efficient for 

municipalities at the local level, I think maybe a few of them 

get that. But sadly, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s perhaps the 

members who aren’t in cabinet, and that’s the real shame. I 

think it’s perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the members who don’t have 

the decision-making authority or power to actually change 

course, to actually go from a course of financial 

mismanagement, to go from a course of running huge deficits 

and gambling with the future prosperity of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, to abandon that course and to go to a course of 

responsible fiscal management. 

 

And I think the few people over there that are perhaps hearing 

that aren’t the individuals around the cabinet table, aren’t the 

individuals in charge of the finances — surely not the 

individual occupying the Premier’s office, Mr. Speaker — 

because if they had that approach, if they had that approach, Mr. 

Speaker, there is no way they would have allowed us to get into 

such a situation as we see now, where in fact we are paying 

potash companies to pull the resources out of the ground instead 

of the other way around. 

 

And I think that’s a concern for all Saskatchewan people. I 

know it’s a concern for me. I know it’s a concern for many 

people, many members of this Assembly, at least on this side of 

the House, and perhaps one or two over there. But, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s individuals who don’t have a loud voice either 

around the caucus table and certainly the voices that aren’t even 

present at the cabinet table. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when individuals were in consultation about 

Bill 109, when they were listening to municipalities on ways 

that they could improve the efficiency and the effectiveness of 

municipalities at the local level, surely, if this change in fact 

could make life more simple by having a third party mechanism 

to resolve disputes about differences with contractors on road 

repairs and construction, if the members opposite were talking 

to people, they would have heard that the promise, Mr. Speaker, 

that the Sask Party government made to tie a percentage of the 

PST, direct that straight to municipalities, Mr. Speaker, that was 

an important promise. 

 



4028 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

And the rationale for that promise was that there was a 

recognition, at least once upon a time when it was convenient 

during an election, there was a recognition that commodity 

prices, Mr. Speaker, do have a tendency to go up and down — 

wild gyrations, I think it was coined at one time, something 

along those lines. And because of those types of changes, it was 

seen as important to tie a percentage of the PST, to designate it 

straight to municipalities so they wouldn’t have the question 

marks, they wouldn’t have the huge question marks and 

uncertainty about what level of funding they would have, and in 

turn be able to . . . what types of services they would be able to 

provide to individuals at the local level. 

 

So the very tragic irony, Mr. Speaker, of this broken promise by 

the Sask Party as they’re going out and about doing all this 

great consultation on Bill 109 about how to make municipalities 

more efficient, I’m sure, I’m positive they heard from members 

opposite that it was important to tie a portion of the PST 

straight to municipal funding in order to clear up some of the 

uncertainty and to allow municipalities to better deliver services 

at the local level. Because as I said before, the whole point of 

consultation, Mr. Speaker, is to hear from people, to recognize 

what they’re saying, and to really integrate the feedback you 

have into the decisions you’re making. 

 

[21:30] 

 

And based on the broken promise, Mr. Speaker, based on the 

broken promise, to break the promise of delivering a percentage 

of the PST straight to municipalities, I could see why it might 

be attractive to put forward this aspect, the first aspect that the 

minister brought up in Bill 109, this aspect of third party 

resolution in order to solve differences between a municipality 

and a contractor. Because I’m not minimizing the importance of 

that type of change, Mr. Speaker, but it’s not as significant a 

change as was the promise to deliver a percentage of the PST 

which has been clearly broken by members opposite. 

 

So perhaps this was an easy way . Perhaps they thought this 

would provide some cover for the broken promise. Perhaps this 

would be a deflection. Perhaps the strategy around the caucus 

table and coming out of Executive Council was, well we know 

we’ve broken the huge promise on PST, among other promises. 

We know we’ve horribly managed the books. We know we’re 

now paying the potash companies, as opposed to the other way 

around, because of our own inability to do things properly. But, 

you know, we’ll give them a third party source to solve disputes 

around differences on servicing roads. Perhaps that will appease 

some of the people for some of the time. Perhaps that will be 

something we can deflect some attention, some negative 

attention. 

 

Say, well you know we have broken this huge promise about 

PST funding or funding from PST to municipalities. We know 

we’ve broken that promise. But we know we’ve broken our 

promise to be good stewards of the resources in this province. 

We know we’ve broken our promise on how to manage the 

finances properly and to ensure that Saskatchewan is on strong 

financial footing. We know we’ve broken our promise not to 

squander our future prosperity. But you know what? We have 

given you, or we’re putting forward in legislation, the means to 

solve disputes between a municipality and a road contractor 

over whether or not certain materials were hauled in the right 

way, whether or not the service was . . . whether or not the 

repairs to a road were done properly. 

 

A colleague close to me said, well that doesn’t sound like a very 

fair trade-off. And I would have to agree with the member, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t think it’s a fair trade-off. I think the trade-off of 

sound fiscal management is something you don’t want to give 

away. I don’t think that’s something you want to trade away. 

But sadly, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen from the Finance 

minister, what we’ve seen from the Premier, what we’ve seen 

from the members around the cabinet tables, they have traded 

that off. They have traded away our sound financial footing 

here in the province. They have traded away the mechanisms to 

ensure that Saskatchewan people can trust in their government 

to take care of their best interests. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if Bill 109 goes through, municipalities will 

have a third party mechanism in order to resolve disputes at the 

local level about roads. So I guess it’s something. I don’t think 

it’s a fair trade-off. I for one, Mr. Speaker, would rather have 

good fiscal management. I for one, Mr. Speaker, would rather 

have good royalties coming from the resource sector. I for one 

would rather have a type of consultation that is thorough, that is 

proper, that does not float trial balloons simply on a political 

basis. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s a sad reality. 

 

But if members opposite think individuals in the public are 

content with trading away fiscal security, proper management 

of our financial resources for a third party resolution 

mechanism for disputes between municipalities and contractors 

over things like the hauling of gravel — important issues; I’m 

not minimizing the significance of those issues for individuals 

at the local level — but I don’t think it’s a fair trade. I don’t 

think it’s a . . . It’s a horribly lopsided trade. It reminds me of 

the type of lopsided consultation, Mr. Speaker, that occurs with 

this government, the type of lopsided consultation that they 

pursue with only the people who want to hear from them and 

only the people they want to hear from. 

 

So we know, Mr. Speaker, that dollars at the municipal level are 

very important. And because they’re so important, Mr. Speaker, 

if there are changes that this Assembly can make at the local 

level or legislation at this level which can affect the local level 

in a positive way by providing things like a third party 

mechanism to resolve disputes between a municipality and a 

contractor, I won’t speak for all of my colleagues, but in 

principle I think that’s an okay thing. 

 

But I have some real question marks, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s 

an appropriate trade-off, whether the sell job that the Sask Party 

is pursuing on this issue is in fact a good trade-off. Because I 

think while municipalities, I’m sure many of them truly want 

legislation that can make life better for them at the local level, I 

don’t know if they’re willing to trade away the promise that the 

members opposite made to have the finances of this province 

managed in a responsible, in a transparent and true way. To me, 

not a fair trade-off. It reminds me . . . And I think individuals in 

the province understand this. They know what’s fair, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It reminds me of the one ad that’s being played on TV. And this 

isn’t a political ad. I think it’s an ad for selling insurance or 

something like that. But it’s the ad about the pony, Mr. Speaker. 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4029 

And there is the two, two young girls in a room, and the first 

girl receives something and it really isn’t all that impressive. 

You know, perhaps it’s nice, but not the most important thing. 

Perhaps it’s sort of like the third party mechanism to solve 

disputes between a contractor . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . A 

wee pony, you know. And ponies have been a topic that have 

been discussed at great length in this Assembly in recent 

months, and I will go on record that I am in favour of ponies. I 

think they’re a good aspect of Saskatchewan life. 

 

But then the second girl, the guy brings in a full . . . like a 

proper pony, a real live pony, the pony of her dreams, the pony 

that many young children grow up wishing they had. And the 

first girl says, well that’s not fair. I mean, what’s the deal? Why 

does that one get the pony and I’m stuck with this fake pony, 

I’m stuck with the miniature? And he said, well you didn’t ask. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s what these, the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, they’re pursuing these kind of trade-offs 

where individuals are being given the mini-pony, they’re being 

given the fake deal. Because they’ve mismanaged the resources 

so badly, Mr. Speaker, that it’s no longer ponies for everyone; 

it’s only ponies for a few select people. It’s only ponies for a 

few select people who are friends, a few select people who 

provided the type of consultation feedback the members 

opposite actually wanted to hear, the type of, the type of 

relationship, Mr. Speaker, where you give a pony to your 

friends because you like your friends. You owe them a favour 

because they did something for you once. 

 

But in terms of being fair, in terms of doing what is best, what 

is right for the people of Saskatchewan, that’s not the plan, 

that’s not the approach the members opposite are taking. 

They’re choosing certain individuals who they’ve done some 

consultation with, they’ve heard the type of feedback that they 

want to hear. They’ve had selective hearing and they’ve chosen 

to give ponies to those people. But for the other individuals who 

are just as deserving, there is no pony. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people, I don’t know, I can’t 

. . . I can speak for myself and my friends and my family if I’ve 

spoken to them. You know, I know people in Saskatchewan, 

they wanted the resources of this province to be handled in a 

proper way. The people of this province wanted fiscal 

management that was responsible, that was forward-looking, 

not looking for the . . . not looking only at the moment, Mr. 

Speaker. And Mr. Speaker, they haven’t received that. And they 

are feeling like they are not being treated fairly because they 

were promised, Mr. Speaker, they were promised responsible 

government, and they’ve had the complete opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Members opposite have overpromised and underdelivered, Mr. 

Speaker. They promised the world. They started to believe their 

own hype, Mr. Speaker, that the new era had arrived with the 

Sask Party. But guess what, Mr. Speaker? It was a few new 

faces but more or less the same people, the same old ideas, the 

same backwards economic thinking, Mr. Speaker, the same 

reckless use of our resources, the same cover-up, the same 

pitting one group against another, the same buying ponies for 

some and giving miniature ponies, fake ponies to the others, 

Mr. Speaker. That’s the approach that they’ve taken, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s not the approach that people of Saskatchewan 

want. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at these three areas, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’ve talked about the first area. I’ve talked about 

how, in my opinion, it probably is good to have third party 

disputes . . . Or to have disputes solved by a third party. That’s 

probably a good thing, Mr. Speaker. But it is not a fair trade-off 

to lose financial management, proper financial management. 

It’s not a fair trade-off to have the reckless use of our resources 

here in the province. People in Saskatchewan don’t want that. 

 

So I’ve touched on a bit, Mr. Speaker, how it’s not . . . how 

there may be some merit to the first part of the amendments in 

this legislation. And I would now, Mr. Speaker, like to move on 

to the second part. And the second part as stated by the Minister 

of Municipal Affairs during the second reading speech . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who is that? 

 

Mr. Broten: — I don’t know. The member opposite asked, who 

is that minister? We can’t use names here, but there was a 

shuffle, Mr. Speaker, when certain individuals were booted 

from cabinet and others were brought in. But that’s another 

speech and that’s another story, though I would like to get into 

that one. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well get in a little bit. 

 

Mr. Broten: — No, I am one to always stay on topic, on topic 

to Bill 109, The Municipalities Act. 

 

The second area, Mr. Speaker, stated by the minister, was an 

additional tool, as they put it — an interesting word, interesting 

tool — or another tool to collect taxes on mobile homes. There 

was recognition in this proposed legislation, Mr. Speaker, these 

amendments, that there are changes in the municipalities, 

changes in our cities, changes in our towns and in the 

countryside with how individuals are living. And as individuals 

make changes to their homes, and the example in this piece, in 

the legislation are mobile homes, that it’s still important to have 

a proper tax structure in place on the mobile homes. And these 

changes, Mr. Speaker, are suggesting that this new tool will 

make it easier, easier to have the proper tax structure in place on 

these mobile homes. 

 

And this issue of mobile homes brings forward an important 

issue for the people of Saskatchewan. Because just as in the 

first issue about a third party resolution mechanism in order to 

solve disputes between contractors and municipalities, this issue 

of changes to the tax structure on mobile homes brings forward 

the most important issue of housing for people here in 

Saskatchewan. And the type of tax structures in place on 

housing — whether it’s in a condo or whether it’s in a house, 

whether it’s in a mobile home — has a great deal of importance 

for Saskatchewan people because it ties straight into the issue of 

affordability. Affordability. 

 

So on the first proposed amendment in this piece of legislation, 

Mr. Speaker, was we saw how the issue of fiscal incompetence 

by members opposite, the issue of horrible mismanagement of 

our province’s resources and finances, became very clear in the 

first example. 

 



4030 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

In this second area, Mr. Speaker, on mobile homes, we see the 

issue of affordability come into the discussion. Because life 

under the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, has become more expensive 

for individuals. Now again they will get into a shell game. You 

know, they’ll give a little bit here but, Mr. Speaker, when no 

one’s looking, they’ll take a whole lot out of the other pocket. 

 

So they might give a small benefit in one area, Mr. Speaker. 

They might give a change to property taxes — you know, 

individuals living in mobile homes. They might make a small 

change that will help them in the $27 range. I think when the 

changes were brought in a couple of budgets ago, when the 

mismanagement was certainly bad but not as horrible as we’ve 

seen in recent months, the changes at the property . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member opposite says I 

give them too much credit, that it’s been bad all along. And I 

would agree with him. 

 

But when the changes that first occurred were about $27, about 

$27, Mr. Speaker. I think at the time, some of my colleagues 

said, well for 27 bucks perhaps I could take, perhaps I could 

take my wife out for supper one night, maybe to A&W, maybe 

to A&W. Perhaps we could stop at Tim Hortons and have a 

Timbit with the $27 of saving in municipal taxes. And, you 

know, I guess one night out with my wife, going to A&W, and 

having some Timbits, perhaps that’s okay. Perhaps that’s not 

bad. But when you look at the whole picture, when you see the 

increases to SaskPower, when you see the increases, Mr. 

Speaker, to area of tuition, where individuals are paying 

hundreds and hundreds of dollars more, you know, Mr. 

Speaker, no longer am I getting the mozza burger. Perhaps I’m 

only getting one root beer now and . . . Well the Timbits, that’s 

seriously called into question whether or not I could afford the 

Timbits. 

 

[21:45] 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, when we’ve seen the issue of property 

taxes at the local level — whether it’s in a mobile home as 

presented in Bill 109 or whether it’s in a condo or whether it’s 

in a house, Mr. Speaker — the issue of affordability is 

something that cuts across the province. It cuts across regions. 

It cuts across cities. It affects people on farms in a major way. 

We’ve seen with the recent proposed increases, Mr. Speaker, to 

SaskPower, how this disproportionately affects rural people in a 

negative way. We’ve seen that from members opposite, whether 

you’re a student who once upon a time had a dream of pursuing 

post-secondary education, but under the Sask Party government 

that has become more expensive. 

 

Most recently, Mr. Speaker, well we have the issue of EAs as 

well that was floated by the Minister of Education. If EAs are 

cut, that’s a burden of additional expenses on families once 

again as they look for other means to provide the supports to 

their children because the minister chooses to pull those 

supports away from families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so we see in all these areas, whether it’s 

SaskPower rates in rural areas, whether it’s SaskEnergy bills in 

the cities, whether it is tuition that students are having to pay 

. . . Whatever the issues, Mr. Speaker, it’s not enough to 

provide a small, token $27 reduction or $13 reduction in one 

area but then take hundreds, thousands of dollars, Mr. Speaker, 

out of their other pocket. 

 

And this is the type of approach we’ve seen. Again it ties into 

the fairness aspect of the fake miniature pony and the real pony. 

It calls into question this government’s approach to fairness. It 

calls into question this government’s approach to true 

consultation, to managing resources properly, and to ensuring 

that life is affordable for Saskatchewan people because, Mr. 

Speaker, we have seen the opposite under this Sask Party 

government. We have seen life for individuals, Mr. Speaker . . . 

Mr. Speaker, I see that the light is not on. Does this mean I’m 

cut off, or should I keep going, Mr. Speaker? The clock is 

rolling? All right, thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so whether it’s the issue of fiscal management, 

proper use of our resources, whether it is affordability, Mr. 

Speaker, these are the issues that matter to people. 

 

And so when we look at Bill 109 changes, Mr. Speaker, to The 

Municipalities Act, if we, in the amendments brought forward 

here, deal with the issue of taxation on mobile homes . . . We 

know, Mr. Speaker, that many people live in mobile homes. 

And it’s a good way to live, a good type of housing for many, 

many people. And perhaps more people will pursue the option 

of living in mobile homes, but we have to make sure, Mr. 

Speaker, that whatever changes are brought forward in 109, that 

it’s done in a responsible way. 

 

So I can see, Mr. Speaker, why municipalities may in fact want 

to ensure that amendments come forward in order to allow for a 

proper tax structure on mobile homes because, one, perhaps 

more people are living in mobile homes. That’s one reason why 

municipalities could think this is a concern for them. But 

municipalities, Mr. Speaker, are more and more concerned 

about their bottom line. And that’s because, Mr. Speaker, of the 

approach that we’ve seen of members opposite, of the Sask 

Party government, of breaking promises. 

 

So once upon a time, municipalities were promised that they 

would receive a portion of the PST straight to the provinces so 

they could plan accordingly. They could have the tax structures 

in place that mattered, tax structures in place that ensured 

people could have an affordable way of living. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m not so sure that that is the reality under the Sask 

Party government because of the broken promises that the 

members opposite have already done in these two years. 

 

The budget’s coming down, Mr. Speaker, on the 24th. I think 

we’re going to see a whole lot of other broken promises. We 

will see, Mr. Speaker, that the issue of taxation at the municipal 

level — whether it’s on a mobile home, whether it’s on a 

condo, whether it’s on a house, Mr. Speaker — matters. And it 

matters to owners as well as renters, Mr. Speaker, because if the 

taxes go up at the municipal level for landlords, those expenses, 

Mr. Speaker, will naturally be passed on to the renters. And 

we’ve seen this, Mr. Speaker, in jurisdictions or in cities and 

towns across the province. We’ve seen rents, we’ve seen rents, 

Mr. Speaker, go way up. And I know, Mr. Speaker, that is a 

concern for many, many people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so I’ve talked tonight . . . I’m not winding down, 

Mr. Speaker; I’m just doing the midway recap in case my 

grandma just tuned in tonight at the 10 o’clock hour. We’ve 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4031 

talked, Mr. Speaker, about the important work that 

municipalities do. We’ve talked about how it is only through 

proper consultation that a government can have the proper 

priorities in order to deliver to Saskatchewan people. We talked 

about how in two short years members opposite have done 

horrible trade-offs. They’ve given small pieces of legislative 

changes, whether it’s a proposed change like the one here in the 

first area of a third party mechanism to solve disputes at the 

local level, whether it’s a $27 reduction in property taxes but at 

the same time taking hundreds, thousands of dollars out of the 

other pocket, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve talked about, this evening, how there are changes to this, 

how changes at the local level on property, places like mobile 

homes, have a real effect on individuals because it ties into the 

issue of affordability, and life has become more expensive 

under this Sask Party government. 

 

The third area, Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment on, which 

the minister made remarks on in his second reading speech, is 

the area which allows criminal record checks on individuals 

seeking public office at the municipal level. Again I have to go 

by the minister’s opening remarks in the second reading speech 

when he said that this change, this request has come through 

consultation. I hope that is the case because proper and true 

consultation is always the best way. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in the two years of Sask Party track record 

here, we have seen a whole lot of weak consultation, a whole 

lot of non-existent consultation, many opportunities, Mr. 

Speaker, where members opposite have made up policy on the 

fly, on a cocktail napkin. The Premier has rammed something 

through. He’s made a call on a Saturday afternoon. He’s pegged 

potash numbers at a certain level which just simply aren’t 

realistic. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the horrible domino 

effect that this has throughout the entire budget and through the 

entire province. 

 

So it’s my hope, Mr. Speaker, it’s my sincere hope, my honest 

hope that true and proper consultation took place here, not the 

type of consultation that has become the so consistent, regular 

track record of members opposite. 

 

Now I’m not saying, Mr. Speaker, that every member opposite 

on the other side is engaged in this half-hearted, quasi-type of 

consultation that produces no real true and accurate results. 

There are some, Mr. Speaker, who do the true consultation, but, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen those individuals booted from cabinet. 

Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen these people moved even further back 

in the benches. Mr. Speaker, these are not the individuals who 

have a say around the cabinet table who can ensure, who can 

speak up and tell the Premier that true consultation needs to 

occur. 

 

So when I get to this third issue, Mr. Speaker, this issue of 

municipalities having the choice to bring in the option of 

criminal record checks on individuals seeking public office, it 

really is my hope the consultation occurred. But as the member 

from Nutana highlighted this morning on cuts to workers who 

assist women who are victims of domestic abuse, as we heard 

this afternoon through a petition about Bill 80, how this was 

done without proper consultation, as we’ve heard about in 

recent weeks with the possibility of EAs being slashed 

drastically throughout the province, consultation is not 

members’ opposite strong suit. Consultation is actually a huge 

weakness. It’s a huge broken promise. It’s a huge failure of 

members opposite. 

 

So I hope when the minister says proper consultation occurred, 

I hope when the minister says this request came by people at the 

municipal level who want increased transparency, I hope that is 

in fact the case, Mr. Speaker, because transparency is an 

important issue. And I know many people . . . Earlier on I gave 

the story of the two girls. And one gets the real pony and one 

gets the dud pony, Mr. Speaker. The girl who received the dud 

pony would want transparency. How did that decision occur? 

Why is that individual receiving the real deal and I am getting a 

poor imitation of a pony, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I think some people in Saskatchewan right now are asking 

themselves, why am I getting a poor imitation of a real 

government? Why, Mr. Speaker, why do I have a government, 

Mr. Speaker, that talks the talk about consultation, that talks the 

talk about proper fiscal management, Mr. Speaker, that talks the 

talk about not squandering our future prosperity, that talks the 

talk about listening to Saskatchewan people and doing what’s 

best for everyone in Saskatchewan people, but why, Mr. 

Speaker, am I being left with a poor imitation of a government 

that actually does that? 

 

And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, this is because the 

government that came in, the Sask Party government, the 

members opposite, they came in, Mr. Speaker, believing their 

own hype. The hype was if we simply cheer enough, if we cut 

enough cakes, if we blow up enough balloons, if we give each 

other enough high-fives in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, if we do 

enough really positive, feel-good things, well you know the new 

era of prosperity and hope and every other good thing has 

arrived and everything will just be great, Mr. Speaker. And they 

actually believed this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They actually did not realize that, well you know what, Mr. 

Speaker? Running a proper government, running a province, 

Mr. Speaker, actually takes discipline. It actually takes proper 

consultation with people. It actually takes forward thinking. 

You can’t simply, Mr. Speaker, make a call on a Saturday 

afternoon, peg potash at some pie in the sky, fantasyland budget 

number, and expect everything to work out just fine, Mr. 

Speaker 

 

That’s not a realistic way of doing business. It’s not a realistic 

way of managing a family. It’s not a realistic way of organizing 

one’s individual life. So why on earth, Mr. Speaker, would it be 

a reasonable way to run a province? I simply do not understand. 

And I think people in Saskatchewan now are beginning to ask 

themselves, why do I have this government that pretends that 

it’s something that it isn’t? Why do I have this government that 

pretends it knows what it’s doing? Why do I have this 

government that says one thing . . . On one hand, we’ll give you 

27 bucks in property tax reduction, which isn’t even all that 

accurate, but we’ll take away thousands out of your other 

pocket, Mr. Speaker. Simply doesn’t make sense, simply 

doesn’t hold water with Saskatchewan people. 

 

So when we look at Bill 109, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this 

issue of increasing . . . Or this possibility of providing criminal 



4032 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

record checks for those seeking municipal government, I see 

why individuals would call for this at the local level. I think 

they would call for this at the local level, Mr. Speaker, this type 

of change to bring in changes at the municipal level to do with 

allowing criminal record checks of people seeking public office 

because people want more transparency. 

 

And I think that yearning, that desire for more transparency, 

Mr. Speaker, a lot of it comes out of their horrible experience 

with this Sask Party government of two years. A lot of it comes 

out of their experience of being promised the world, their 

experience of being promised that the new-found era of hope 

and prosperity had finally arrived, that the new-found era of 

balloons every day and cakes to cut every day and 

reannouncements of reannouncements of reannouncements are 

great every day. This new-found era, Mr. Speaker, they want to 

know how did we get to this position. 

 

How did we get to a position, Mr. Speaker, where there were 

billions in the bank, where the province was doing well — we 

had a surplus — and we’re now in a situation, Mr. Speaker, 

where we have a deficit, where we’re paying the potash 

companies to pull our resources out of the ground, Mr. Speaker, 

where members opposite have no real plan. They float ideas 

here and there like cutting EAs across the province. How did 

we end up in this state? Members opposite want transparency. 

They want answers as to why this occurred. 

 

So I can see why, Mr. Speaker, why, looking at Bill 109, why 

they might call for this type of change where we could have 

increased transparency at the local level for those who are 

seeking public office. I could see why individuals might want 

that change because their experience with members opposite 

with numbers have not been positive. 

 

And this, Mr. Speaker, calls into question as to the type of faith 

you can have in the government.  

 

You know, once upon a time the Premier suggested, oh we 

would have $1.9 billion in potash revenue. And we actually had 

the minister, the person you would think would have somewhat 

of a clue what’s going on; the person you would think who 

might have good access, who should have good access to 

ministry officials who could provide some honest, frank advice, 

individuals who you could truly listen to; an individual, Mr. 

Speaker, who should be tuned into what’s happening in the 

world economy; an individual who should be tuned into what’s 

happening with resources around the world — what’s selling, 

what isn’t selling, what areas of the world are doing well — 

who traditionally buys our resources. But you would think the 

minister responsible for is it energy, mines, and . . . What’s it? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Energy and Resources. 

 

[22:00] 

 

Mr. Broten: — Energy and Resources. You’d think he would 

have a clue. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you thought the Premier’s estimates were 

bad, if you thought the Premier was totally out to lunch, if you 

thought the Premier had penned a fantasyland budget on a 

cocktail napkin on a Saturday afternoon, that’s nothing, Mr. 

Speaker, compared to what the actual minister said. He said, $3 

billion — not 1.9 — $3 billion. 

 

So fast forward a few months, Mr. Speaker, and we get to the 

state, we get to the very puzzling state, Mr. Speaker, where we 

now have, we now have the Sask Party government — the 

government who campaigned on being good business-minded 

people; the government, Mr. Speaker, that campaigned on 

having good business sense; the government, Mr. Speaker, that 

led the public to believe that they were plugged in, they were 

tuned in to the world markets; the government who would go 

around to events saying that they are so smart that they know 

exactly what to do. And under this new-found leadership, Mr. 

Speaker, after the election, they believed that Saskatchewan 

would be doing better than ever. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, from that state — where the Premier had a 

fantasyland estimate of $1.9 billion, and then the minister said, 

oh actually I’m the guy really plugged in and I’m in the know, 

and it’s actually 3 billion — we’ve gone from that state, Mr. 

Speaker, to the government, the Sask Party government actually 

now cutting a cheque for $200 million to pay back. Something’s 

wrong there, and I think people in Saskatchewan understand 

that. They know something is wrong with that picture, and 

that’s why they want transparency. 

 

I could see why on Bill 109 they would say, from our elected 

officials we want increased transparency because our 

experience, Mr. Speaker, with the Sask Party members has been 

nothing further from the truth. We’ve seen a cheque of $204 

million being cut back. We see NSF [not sufficient funds] 

cheques to a whole range of important initiatives, whether it’s 

the children’s hospital in Saskatoon, whether it’s the surgical 

care centres in the province that were supposed to address the 

fly-by- night promise of reducing surgical wait times that they 

made — haven’t heard very much about that since the Throne 

Speech was made on the first day — somehow that’s been lost 

in the shuffle, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They’re on to a new plan now of cutting EAs and cutting 

services to Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, what we see in the members opposite is a government 

who believed their own hype, believed their own hype as 

opposed to understanding what it actually takes to run a 

province in a sustainable and proper way. So, Mr. Speaker, so, 

Mr. Speaker, I see why individuals would want transparency 

from their elected officials. 

 

There are certain questions around this proposed change in Bill 

109 on this issue of criminal records checks. For example, what 

are, what determines . . . Is this an even decision? How are the 

decisions made to ensure this type of check? Right now it’s 

only for convictions. Should other considerations be put in 

place? What other types of information should perhaps be 

disclosed? Because people really do have a yearning for the 

transparency that they simply do not get from the members 

opposite on a host of issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so as I do move to wrap things up on my remarks 

on Bill 109, I want to . . . I don’t think actually say to this . . . 

So I was going to say reiterate, but it is my first, my first time 

saying this. I wanted to thank all those working at the municipal 

level, whether it’s an individual who serves in an elected 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4033 

capacity or whether it’s an administrator. Mr. Speaker, these are 

the individuals who are doing much of the work that affects 

people so directly at the local level — the individuals who 

provide the services, provide the structure and make sure our 

cities and towns and RMs run well and meet the needs of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

So if in fact, Mr. Speaker, as the minister suggests, true 

consultation took place and the minister spoke to these people, 

not just a few of them, but a proper consultation and not a 

consultation, Mr. Speaker, that had the Sask Party filter on it 

where they only hear from the people who they want to hear 

from — we’ve sadly seen that far too often on a host of issues 

— but I hope it was a true consultation, Mr. Speaker. And I 

know people working at the municipal level, because they care 

for their towns, because they care for their neighbours, because 

they care for their families, the type of feedback they would 

give would in fact be thoughtful feedback. And it would be 

feedback that would allow for a greater amount of efficiency 

and effectiveness at the local level. 

 

So if the consultation showed that individuals wanted increased 

. . . or wanted a third party mechanism to solve disputes, that’s a 

good thing, if that is the result of a true and proper consultation. 

In my opinion at least — I won’t speak for all of my colleagues 

— I think that’s a decent idea. 

 

But if the consultation was like we saw with the EAs, where 

you float a trial balloon and then you backpedal and backtrack 

and pretend that the real statements weren’t actually made and it 

was just, you know, a passing thought that somehow was put 

down on paper and words, spread to many school regions and 

passed out through the public to the people. If that was the type 

of consultation, Mr. Speaker, then I would have some concerns 

about supporting this notion of the third party mechanism 

because I couldn’t fully trust that it’s what people want on the 

ground. Because without proper consultation, if it’s only 

one-sided consultation, if it’s selective consultation, selective 

consultation with selective hearing, then I’ve got some true 

concerns. 

 

If the consultation was accurate, true, and honest, and I really 

did hear from Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, if the 

consultation brought forward the request from municipalities 

that they wanted some changes to allow a different or an 

improved tax structure on places like mobile homes . . . We 

know under the Sask Party, life is more expensive. Life is less 

affordable. We know many families are facing pressures, so the 

issue of taxation at the local level is a very important one. 

 

We also know at the local level municipalities are increasingly 

concerned about the promises they’ve received from members 

opposite. Because once upon a time, Mr. Speaker, they were 

promised to receive a percentage of the PST that was 

designated for municipalities. But, Mr. Speaker, I think with the 

amount of broken promises we’ve seen, I mean there was the 

PST broken promise. There was the promise that Bill 5 wasn’t 

needed. Sure enough, it showed up right away. There was the 

promise that they would manage the provincial finances well. 

That certainly has not come to fruition. There was the promise, 

Mr. Speaker, that they wouldn’t squander our future prosperity. 

That certainly hasn’t come to fruition. There was the promise, 

Mr. Speaker, that they would follow greenhouse gas emissions 

targets for reduction of . . . Members on this side. That promise 

was broken. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the promises are mounting. There was a 

promise for a health ombudsman — not present. There was a 

promise, Mr. Speaker, that they would treat Saskatchewan 

people with respect. But we’ve seen with many pieces of 

legislation that they have brought forward — whether it’s 5, 6, 

48, or 80 — there have been some challenges. There was the 

promise, Mr. Speaker, to open the mill. A vote for the member 

from P.A. — I’d better get the P.A. constituency right, P.A. 

Carlton — a vote for that individual was a vote to keep the mill 

open. Well, Mr. Speaker, not so much. 

 

So we see a consistent record of broken promises. So I 

understand why members opposite would be trying to do a 

deflection. They would be trying to pass off small pieces of 

legislation that provide some token change, some token relief 

while they ignore the grave and serious concerns the people 

have at the local level. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if true consultation did in fact take place, if 

true consultation did take place, if they heard from all the 

people from whom they should have received feedback, if they 

chose to listen to all the feedback and not simply the ones that 

were convenient; if that took place, Mr. Speaker, well yes I 

suppose I could, I could live with that. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that is what took place. Well 

we’ll see. Time will tell, won’t it, Mr. Speaker? But on so many 

issues, we haven’t seen the accountability and the keeping of 

promises that were given to us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the work the municipalities do is very 

important work. I think we as an Assembly can all agree that we 

should commend the good efforts done at the municipal level, 

whether done by elected individuals or an administrator at the 

local level or the front-line workers who provide the services. 

Whether it is the individual grading the roads or collecting the 

taxes or enforcing the bylaws, Mr. Speaker, these are important 

jobs and, members of this Assembly, we do need to ensure that 

we are working co-operatively with levels of government at the 

municipal level to ensure that matters are taken care of as they 

ought to be taken care of. 

 

But sadly, Mr. Speaker, consultation has not been the strong 

suit of this government, just as keeping promises has not been a 

strong suit, Mr. Speaker, just as running the province’s fiscal 

resources well has not been a strong suit, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m worried that people in society are not content with 

simply being given these horrible trade-offs where they get the 

fake pony instead of the real pony. I’m worried for the people in 

the province who are asking themselves, Mr. Speaker, what 

went so wrong in such a short period of time? 

 

Mr. Speaker, members in society, in the electorate, are asking 

themselves, how could these individuals who promised us the 

world could have underdelivered so badly, could have promised 

the world, Mr. Speaker? How it could have gone from a huge 

surplus, Mr. Speaker, to a huge deficit? People in Saskatchewan 

want to know that answer and they deserve to know that 

answer, Mr. Speaker. 

 



4034 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

And this whole discussion that we’ve been having, Mr. 

Speaker, about Bill 109, An Act to amend The Municipalities 

Act and to make related amendments to The Local Government 

Election Act, you know, sometimes when you make minor 

changes to a piece of legislation it doesn’t always seem like it’s 

the biggest deal in the world. It doesn’t always seem like it’s 

earth-shattering or that everyone in the province should pay 

attention. But I think when you really examine the issues, often 

the minor changes to legislation, the small amendments to a 

piece of legislation, the types of changes that would affect 

individuals at the municipal level, often those are the most 

telling changes, Mr. Speaker, because the devil is in the details 

often. And those details can shed a great deal of light on the 

greater operations of a government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, some individuals might question how Bill 109 

has an effect and an impact on the greater aspects of 

government. Well, Mr. Speaker, if it’s about consultation, if it’s 

about consultation, it has the greatest relevance. It has a huge 

relevance, Mr. Speaker, because it speaks to a philosophy by 

members opposite with respect to who they will listen to, who 

will call the tune. Mr. Speaker, who they will truly respect in 

society and who they won’t respect; who they won’t listen to 

and who they will ignore. And that’s a concern, Mr. Speaker, 

because if the individuals at the local level and municipalities 

are requesting changes at the local level of government, then, 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is appropriate to listen to them. It’s 

appropriate to heed the request and the warning or the 

suggestion that they give because people at the local level are 

plugged in. That’s the kind of true consultation that needs to 

occur. We need to hear from those people. 

 

And what I fear, Mr. Speaker, when we look at a small issue 

like Bill 109 about changes to how things operate in 

municipalities, my fear is if true and proper consultation does 

not occur, Mr. Speaker, it calls into question what the 

government is doing on so many other fronts. 

 

It calls into question as we get closer to the 24th of March, Mr. 

Speaker, when we have budget day, we have to ask ourselves 

what type of consultation took place, Mr. Speaker. Because the 

promises that members opposite made during election and 

during their first two years of government, Mr. Speaker, those 

promises were huge. And I think they were huge, Mr. Speaker, 

because members opposite actually believed their own hype. 

They actually believed their own rhetoric. 

 

They thought, Mr. Speaker . . . And on this issue of consultation 

and how we learn from Bill 109 some larger lessons about how 

this government operates, there were comments by the Premier 

going into their convention, which recently happened this 

weekend here in Regina. There were questions about 

consultation and how this convention is a time to get together 

and talk politics with people. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the people who were 

actually there, Mr. Speaker, the numbers and the type of people, 

I imagine you’d see a lot of faces from this building of 

individuals who were required to be there because it was their 

job. So members in my caucus have referred to this as a large 

staff party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If that’s the type of consultation, if when the Premier said they 

were holding this convention to talk politics and hear from 

people to be informed about the issues that are important, so 

that when we look at pieces of legislation like Bill 109 we’d be 

making the proper decisions — we wouldn’t be making 

decisions in haste; we would know what really matters to 

people, Mr. Speaker — then if the type of consultation that the 

Premier was speaking of, if their type of consultation is what 

we saw at the convention this last weekend, Mr. Speaker, I 

understand why the government would be pursuing this kind of 

horrible trade-off where they give us small changes, small yet 

significant changes in Bill 109, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But they completely fail. They completely break their promise. 

They completely go back on their word with respect to election 

promises of managing our financial resources properly, of 

pursuing good resource policy, of ensuring that everyone 

benefits from the resources in the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, so when we see the issue of transparency 

around Bill 109, when we see what kind of process has been in 

place to get the feedback, if as the Premier said, that only type 

of consultation, as he said about the convention this recent 

weekend, that it was a time to consult with people and talk 

politics and get some feedback on what they want, well, Mr. 

Speaker, I have some concerns. Because while the changes in 

Bill 109 may be important, while they might truly speak to 

some true concerns at the local level by municipalities, if they 

don’t come from a process of consultation that is true and 

sincere and comprehensive and is not lopsided, is not one-sided, 

is not selectively based — like I would argue occurs at the Sask 

Party convention by a bunch of people who are required to be 

there because their employment in this building hinges on it — 

well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that is the best type of 

consultation. And that worries me. 

 

So when we look at a piece of legislation like 109, and some 

might say, well yes it is somewhat insignificant . . . Well not 

insignificant, but the changes do not totally revolutionize the 

way I live my life. The changes do not turn my world upside 

down. Even though the changes may bring a greater degree of 

efficiency and effectiveness in the ability of municipalities to 

deliver services to people in their constituencies, in their areas, 

jurisdictions, then, Mr. Speaker, if the consultation has not been 

widespread and far-reaching, then I think that is in fact a 

concern. 

 

So Bill 109, it teaches some lessons about transparency and 

taking a true and honest look at the facts and what people want. 

And I think if the members opposite took a true and honest fact 

of what Saskatchewan people want, I think some of them would 

be shocked. Again, not all. But two or three maybe in far, far 

backbenches who aren’t in cabinet any longer or never have 

been or they’re in the very backbenches, maybe some of those 

people, they’re still fairly plugged in to their constituency. 

Maybe they’re hearing the true consultation that needs to occur 

in order to ensure that we get pieces of legislation like Bill 109 

right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But my worry is that the approach we have seen from members 

opposite is one of promising the world, promising everything, 

believing our own hype, blowing up lots of balloons, cutting a 

lot of cakes, waving a lot of pompoms, slapping a lot of 

high-fives. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen when you take 



March 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4035 

a high-five approach to the budgetary process, that the failure 

really is a thumbs-down. There is no high-five. In fact, people 

are just left with hurt knuckles because the end result is not a 

positive one. 

 

And we will see the true extent of what improper consultation 

leads to. My hope is that we’ve seen proper consultation of 109. 

I can’t guarantee that. My hope is that is the case because the 

minister has stated that that is what he did. But we’ll see on the 

24th what kind of consultation took place because I think, Mr. 

Speaker, if the Sask Party, if the members opposite were really 

plugged in to what people wanted their government to do, if the 

Sask Party is really plugged in to what people on the street are 

saying, I think, Mr. Speaker, they would hear that members 

opposite don’t really have . . . They no longer have the 

credibility that they once pretended to have, that they once 

hyped up that they had about being great business people and 

having the best financial minds and being economic wizards 

that could somehow wave their wand and poof, the province 

would be doing better than ever, Mr. Speaker. Because reality 

hasn’t really demonstrated that. 

 

So we might see in 109 where consultation has taken place. But 

my worry is that it’s the type of consultation that allows for an 

approach to legislation where you give a few things, you make 

a few changes at the municipal level, you, for example, you 

provide a third party mechanism to settle disputes at the local 

level on if there is a dispute on the servicing and the building 

and the repairs of roads. You get those types of changes 

because well, Mr. Speaker, frankly they don’t cost as much as 

the huge promises that members opposite made. 

 

And they made these promises, Mr. Speaker. They 

overpromised. They promised everything under the sun because 

they really did think they were the new Adam. They thought 

that the new era had arrived, but they failed to realize, Mr. 

Speaker, that while there’s a few new faces on certain seats, on 

a few benches, the same actors are all there. And many of the 

faces that are new, Mr. Speaker, learned the behaviours from 

the individuals who so horribly treated the province in the past. 

 

So while the hype might have said this is the new era of 

prosperity, Mr. Speaker, the reality on the ground has told a 

very, very different story. So if we look at consultation, if we 

look at this process and if municipalities, Mr. Speaker, said that, 

you know, we want a third party resolution mechanism to allow 

for the ability to solve disputes around the construction and 

repair of roads, if that’s what the true consultation said, Mr. 

Speaker, then, you know, you can’t argue with the people that 

are on the front lines delivering the service, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But as members opposite were out and about on their travels, as 

they were talking about these issues like the need as is stated in 

the second reading statement by the minister that there is a third 

party mechanism needed to solve these types of disputes, 

surely, Mr. Speaker, they heard also from individuals about 

their desires to have the province run in a responsible, in a 

mature manner. 

 

And the mature manner is an important part, Mr. Speaker, 

because mature leadership, mature control of the province’s 

finances isn’t the type of approach which gives a few changes 

in something like Bill 109 — changes which are significant but 

not revolutionary, changes which have an impact and an 

influence on people’s lives but aren’t really the entire story, 

don’t really speak to the entire story that they’re hearing on the 

ground. 

 

If, Mr. Speaker, the type of consultation they’re pursuing and 

the type of approach and leadership that we’ve seen from the 

Premier, members opposite, is one to pick a few easy battles but 

when it comes to the really important issues, when it comes to 

the issues of managing our province in a responsible manner, in 

choosing revenue estimates, Mr. Speaker, that are realistic, that 

are down to earth, that are practical, that are not thought up of 

on a Saturday afternoon in between vacuuming the house when 

you call the Finance minister and say, oh actually I think we’re 

getting 1.9 billion in potash so let’s ramp up spending even 

more because I think we have in fact won the potash lottery. I 

think it’s okay to have all of our eggs in one basket. 

 

If that’s the kind of leadership, Mr. Speaker, that people in 

Saskatchewan are now seeing, where you might get some 

changes in Bill 109 but on the really, on the super important 

issues, the issues that underpin everything we’re able to do as a 

provincial government in terms of having our financial issues 

dealt with properly, in the delivery of services, in the care of 

our seniors and the care of our parents and the care of our 

children and the care of our colleagues and our friends, Mr. 

Speaker, if the type of leadership we’ve seen says, well we can 

make a few changes in Bill 109, for example we can make some 

changes as to how mobile homes are taxed. We can make some 

changes at the municipal level how municipalities can collect 

the taxes on mobile homes because we know, under our tenure, 

this is what the Sask Party is saying: life has become a lot more 

expensive for Saskatchewan people. We’ve given them a few 

breaks to disguise the huge clawbacks we’ve taken in other 

areas. 

 

If that’s the kind of leadership, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan 

people can expect, then this raises some concerns for me on Bill 

109 because it’s not fair. It’s like those two girls in the ad, Mr. 

Speaker. The one girl gets the real pony and the one girl gets 

the wee, poor, miniature, imitation, fake pony. And that girl 

who gets the fake pony knows at her core, in her heart of hearts, 

that it’s not fair. It just speaks to her sense of what is wrong and 

what is right. And I think people in Saskatchewan are 

increasingly sharing the feelings of that girl who received the 

dud pony, the fake pony, the imitation pony, the pony that is not 

the real deal. 

 

Because people in Saskatchewan now are in a position where, 

you know, they’re saying to themselves, this Premier, you 

know, he was young, and he delivered some good one-liners. 

And you know, he was friendly — and, you know, who doesn’t 

like a friendly person? — and, you know, he seemed to give a 

good speech. But, Mr. Speaker, these individuals are saying, 

well we thought we’d give that person a chance. And the 

member from Athabasca spoke about this issue. They said, 

people in Saskatchewan said, we thought we’d give these 

people a chance. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think they’re starting to realize that they 

don’t simply want the Bill 109 changes. They don’t simply 

want the changes that change how mobile homes are taxed. 

They want the type of leadership, they want the type of 



4036 Saskatchewan Hansard March 8, 2010 

responsible leadership, mature leadership that doesn’t predict 

$3 billion in potash revenue when it’s clear, Mr. Speaker, that 

the individuals who are purchasing potash are . . . In the world, 

the countries that are purchasing potash are clearly slowing 

down. 

 

And you know, members opposite, I think people in 

Saskatchewan they also want the type of leadership that doesn’t 

mock honest criticism and legitimate criticism. 

 

You know, on this potash issue, I think we’re going to be 

talking a lot about potash throughout this session. It cuts to 

every issue. And it cuts to these Bills like these Bill 109’s, the 

Bills that don’t turn the world upside down but can make some 

real changes because it causes people to think. 

 

They say to themselves well, Mr. Speaker, you know some of 

these individuals, these . . . They say the Sask Party promised 

us the world. They promised us that this was the new era of 

hope, the new era of prosperity. But all that we’ve received, Mr. 

Speaker, is Bill 109, a change as to how mobile homes are 

taxed. And I’m not saying that’s not an important change. It 

might be a very warranted change, and it might be the request 

that’s coming from municipalities. But, Mr. Speaker, Bill 109 is 

silent, completely silent on the issue of the promise that the 

members opposite made of providing a percentage of PST to 

municipalities. 

 

So we see in Bill 109, while some might deem it as a somewhat 

less than significant — well not less than significant; a 

significant yet not the flagship — piece of legislation coming 

from the Sask Party government in a session, it’s important, Mr. 

Speaker, because it speaks to, a number of the issues speak to 

the ability of municipalities to provide services at a reasonable 

cost and to save money. Because, Mr. Speaker, municipalities 

and people in Saskatchewan are now realizing they can’t trust 

the government. They can’t trust the Sask Party to deliver on 

the big promises. So now they’re in a position where they have 

to settle for the minor changes, the types of changes you see in 

Bill 109 where you change the tax structure on mobile homes. 

 

But then that huge election promise, Mr. Speaker, that you left 

out flapping in the wind, the huge election promise that they 

made following one of their so-called amazing budgets to 

provide a percentage of the PST to municipalities, Mr. Speaker, 

you just leave it. You just ignore it. You say, well we’re sorry 

we broke the promise on PST. We’re sorry we broke the 

promise on providing meaningful change, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

going to make changes so you can tax mobile homes 

differently. We’re going to make a change, Mr. Speaker, so that 

you can actually do . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time being 10:30, this House 

now stands adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4007 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 101 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4007 

 Bill No. 103 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4010 

 Bill No. 108 — The Cities Amendment Act, 2009 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4011 

 Bill No. 121 — The Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4016 

 Bill No. 102 — The Personal Property Security Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4022 

 Bill No. 109 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4025 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


