




















































Hansard: March 29, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 38B  MONDAY, MARCH 29, 2010, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4543 

 March 29, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time being 7 o’clock, this House 

now resumes sitting. I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was 

saying before we broke for the supper hour . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Start over. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — And I’m sorry but I will not be starting 

my remarks over from the very beginning . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . I know. 

 

Right, on the issue of policies and particularly on the climate 

change policy, there is one very substantial difference between 

the NDP [New Democratic Party] and us, and that is we 

actually have a policy on this issue, Mr. Speaker. This budget 

sees the continuation of our campaign promise to commit $15 

million per year to our Go Green Fund. This fund offers 

financing to enable people to go green and make the changes 

necessary to help our environment and reduce our greenhouse 

gas emissions. 

 

Included this year, Mr. Speaker, in the Go Green allocation is 

$4 million for SARCAN and their recycling efforts. This is 

above and beyond the environment handling charges that we are 

returning to them. Under the NDP administration, they were 

quite happy to collect the environmental handling charges for 

beverage containers and then dump the money into the GRF 

[General Revenue Fund] instead of reinvesting completely in 

recycling. We are taking a different approach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are allocating more than $10 million per year 

more to SARCAN than the NDP ever did. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

this year SARCAN will receive an allocation of over $21 

million to make sure they can continue to recycle beverage 

containers, to expand their services to meet a growing need, all 

the while employing peoples with all abilities, Mr. Speaker. On 

behalf of the government, I would like to thank SARCAN for 

their investment in our communities and their commitment to 

people with disabilities and their dedication to protecting our 

environment. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, before this House is our legislation on the 

reduction of greenhouse gas emissions for Saskatchewan. This 

is yet another area where the NDP were all talk and where our 

government is taking action. We have set a target of a 20 per 

cent reduction over 2006 levels by 2020. 

 

I’m not sure what the NDP’s targets are today, Mr. Speaker. 

They started off with a 32 per cent reduction. Then the 

Environment critic clearly called upon us to adopt the federal 

targets of 20 per cent. And now the NDP leader says that we 

have to do what the United States is doing, which is a 17 per 

cent reduction. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll quote from November 17, 

2009. The member for Regina Douglas Park said, and I quote: 

 

My view is that we will continue to watch as this 

develops and through our policy forums come up with our 

proposal. But at this point in time, I think to do something 

other than the Americans is going to be very, very 

difficult. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, from that quote it’s quite obvious that they 

don’t actually have their own proposal for this initiative. They 

said that they’re going work through their policy forums on that 

and that they are apparently quite willing to adopt what the 

United States is doing, which is a 17 per cent reduction, Mr. 

Speaker. So they’re apparently a little confused. And the other 

quote from the member for Regina Douglas Park, from The 

Leader-Post, December 29, 2009 says, and I quote: 

 

I think it’s incumbent on a large producer of fossil fuels 

and all the opportunity we have in Saskatchewan, for the 

New Democratic Party to be absolutely clear on what our 

environmental policy is going forward. I think we’ve got 

quite a bit of work to do there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was his quote. Obviously he’s not confident 

in the position their party has, whatever that position is today, 

and he admits that there’s a whole lot of work yet to be done. 

So while they talk amongst themselves to come up with their 

policies, Mr. Speaker, our approach is very clear. Not only are 

they confused about targets and what their policy is going to be 

on this, Mr. Speaker, they’re apparently a little confused on the 

mechanisms which will be employed to actually help us reach 

our targets. 

 

Just last week the NDP leader was proudly stating 

Saskatchewan’s history in carbon capture and storage, and I 

actually have to agree with him on that point. Saskatchewan is a 

world leader in carbon capture and storage, Mr. Speaker. But 

what I find more than passing strange is that his own 

hand-picked Environment critic is absolutely opposed to carbon 

capture and storage. She said and I quote, “. . . they [meaning 

us] committed to the expensive and untried technology of 

carbon capture.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, so they are confused about their own policy. 

They’re obviously confused about their own targets, and they’re 

confused internally about what mechanisms we’re actually 

going to employ to get us to reach our targets, Mr. Speaker. So I 

wish them well on that. 

 

However, I do want to thank one of the members of the NDP, 

the member for Regina Dewdney. And I want to thank him for 

his absolute unqualified support for our government’s 

legislation on reduction of greenhouse gases’. I have a long list 

of quotes here, and I think I’ll read every single one of them, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 



4544 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

This is from debate in the House on . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Request leave for an introduction. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland has requested leave to introduce a guest. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank 

you, hon. member. To you and through you to the rest of the 

legislature, I’d like to introduce my only daughter, Elise, who’s 

up in the Speaker’s gallery. This is the first time she’s been in 

the House. And I wish to tell everybody how proud I am of her, 

what a wonderful daughter she is, and welcome to your 

legislature. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 

Environment. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government.] 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, last fall in this House on 

November 18th, the member for Regina Dewdney was . . . I 

think we were having a debate about greenhouse gas legislation. 

And so I want to quote some of what he said, Mr. Speaker, 

because I really do want to thank him for his support. It’s, you 

know, pretty clear. He said, "Mr. Speaker, what we’re urging 

the government to do is reintroduce their own Bill, Bill No. 95, 

because we support that Bill.” The member for Regina 

Dewdney, he went on to say, and I quote, “. . . on reflection of 

that legislation, Mr. Speaker, it is something that in fact does 

put forward a concrete plan.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, he went on to praise our legislation and again I 

thank him for that. He said, and I quote: 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve now had the opportunity to 

review some additional information that was provided, 

including Bill 95. We reviewed it in detail, and we 

support Bill 95. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one more. He said, and I quote, “. . . it is a very, 

very, very, very . . .” And I didn’t put those in myself. He said 

that “. . . it is a very, very, very, very important piece of 

legislation, Bill No. 95, because it’s actually the plan. And if we 

pass Bill No. 95, we then have a concrete plan . . .” So again, 

Mr. Speaker, thank you to the member for Regina Dewdney. 

Oh, Mr. Speaker, I missed one because I switched my pages. 

I’ve got one more. He said, and I quote, “. . . this is a Bill that 

has substance and structure in which to accomplish the goals of 

which the government has brought forward.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do thank him for his support, and I hope that 

he can speak with the members of his caucus to get them onside 

because apparently he’s pretty happy with the piece of 

legislation that we have before the House. And he is the House 

Leader, so you know I would imagine he has some sway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have personally spoken to numerous 

stakeholders, and they are incredibly supportive of our 

government’s approach. I actually . . . We’re in the middle of 

consultations currently on our greenhouse gas reduction Bill in 

both Saskatoon and Regina. We’re meeting with industry 

stakeholders, with stakeholders from the agricultural 

community. There’s some potential for offset credits within 

how they do business. We’re meeting with environmental 

NGOs [non-governmental organization] and others, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I was able to go down and meet with the industry 

stakeholders just this afternoon and thank them for their 

participation. They have been outstanding in their participation, 

the feedback they’ve given us on our legislation, and I know 

that they’re very supportive. They particularly like the tech fund 

structure that we have, Mr. Speaker, that we would actually 

reinvest in Saskatchewan businesses to help them reach those 

targets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another issue within my ministry, which is 

incredibly important for our government, is water. As part of 

this budget process, the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority has 

also been asked to find efficiencies, and they will. But they 

have been able to do this without reducing the key services that 

they offer to people. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we continue to do 

more than ever. The authority’s important work will continue 

on a water availability study. As our province grows, it is 

essential that we are aware of where our water resources are, 

what they are, in order to accommodate our population growth 

and the increased industrial activity in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP left behind a massive infrastructure 

deficit. We know this. We hear about it when it comes to 

schools and hospitals and roads. But there is also a water 

infrastructure deficit in our province, infrastructure that needs to 

be repaired, improved, and built. Mr. Speaker, we are spending 

six times the money the NDP did on dam infrastructure in our 

province. 

 

The Saskatchewan Watershed Authority is also continuing free 

water testing for communities at risk. We did this previously for 

the village of Hepburn. Them having this information on the 

deplorable state of their water system, Mr. Speaker, a water 

system that the NDP completely overlooked . . . the village had 

asked for financial help under the NDP for years and were 

denied every single year. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to say 

that we were able, through federal and provincial money, to 

contribute $6 million to a $9 million water project for the 

community of Hepburn so they could have clean, safe water. 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4545 

Mr. Speaker, while the NDP spent a mere $9 million in their 

last two years on water infrastructure, in our first two years we 

have handed out over $76 million for water infrastructure 

projects in our province. Access to clean, safe water is essential 

not only for human health and safety but to meet the growth of 

our province, Mr. Speaker. We are committed to making sure 

that communities in Saskatchewan have access to safe, clean 

water. 

 

And I have to say I’m a little surprised at the NDP’s 

Environment critic’s request for the current water supply to 

continue to flow into Furdale. Mr. Speaker, the water is raw 

water. It’s straight from the river. It is meant for industrial use. 

In fact 97 per cent of the users on that system are industrial 

users. Monitoring of that water system has shown that there are 

rodents making their homes by the water intake. It has E. coli, 

metals, other contaminants. And, Mr. Speaker, after the water 

situation in North Battleford, I would have thought that we 

would all see the benefits of having safe, clean water delivered 

to homes in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Just last year, there was money that was given to the non-profit 

Dundurn water utility, about $15 million through federal and 

provincial funding to expand their water system, and the 

residents of Furdale have an opportunity to hook up to that 

system. But we will continue to work with the good people in 

Furdale to make sure that they have access to clean, health-safe 

water, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I listened with interest also — speaking of water — to the 

member from Athabasca make fun of my toilet replacement 

program offered through the Saskatchewan Watershed 

Authority. On one hand, he stated that we needed to protect the 

water in this province, and on the other hand he repeatedly 

mocked a program that does just that. The NDP had their own 

toilet replacement program. It operated for one year, had a 

budget of $200,000. Mr. Speaker, ours is a four-year program 

with a budget of $11 million, and so far we’ve had pretty good 

uptake. The total that’s replaced in this province, there’s been 

13,000 traditional toilets that have been replaced for water 

savings of 150 million litres of water, Mr. Speaker. So the 

opposition’s concern about protection of our water; this is a 

great way for the average person to be involved in reducing 

their water consumption so that we have a safe water supply 

going into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the funding continues in this year’s budget, and 

the program is being expanded to include things like schools 

and municipal buildings as well. Mr. Speaker, we are 

continuing our unprecedented investment in infrastructure 

through this budget. We have spent almost $3 billion over the 

last three years, and we wouldn’t have to do that if the NDP 

made infrastructure a priority under their government but, Mr. 

Speaker, they did not. 

 

We are committed to building schools and fixing roads. The 

twinning of Highway 11 will continue, and as I drive this 

highway all the time I can see the benefits of this project. The 

communities along Highway 11 continue to grow and no more 

than the town of Warman. 

 

I want to thank the Education minister for his announcement 

this month that a middle-year school for Warman will be built. 

The minister and I have discussed the need for this . . . The 

minister and I have discussed the need for this school many 

times, and I can tell him that over the past few weeks the 

residents of Warman have contacted me through phone calls 

and emails to say thank you. Without this school, the 

community’s growth would have been stunted. It is a great 

town. Even as it grows, it is holding onto its small-town feel 

and sense of community, a place where neighbours help 

neighbours. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government is listening. Whether 

through door knocking during the 2007 by-election or talking to 

folks over the last few years, there have been pretty much the 

same issues raised consistently: education property taxes, a safe 

water supply for Hepburn, a middle year school for Warman, 

and attention paid to access roads within my riding. I’m happy 

to say that we have or will be addressing all of these issues, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The good people of my constituency have had the same 

concerns for years. Hepburn repeatedly applied for water 

funding, and the NDP repeatedly refused their requests. Tax 

payers across this province repeatedly called for relief from 

education property taxes, and the NDP repeatedly refused to 

hear them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Drivers have repeatedly asked 

for better roads, and the NDP repeatedly refused to invest in 

infrastructure. Mr. Speaker, that was the old Saskatchewan led 

by a tired, old NDP government. But Mr. Speaker, we are in a 

new Saskatchewan, one led by a dynamic leader and MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] who are listening. 

 

Nothing is more indicative of the NDP’s backward-looking 

ways than their convention this past weekend. Mr. Speaker, I 

found it interesting that their policy renewal session was titled 

“Saskatchewan in the 21st Century,” and then their leader spent 

most of his time talking about the past. He continues to talk 

about the 1980s. Well, Mr. Speaker, I was in high school in the 

1980s. It was quite a while ago, and I think it’s probably time to 

move on and pay attention to this new Saskatchewan. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP are going back to old school politics, looking 

backward instead of forward. 

 

[19:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the new Saskatchewan. There is a renewed 

optimism in our province. People are moving here like never 

before. Our population continues to increase. Saskatchewan 

under the NDP might have been a good place to be from but, 

Mr. Speaker, the new Saskatchewan is a great place to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I started my remarks talking about my kids, and 

I’ll talk about my parents’ kids for a second. At one time my 

brother, sister, and I all lived outside of Saskatchewan, and I 

don’t think there was a happier day for my parents when we all 

moved back home. Mr. Speaker, I have six nieces and nephews, 

and in this new Saskatchewan there are opportunities for every 

single one of them. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m proud to be a 

resident of this new Saskatchewan. I am proud to support this 

budget. It is a budget that will see Saskatchewan continue to 

move forward, to see Saskatchewan be a leader in the country, 

and a place where people want to be. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



4546 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a real 

pleasure tonight to rise and speak to this budget. I think there 

are a number of concerns in quite a few different areas. And as 

many people know, I have a strong interest in the arts and in 

what’s happening in Saskatchewan, and there have been a 

number of things that have been done or started to be completed 

in this budget which are a worry to many of us in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I find it’s kind of interesting that April 2010 is Ibsen 

month in Saskatchewan. Right now at the University of 

Saskatchewan, they’re performing Peer Gynt which is one of 

Ibsen’s early plays, and it’s quite an interesting play. It started 

last Thursday. I recommend it to anybody who is interested, and 

it continues I think every night this week until Saturday. 

 

But Peer Gynt — if people don’t know this play — it’s about a 

man who basically follows the wisdom of the trolls, and 

basically what it does is it puts that person first above the 

community. And in many ways when you think about or listen 

or go to this play, like I did last Thursday, it reminds me a lot of 

this budget which effectively neglects the many, the 

community, and starts focusing on a few and on the friends of 

the members opposite. And, Mr. Speaker, I just don’t want to 

spend a long time on this, but the main character in this play is 

Peer Gynt. And it’s quite interesting that he goes through three 

bankruptcies during the play. And I think we’ve had quite a few 

discussions about bankruptcies and abilities and things that 

have happened. And so I encourage everybody to go and see 

that play. 

 

Then in a week or two, the Globe Theatre will be performing A 

Doll’s House. And once again, this is a 19th-century play that 

speaks to the 21st century because it deals with, once again, 

many of the issues around how we treat women, family, and 

their roles within society. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard a 

number of things and seen a number of things that raise concern 

both here in the provincial area but also at the national area as it 

relates to the rights of women. And I will once again urge 

people to go and see that particular play. 

 

Now when one looks at a budget and what needs to be in a 

budget, one of the concerns that you have is that you follow the 

accounting rules. And I was very pleased to see in the certified 

general accountant magazine that just arrived this week — it’s 

the March-April edition — they have one of their writers talk 

about a breakthrough in setting generally accepted accounting 

principles for private enterprises. And basically what they’re 

doing is they’re setting up these generally accepted accounting 

principles according to Canada’s Accounting Standards Board 

for smaller businesses, but which then obviously helps certified 

general accountants and accountants to do their work. 

 

But one of the comments made by a person who’s quoted here 

is a comment by Stephen Spector who is an accounting lecturer 

at Simon Fraser University. He’s also a treasurer of the 

Certified General Accountants of British Columbia. And what 

he says is: 

 

“the three fundamental underlying premises of the new 

GAAP [or general accounting principles] are that . . . 

[private enterprise] financial statements should allow 

users to understand an organization’s operations, to 

determine whether it will be able to meet its cash flow 

obligations, and to figure out what happened from one 

period to the next. Those addressed the three key needs of 

creditors. The focus is on decision usefulness.” 

 

I think that one of the concerns that we have, fundamentally 

about the budget that was presented last week, is the usefulness 

of this budget for voters, for the people of Saskatchewan in 

understanding exactly those three things — understanding how 

the operations are organized, determine about whether or not 

the cash will be there to actually meet the obligations, and 

finally to make a comparison between what’s going to happen 

in this coming year with what’s happened in previous years. 

 

And when a government comes in and starts changing the 

accounting rules in the middle of a term, we know that there’s a 

problem somewhere. And I think that’s why the Provincial 

Auditor is concerned. That’s why many in the accounting 

profession across Saskatchewan are concerned, and that’s very 

clearly why we on this side are concerned because, when one 

starts to mess with the budget, well then you end up with all 

kinds of issues. 

 

And it’s quite amazing when you look at the document and see 

that at the end of almost every page in that book, when it comes 

to departmental expenditures, there’s a little footnote at the 

bottom that says these things have been adjusted in some way. 

So you don’t really know whether the comparisons are accurate 

or not. And that I think becomes the concern for all of us in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now to compound that, we have a commentary — which kind 

of reflects my own sense — from Jeffrey Simpson in March 

6th, the Saturday edition of The Globe and Mail. And the 

article’s called “Budget reality: promises, promises on the road 

to fiscal hock.” And one of the little highlight portions here 

says, “The single most curious aspect of North American 

political conservatism is that it has very seldom produced what 

it preached, although the yawning gap never stopped the 

preaching.” 

 

And what Mr. Simpson is talking about is that much as 

conservatives, like our Saskatchewan Party friends opposite or 

our federal Conservatives or Republicans in the United States, 

much as they pride themselves in thinking that they know how 

to manage and keep account of money, they are the ones that 

continually get us into big debt which then requires New 

Democrats or Democrats in the United States to come back into 

power and sort the thing out. And one of the quotes in here very 

clearly says: 

 

In Canada, Conservative governments in provinces such 

as Ontario and Saskatchewan preached all the usual 

small-c conservative virtues but bequeathed deficits that 

subsequent governments had to eliminate. They cut 

spending for a while but left their provinces in hock. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this budget that we had last week shows that 

our government is on the same track as Mr. Devine was during 

the ’80s. The only thing that’s shocking is that they seem to 

have been able to get there in two and a half years rather than in 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4547 

five. And that ends up actually being of benefit for the people of 

Saskatchewan because I don’t think the people of Saskatchewan 

are going to be bitten twice by this same dog of debt. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we will continue to raise the questions about some of 

the decisions that are hidden in this budget, but we’ll also raise 

questions that make sure that the public knows that there are 

major problems as it relates to the finances of the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, given that there’s a bit of a theme of drama 

tonight, I thought that it would also be appropriate to look at 

that dream play of Shakespeare called A Midsummer Night’s 

Dream. And it’s got a bit of a section in there which is sort of a 

play within a play where it talks about a wall, and I think the 

wall is kind of like the debt of the province. And so I want to 

put some quotes into the record from A Midsummer Night’s 

Dream, act V, scene I, and the first section is a quote from the 

wall: 

 

In this same interlude it doth befall 

That I, one Snout by name, present a wall; 

And such a wall, as I would have you think, 

That had in it a crannied hole or chink, 

Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisbe, 

Did whisper often very secretly. 

This loam, this rough-cast and this stone doth show 

That I am that same wall; the truth is so: 

And this the cranny is, right and sinister, 

 

And holds up his . . . if you go to the play, hold up your hand 

and have their finger and thumb making a hole in the wall: 

“Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.” And so, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this particular play then continues, and I think 

some of these lines will be quite familiar, but I think it’s well 

worth reminding ourselves of them. We have Pyramus talking, 

and he says: 

 

O grim-look’d night! O night with hue so black! 

O night, which ever art when day is not! 

O night, O night! alack, alack, alack, 

I fear my Thisbe’s promise ’tis forgot! 

And thou, O wall, O sweet, O lovely wall, 

Thou stand’st between her father’s ground and mine! 

Thou wall, O wall, O sweet and lovely wall, 

Show me thy chink, to blink through with mine eyne! 

 

And so basically you then have the wall put up his hand and put 

the chink up, and Pyramus starts talking. But when you’re 

watching the play or you’re in the mood of sort of imaging this 

as you read it, you end up having this wall which is a fair 

barrier between Pyramus and Thisbe as they try speak to each 

other. 

 

And a little later — I’ll just give you a one more quote — 

Pyramus says, “O kiss me through the hole of this vile wall!” 

And Thisbe says, “I kiss the wall’s hole, not your lips at all.” 

And then later Snout the wall says, 

 

Wall: Thus have I, Wall, my part discharged so; 

And, being done, thus Wall away doth go. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this wall is debt that we’re talking about, 

ends up being a barrier between what should happen in this 

province and what the people want to happen. And so I think 

that what I need to talk about are these holes in this budget or 

these holes in this whole thing so that maybe these last words of 

Snout will be fulfilled in November 2011 when it will say, and I 

quote, “And, being done, thus Wall away doth go.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what are these chinks? What are these holes in 

this particular budget? Well I think late last week we heard the 

Minister of Finance reveal a secret that wasn’t in the budget 

documents, and that’s the whole spectre of a harmonized sales 

tax. And when he actually speaks through the holes so that 

somebody could understand, all of a sudden that chink is 

attempted to be filled up. But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that 

that can be done. I think that, in the plans of the members 

opposite, there are recognition that they will have to find some 

revenues in some other place if they’re going to fulfill the kind 

of agenda that they want to fulfill. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Last year and the year before, they made a number of changes 

when they had cash, without a plan, without thinking through 

where they were going to go. This year they’re stuck. They 

have to try to do some things, but they still don’t have a plan. 

But this harmonized sales tax is sitting out there as a way that 

they can recoup some money from not the places that pay it 

now but from individuals within our community. And I think 

that there’s a great deal of concern that once again something 

that was not in the budget shows up in the budget rollout within 

a day or two after. 

 

Today we heard the Minister of Health talk about privatization 

of a whole part of the health care system, and he does this after 

underfunding exactly the solutions that he wants to pay 

somebody else to provide. There were clear plans for surgery 

centres, surgical care centres in both Saskatoon and Regina — 

but I think Regina’s was maybe a little further ahead — that 

were part of a plan which would then complement a whole 

surgical wait-list plan which was rolled out today. 

 

But rather than go forward with some of the well-thought-out 

ways of dealing this which would allow for it to be completed 

within the health system that we have, what we heard today 

was, well we’re going to give some money — we don’t know 

how much for each procedure or how much this is all going to 

cost — but they’re going to give some money to some private 

facilities where they have withdrawn the money from the public 

facilities and the plans that were laid out. And I think that all of 

us in Saskatchewan should be worried when we have these 

kinds of plans and these kind of ideological statements made by 

our Minister of Health, and I’m sure that we’ll hear them from 

the Premier as well. 

 

We also have another chink in this wall that is a problem, and 

that relates to the whole film industry and especially the role of 

the Saskatchewan Communications Network. It appears quite 

clear, even three or four or five days after the budget, that the 

amount of discussion within the film industry, even within the 

board of the Saskatchewan Communications Network, was 

very, very minimal and that in fact there wasn’t any sense of 

trying to figure out a way of maybe doing some things in a 

different way that would allow for that role of a first source of 

money for new films, for new filmmakers, or for other 

filmmakers, or as a place of a gathering of expertise which 



4548 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

would help the continued development of the film industry in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So here we have destruction of something which was built up 

over the last 20 years. And I guess maybe it is a bit of a 

reflection of the memories of the people on that side of the 

House, which is also reflected in the overall budget. The 

Saskatchewan Communications Network was brought forward 

by the minister of SaskTel in the late ’80s in the Devine 

government. That person, Mr. Gary Lane, was very proud of 

this organization. And I’m not sure if any of the members 

opposite have phoned and talked to him about this. But this is a 

legacy of Mr. Lane and the good work that he did at SaskTel. 

 

And I think it’s a sad commentary that some of these things are 

done without much planning, without much thinking. But the 

more that I hear about this one, it seems to be one of the worst 

cases of not talking to the people who are directly affected, not 

talking to the people who might know something about this, and 

then coming up with something that will be of benefit to all of 

us in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I’m hoping that there’ll be some way that this can be 

fixed. We do know that we’ll be trying to retrieve all of the 

good things that were created out of this in November 2011. I 

don’t think this one can wait that long, and so I’m hoping that 

there’ll be some rethinking by the minister and by the Finance 

minister and by the Premier because it’ll be a sad legacy for 

long, hard work to build up a film industry in Saskatchewan if 

the Premier and the member from Weyburn are tagged for the 

role of destroying the film industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now one of the other chinks in this wall that shows up in this 

wall of budget is that there’s a goal to or a plan to lay off civil 

servants without really thinking through what they’re doing. 

And this appears to be clearer each day as we get more 

information about this. And once again, I think that there have 

been many comments from people in the press and within the 

community that say a plan that does the kind of reductions in 

the civil service that the members opposite have put forward is 

not a plan at all. And it’s going to not only harm the individuals 

who are doing these jobs and their families and their 

communities; it’s also going to be of no benefit and will in fact 

damage the rest of us as we try to pick up the pieces. 

 

And I guess what I would say is that it’s difficult for many of us 

to understand that have been around this place for quite a long 

time, and I know many members on that side have been as well, 

but it’s difficult to understand that they would bring forward a 

plan like this that doesn’t get to the heart of what some of the 

functions are of the people that they’re trying to eliminate and 

that it doesn’t end up providing some direction for the future. 

 

Now I think the really sad part is that I know, from the many 

years that I worked with the civil servants of Saskatchewan, that 

they all are people who are very proud of the work that they do. 

And they appreciate and understand their role to provide advice, 

to provide options to the people who are to make the decisions. 

And clearly the important part of that whole interaction between 

civil servants and the politicians is that 95 per cent of the time 

you’re probably going to listen to the advice that you get from 

the civil servants because they have been working in a 

particular area and understand the different options and will 

give their recommendations. If you don’t understand their 

recommendation as a minister or as a member of caucus or as 

the Premier, then it’s your job to sit down and figure that out 

and then make the right decisions based on the information. 

 

Something broke down last year on the advice around the value 

of potash and resources, and that has ended up causing all kinds 

of difficulty right through the whole province. What we’re 

seeing and what we were worried about was exactly the kind of 

budget that we had this last week, which then pushes all the 

damage from the lack of taking advice last year onto others who 

had nothing to do with that. 

 

And I think that’s a sign, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of poor 

government. It’s a government that doesn’t listen to advice. It’s 

a government that makes decisions in a willy-nilly fashion. It’s 

a government that seems to be reacting in crisis mode and, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve seen that in quite a number of ways. It’s also a 

government, when some truth or story comes out like it did last 

Friday . . . that the Premier’s office then quickly goes to try to 

shut it down. 

 

Now you’ll know that other times I’ve talked about the 

concentration of power in the Premier’s offices or the Prime 

Minister’s Office, and once again I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that’s a reflection of that particular perspective that our Premier 

has. I think people would appreciate if there was a change in 

tactics, a change in understanding, and much more consultation, 

even with the members of his own caucus. I think it would 

prevent quite a few of the wild and crazy decisions that we’ve 

seen over the last couple of years. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also know that this budget 

doesn’t seem to tell us the whole story in the area of the 

environment and the kinds of things that are happening there. 

We know in the Throne Speech last fall that there was great 

discussion about some kind of new water plan. We haven’t seen 

that. We don’t kind of know what’s happening. The word on the 

street is that there’s groups of people outside of government 

who are trying to define this, maybe over at Clifton Associates, 

including some of the old advisers from the Devine 

government. And so we’re quite concerned. I think people right 

across the community are quite concerned. Those professional 

civil servants who have worked in the Department of 

Environment and related pieces of the civil service have been 

effectively pushed aside, and we’re concerned that this will be 

once again another chink in this wall. So we’ll be watching that 

carefully, and we will make sure that we will ask hard 

questions. 

 

Another aspect of this which relates to this is the introduction of 

legislation into this House around wildlife habitat land. And the 

kind of flexibility opening up, allowing the minister in cabinet 

to have total control of this is not acceptable to Saskatchewan 

people. But it fits with some of this kind of behind-the-scenes 

scheming. And we are watching it carefully, and we’re listening 

carefully, and we’re hearing many things that we don’t like. 

And we urge the government to spend some time to get this out 

in a way where there can be public discussion because, I think, 

when there is public discussion the course of the government 

will be changed. We don’t know what other areas where these 

things are happening, but once again these are these chinks or 

holes in this wall that is this budget. 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4549 

Now the final topic I’m going to describe tonight is one that 

concerns me personally, and my colleague from Saskatoon has 

been quite ably raising this one, but this relates to the whole 

issue of the role of this legislature in being the guardians of 

democracy in Saskatchewan, and it relates to the election of the 

Chief Electoral Officer. And we have a process and procedure 

that has been developed over many years, and this procedure 

was used. And what is of concern to me as a lawyer, as 

somebody who understands how government works, is that this 

particular role of a Chief Electoral Officer belongs to the 

members of the legislature, but more importantly the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And when we have the leaders of all of the political parties, 

other than the government, raising questions about it in this 

building and in this community, when we have the unexplained 

responses from the government that then get curiouser and 

curiouser as each day rolls out, then we are concerned that this 

is also another hole in this wall of budget. And we will be 

watching very, very carefully because, because, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, this goes right to the heart of how our country is 

organized, and we will not be in a position where we’re going 

to tolerate any kind of funny business as it relates to the Chief 

Electoral Officer. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we have here is a situation where 

the budget is a reflection of a government that seems to have 

lost its way. It’s a government that doesn’t consult in ways with 

the people. It’s a government that hides things in some of the 

accounting rules and in the documents that they provide. It’s 

also a government that doesn’t even tell us all the things that are 

going on here. 

 

[19:45] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we are experienced people on this side of the 

House. We also live within the community. And we’re not the 

only ones that are concerned about how this government is 

trying to proceed. And we will continue to ask hard questions. 

We will continue to keep our eyes and ears open, and we will 

continue to stand on principle as it relates to the rights of the 

people of Saskatchewan and that also relates then to this budget. 

We will be examining it carefully as we move forward into 

committee, and I urge all of the ministers and their officials to 

be well prepared because we have many, many questions about 

this budget, even more than we’ve had over the last couple of 

budgets because there are all kinds of difficulties or, as I said, 

chinks in the wall that need to be examined. So with that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I will conclude my remarks on this budget. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is indeed 

an honour to stand here today and join in this important budget 

debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I . . . or Deputy Speaker, pardon me, before 

I start to talk about this budget, I want to take a moment to 

thank the people of Regina Wascana Plains. The constituents 

who have contacted me in my office over the past year have 

brought many important issues to my attention. It is indeed an 

honour and a privilege to represent the constituents of Regina 

Wascana Plains as their MLA in the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

I’d also like to take this time to acknowledge my family for 

their ongoing support. As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to 

thank my staff in my constituency office and minister’s office 

who work hard to serve the citizens of this great province. 

Thank you to Marie, Raynelle, Gary, John, Selena, and Linda. 

Also my thanks to my constituency president, Sean Quinlan, 

and the executive for their ongoing support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is our government’s third balanced budget. In 

this budget, we have balanced caution on the revenue side with 

prudent spending while taking an overall balanced approach to 

the province’s finances. We are cognizant that, as a 

government, we need to invest in key capital areas that ensure 

that the citizens of this province continue to receive important 

programming. We did this in a way that focuses on sustaining 

and enhancing core government services with a view to 

reducing the footprint of government and reducing government 

spending. The end result, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a budget that 

will see an overall government spending drop of 1.2 per cent or 

121.3 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am proud that this budget builds on the 

economic momentum that the province has experienced over 

the past couple years. I think that this budget also reflects the 

overall optimism that the people of Saskatchewan now feel. In 

our first budget, we made payments against the provincial debt. 

We started working to erase the provincial infrastructure deficit 

left behind by the members opposite, and we delivered 

unprecedented tax relief to the people of the province. 

 

What we did and continue to do, Mr. Speaker, is to work to 

ensure a sustained period of economic growth. Last year we 

saw an economic downturn which threatened the entire world 

economy. Our government responded by continuing to invest in 

our province. We delivered an economic booster shot and, Mr. 

Speaker, it succeeded in keeping our provincial economy 

healthy and vibrant. Mr. Speaker, as we look back on 

everything that has happened over the past two years, we can 

now appreciate how so very important it has been for our 

government to have invested in programs specifically designed 

to keep our economy strong. We also now acknowledge how 

very important it was that we paid down the debt by an 

unprecedented 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year’s budget builds on that strong 

foundation. We are building on the successes we have had in 

rebuilding the province’s infrastructure and revitalizing the 

economy through historic tax cuts. Mr. Speaker, this success is 

being noticed. On average, Canada’s nine leading economic 

forecasters are projecting an economic growth rate for 

Saskatchewan of 3.0 per cent. This is the third highest in the 

country. 

 

In this budget, we also wanted to make sure that we maintain 

our momentum in eliminating the infrastructure deficit that has 

built up over many years prior to us forming government, Mr. 

Speaker. To that end, this year we will spend 632 million on 

capital expenditures across the province. That is the third 

largest amount ever budgeted for capital in Saskatchewan. It 

will bring the total amount invested in infrastructure since we 

were elected to almost $3 billion, Mr. Speaker. Also, Mr. 



4550 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

Speaker, a key part of our infrastructure strategy was to 

maximize the amount of federal dollars available for projects. 

So we will be spending 177 million on municipal infrastructure 

in this budget, an increase of 30 per cent. And we know just 

how important those dollars are to municipalities, especially as 

our communities continue to grow throughout the province. 

 

We have more people living in the province than ever before. 

After years of decline under the NDP, we are seeing 

Saskatchewan’s expatriates coming home to new job 

opportunities, and we are also welcoming new residents from 

across the country and from across the world. In my own 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, I’ve witnessed that growth 

first-hand. And I’m proud to say that, since we became 

government in 2007, there are now more than 1,500 new postal 

addresses in Regina Wascana Plains. 

 

With that population growth, our municipalities of course are 

seeing a rising demand for services. Our government is working 

to assist municipalities in funding those new and expanding 

services. We saw it last year in Regina through a number of 

programs: the historic 25.9 million in revenue sharing in 

2009-10, an increase of 64.5 per cent from 2007-2008, an 

increase of over $10 million in two years; 19.5 million through 

the municipal economic enhancement program. You may 

remember, Mr. Speaker, that the municipal economic 

enhancement program was a per capita funding agreement with 

municipalities to make local infrastructure improvements. It 

was intended to get infrastructure projects moving quickly to 

stimulate the economy and help municipalities deal with the 

infrastructure deficit. And I believe that that program absolutely 

succeeded in doing just that. 

 

Four Recreational Infrastructure Canada or RInC projects for 

just over 1.5 million in provincial funding; 750,000 for Leibel 

Field — and this is just in Regina — Leibel Field upgrades; 

300,000 for YMCA [Young Men’s Christian Association] 

renovation; 190,000 for the Broad Street pedestrian bridge and 

trail improvements; $283,666 for Wascana Rehabilitation 

Centre playground improvements; $300,000 through urban 

development agreements for the development and revitalization 

of Regina City Square. 

 

Regina also received 43.1 million borrowing approval to 

provide water, waste water, and drainage for the global 

transportation hub through the Saskatchewan infrastructure 

growth initiative. And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to talk just a 

minute here about the global transportation hub. This is one of 

the most important projects Regina has seen in decades. When 

Loblaw starts operating its distribution centre later this year, it’s 

going to create approximately 750 jobs, Mr. Speaker. And this 

budget continues to support that project with a $26 million 

investment from the Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget also continues our government’s 

commitment to public safety by increasing the number of police 

officers in the province. There will be 30 more police officers in 

our province this year, part of our commitment of 120 new 

police officers in our first term of government. The members 

opposite of course promised and never got it done. In addition 

we are also providing $700,000 in municipal policing grants for 

continued support of our specialized officers who deal with 

issues such as gang activity or Internet crime. 

This year’s budget also adds another 12 new postgraduate 

residency seats in the College of Medicine. This brings the 

number of new seats since we were elected to 60 and the total 

number of seats to 120. We think this is forward-looking. This 

move is forward-looking, and that will help ease future doctor 

shortages. As well, Mr. Speaker, funding of 3.5 million will 

continue the implementation of the physician recruitment 

strategy and agency. We are planning for the future of health 

care in our province, but we are also addressing the needs of 

today with these two initiatives. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I know that a very important topic for the 

people of Regina Wascana Plains has been the availability of 

autism services. And with this budget creating $2.5 million in 

new funding — new funding, Mr. Speaker, to enhance autism 

services — I think we’ve taken a huge step forward in how we 

deal with this disorder. Kim Kelln-Kennedy, whose 7-year-old 

son Tate is autistic, is indeed happy with our decision. And I 

think she summed it up very well the other day: “In the last two 

years this has been really big steps.” Two and a half years ago, 

Tate was on a waiting list, but extra autism funding has gotten 

him the service he has so rightly deserved. 

 

And another important point for the people of my constituency 

has been the chiropractic services. Our government had to make 

a difficult choice on this issue. We decided to take a responsible 

approach, and that was in line with what most other provinces 

in Canada do, and continue to insure low-income earners under 

family and supplementary health benefit programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are also a lot of students in Regina Wascana 

Plains constituency. In this budget, our government is taking 

steps to invest in post-secondary education and innovation to 

prepare our young people for their bright future. We are 

increasing the operating grant to our post-secondary institutions 

by 16.3 million to help hold down tuition increases. We are also 

enhancing the student support programs by 1.8 million. That 

includes the lowering of the interest rate paid by students. 

Interest rates will now be reduced to prime on repayable loans. 

As well, funding for the graduate retention program will 

increase by 4.3 million for total funding of 23 million. 

 

Our government recognizes that we cannot move our province 

forward without the youth. That is why we’re investing so much 

in them, in their future, in their education. This is because some 

day soon these young people are going be leading a province 

that is the envy of the country. And you know something, Mr. 

Speaker? I don’t think we hear the term brain drain very often 

in our province any more. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Brain gain. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Brain gain I think is what my friend has 

stated because young people see the promise that our province 

holds and the opportunities that are right here today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to address some of the changes being 

made by SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] 

or Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming relating to the provincial 

budget. Effective April 1, SLGA is making changes to its 

markup structure. If you recall, our government made this 

announcement on budget day. This will result in some changes 

to consumers. A 750 millilitre bottle of spirits or a 26 ounce 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4551 

will cost an additional 50 cents. A 40 ounce bottle will go up 

approximately 75 cents, and a dozen bottled beer will see an 

increase of 75 cents or a little more than 6 cents a bottle. The 

changes to the markup structure will also strengthen SLGA’s 

existing social reference pricing by establishing minimum 

prices based on the amount of alcohol contained in a product. 

These measures are intended to help reduce the 

overconsumption of products with a high alcohol content. 

 

As I mentioned, these changes will take effect April 1 and will 

boost SLGA’s overall net income which in turn supports the 

government’s General Revenue Fund and important priorities 

like health care, education, and infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even though prices are increasing slightly, I would 

like to point out — and I think it’s important to point out — that 

Saskatchewan’s prices for beverage alcohol will still remain 

competitive with other jurisdictions, and less than Alberta’s 

average prices. That was one of the changes relating to SLGA. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Another change, Mr. Speaker, relates to the charitable gaming 

grant program. This is a program that provides groups, 

community groups and organizations, with a grant equal to 25 

per cent of the net revenues they raise from licensed charitable 

gaming activities. These activities include bingos, break-open 

ticket sales, raffles, Texas hold’em poker tournaments, and 

Monte Carlo events. The program is being amended slightly to 

provide for a maximum of $100,000 on the amount of grant 

received annually per organization. This change will affect less 

than 1 per cent of the 2,000 groups, Mr. Speaker, and 

organizations that receive grants each year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know the grant program continues to be well 

received by volunteer organizations across the province. Groups 

that receive the quarterly grants include cadets, Scouts, Girl 

Guides, 4-H clubs, community associations, seniors’ 

associations, service clubs, volunteer fire departments, and so 

on. Our government is proud to be able to provide these groups 

with a grant that allows them to continue to support the many 

worthwhile projects and services that make Saskatchewan 

communities strong. Mr. Speaker, those are two of the items 

announced by SLGA on budget day. 

 

In general, Mr. Speaker, SLGA is predicting a busy year at 

Saskatchewan retail outlets for 2010 and 2011. Saskatchewan’s 

growing population and strong economy are expected to once 

again contribute to robust liquor sales, and we know that 

Saskatchewan’s retail system will continue to meet the needs of 

its customers. Saskatchewan’s liquor retailing system is a mix 

of public and private businesses: 79 are government owned; 

approximately 189 small, private businesses in rural 

Saskatchewan that retail beverage alcohol for the government; 

approximately 500 private businesses which include off-sale 

outlets such as hotels and brew pubs; and two specialty wine 

stores in Saskatchewan. 

 

The new specialty wine stores opened with news releases and 

with great success . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. Opened 

over the past year and complement SLGA’s existing liquor 

stores, serving a niche market and providing enhanced customer 

services for Saskatchewan consumers. The stores — one is in 

Saskatoon and one is in Regina — address a growing segment 

of SLGA customers who were looking for specialty products 

not available within the general listings carried at SLGA liquor 

stores. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to highlight some of the other good 

things going on at SLGA. In November SLGA launched a new 

reusable bag for sale in its 79 liquor stores across the province. 

The new bag was the result of interest from customers who 

were looking for a reusable bag that can handle the bottle 

products more easily. Since its launch, the reusable bags have 

proven very popular, and in fact there are only a fraction of the 

original 50,000 bags left. Stay tuned for a new design coming 

this spring, and I know we’ll all stand by with bated breath. 

 

Flipping over to the gaming side of SLGA, Mr. Speaker, we 

recently launched a program called Know the Score. This 

interactive, problem-gambling awareness program engaged 

university and college students in a fun and informative way 

and focuses on raising awareness about the real chances of 

winning and losing, signs of problem gambling, problem 

gambling services in the province, and ways to keep gambling 

safer. The program is funded by SLGA and delivered by the 

Responsible Gaming Council. And by the time the 

Saskatchewan tour wraps up at the end of March, it will have 

visited six post-secondary institutions across the province, and 

the reviews from the students and universities and colleges have 

been very positive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another awareness program we’re proud . . . that 

was launched in Saskatoon just over two weeks ago, on March 

19th, SLGA recently partnered with SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance], Saskatoon Police Service, MADD 

[Mothers Against Drunk Driving], SADD [Students Against 

Drunk Driving], and Rawlco Radio to launch the Report 

Impaired Drivers initiative. Report Impaired Drivers, or RID as 

it is called, is a crime prevention campaign that encourages 

residents to call 911 to report a suspected impaired driver. In 

support of the program, SLGA’s Saskatoon liquor stores are 

distributing RID promotional material to its customers. The 

program allows the public to assist Saskatoon law enforcement 

to help in the removing of impaired drivers from our roads. The 

program also serves as a warning to motorists that there are 

many more eyes out there watching their actions than just that 

of the police. SLGA has also asked Saskatoon’s approximately 

300 liquor permitted franchises to help spread the word by 

displaying RID posters in their bars and lounges. 

 

I would like to talk a minute about the other ministry I’m 

responsible for, Mr. Speaker, which is Government Services. 

 

It’s exciting. The average person in Saskatchewan does not deal 

with the Ministry of Government Services on a day-to-day 

basis. But the work of government would not be able to happen 

without the hard work of our employees. Government Services 

leases or owns 741 buildings across our province. We manage 

the government vehicle fleet of approximately 5,000 vehicles. 

We manage the government’s air fleet that includes three 

aircraft for the province’s air ambulance service which, 

incidentally, flew over 800 million miles last year, as well as 

three aircraft for executive air services. Beyond that, 

Government Services process about 26 million pieces of mail 

per year and tenders about $135 million in goods per year. 



4552 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

And as we look to find efficiencies — and every ministry in this 

government was expected to find efficiencies, Mr. Speaker — 

in the way government does business, in the way services are 

provided, Government Services is right on the front lines. One 

of the largest changes we have made to government, in regards 

to government office space . . . Previously there was no 

standard for government working space, which means the work 

space in government offices currently ranges anywhere from 18 

to 27 square metres per employee. 

 

Now stand by. I’m going to tell you what the rest of it is here. 

We are bringing in a standard across the government of 18.6 

square metres, which is going to result in a much smaller 

footprint for government. That also means government will be 

leasing less office space. It will take some time as this works 

through the system and as we make this change in office space, 

but it means in the long term that we are going to save 

taxpayers’ dollars. 

 

We are finding efficiencies in a variety of other areas as well, 

Mr. Speaker. One of those is in our cleaning service. We looked 

at our cleaning standards and realized that we could make more 

efficient use of our staff’s cleaning time. This is going to save 

us thousands of work hours over the next year and save 

taxpayers hundreds of thousands of dollars. 

 

Another of those efficiencies in our ministry was in our mail 

service. Since Government Services works primarily with other 

government ministries, our services rise and fall to meet the 

demands of government. We re-evaluated our service and 

realized that with some minimal changes, Mr. Speaker, we 

could achieve some fairly significant savings. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, with this budget our government has 

set a path for a balanced, forward-looking, and responsible 

future. I want to once again thank our Finance minister and his 

officials for having put together a forward-looking budget that 

is going to deliver results for the people of our province. Mr. 

Speaker, I am thankful for the opportunity to stand in this 

legislature and support the strong, balanced, forward-looking, 

responsible budget of our government for 2010 and 2011. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — [Inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker. thanks very 

much. It’s interesting starting up at this point, Mr. Speaker, 

because following the member from Regina Wascana Plains, 

it’s interesting today, you know, just hearing her speech right 

now. 

 

She went on at length about the new bags that are being offered 

by Sask Liquor and Gaming. And you know, this in and of itself 

is a fine thing, Mr. Speaker, a fine thing. But for her to go on at 

length about it and then to go on at length about the savings 

they’re finding in Government Services . . . And the one thing 

she didn’t talk about, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that we’re getting 

calls today from different community groups that have been 

using the central vehicle authority to help defray their costs. 

And . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Why is the member from 

Yorkton on his feet? 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — To ask for leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Yorkton has asked leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I would like to 

introduce some guests here tonight in your gallery. They’re all 

attending here tonight. They’re from the Church of Jesus Christ 

of Latter-day Saints here in Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A friend of ours and one of my researchers, Steve Ellingson, is 

with them and I’d like to . . . I’ve never introduced Stephen 

before, a very valuable member of our team. And with the 

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints here today is B. 

Alvon Tondevold — if you guys just want to wave as I say your 

names — Braden Henrie, Kendal Henrie, David Kydd, Sister 

Drake, Crystal Gail Horning, Kayla Anne Beamer. If I 

mispronounce one of these names, I apologize: Alicia Miller, 

Georgina Majetich, Samantha Hermann, J. Charles Stewart, 

Elder Tieken, Elder Farr, Anthony W. Worfolk, Amelia Henrie, 

Stephen Hermann, Mackenzie Wilson, Kristin Hawkes, and 

Chuck E. Fisher. I’d ask — I think I’ve got everybody — I’d 

ask all members to welcome these young people to their 

Assembly. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. But to 

return to my point about the member’s speech, and I guess I 

find it symbolic of a number of things that this government 

does, that this government coming forward with statements that 

are less than fulsome, Mr. Speaker, statements that are less than 

representative of the truth. 

 

Again you know, we’ve had a nice speech about the bags that 

have been brought forward in Sask Liquor and Gaming and 

how it’s good to have recycling bags and how enthusiastically 

this has been received. But the minister doesn’t talk about a 

policy change in her department that has a huge impact on 

community groups right across this province. And we’ve got 

the member from Yorkton just got up to introduce some 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4553 

students, and I join him in that welcome. 

 

But you know, on the one hand we’ve got the member that did a 

summit with community-based organizations, and then we’ve 

got a minister that gets up and neglects to mention to the House 

that they’ve cut the access to central vehicle authorities for a 

multitude of community groups across this province. And of 

course, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have the details on this yet. We 

just have the people calling in saying, you know, this has been 

dropped on us. We’re trying to do the best we can with the 

small bottom lines that we’ve got, the small amounts of funding 

that we’ve got. 

 

And again we know that the budget overall was increased one 

per cent for CBOs [community-based organization]. That’s not 

going to be enough to keep up with the cost of living. But what 

we find out today from different groups is that they’ve cut off 

access to the CVAs [central vehicle agency] which they’ve been 

using for transport. 

 

And to give you a picture of what this means, Mr. Speaker, this 

means that for, say, example one of the Aboriginal Head Start 

programs or one of the KidsFirst programs that operates within 

my constituency — a very valuable program, Mr. Speaker, a 

program that works with families that are at risk, that works 

prenatally to make sure that you have the healthiest baby 

possible, that works in a very culturally sensitive way, Mr. 

Speaker, that partners with any number of community groups 

throughout the city — one of the things that they depend on in 

terms of getting the kids to those programs is transportation. 

And up until now, Mr. Speaker, that transportation has been 

provided in partnership with Government Services and SPM 

[Saskatchewan Property Management], before that through the 

CVAs, through the government-owned vans that go around the 

neighbourhood, pick up those kids, get them off to that 

program, and help them with that early childhood development 

which is so critical. 

 

And you have this minister stand up and give this lengthy 

speech that’s been no doubt written for her by her staff, and she 

neglects to mention this. In the grand scheme of things, 

probably not a lot of money, Mr. Speaker, but something that is 

absolutely critical for a multitude of community-based 

organizations throughout this province. 

 

And again, we’re just starting to get the picture of what this 

entails, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the groups throughout the inner 

city of Regina that are impacted by this. We’re getting a pretty 

good picture of that already. And, Mr. Speaker, the other sort of 

details we get that they’re not going to stand up and beat their 

chests about. 

 

[20:15] 

 

You know I had a phone call from a group that does adult basic 

education in the inner city today. And these are people that have 

come back as adults because they want to make a better life for 

themselves, a better life for their children, and they’re working 

in programs that have had a lot of success over the years. And 

we find out today that some of these programs have had to beg 

for their funding to be extended till graduation is here, Mr. 

Speaker. So that these students that have struggled and gone 

back to school to better their lives and make a better situation 

for themselves and their families and that benefits the whole of 

society . . . These programs had to beg to have their funding 

continued to graduation. 

 

And you don’t hear that in their speeches over there, Mr. 

Speaker. And I guess it’s hard to take them at face value when 

they can’t, they can’t stand up and own up to the things like 

that, how the mistakes that they’ve made in terms of the budget, 

how this is impacting people on the ground. It’s business as 

usual over there, Mr. Speaker. It’s this carrying on with this . . . 

you know, everything is happy. We’ll talk about the recycling 

bags at SLGA, but we won’t talk about how community-based 

organizations will have a bigger struggle getting kids to 

programming that will have an invaluable effect on their lives. 

 

So they get up and they carry on with the don’t worry, be happy 

line and the smiley faces. And it’s hard to take them for real, 

Mr. Speaker. You know we hear about the wonders of the 

Saskatchewan economy, that they like to return to again and 

again. And I’ve got a graph here. I’ve got a graph here, Mr. 

Speaker, that sums up the . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Okay, 

we’ve got somebody over there talking about how we’re always 

about doom and gloom. 

 

So I’d like to ask them, you know, what measure of the 

Saskatchewan prosperity has been there for the Social Services 

caseloads that have been climbing month over month for the 

past year? You know, Social Services caseloads growing month 

over month over the past year? So . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Well we’ve got a graph based on the minister’s own 

statistics, so perhaps she can get up and enlighten us in her 

speech about how the doom and gloom has been dispelled by 

the wonders of the Sask Party government. Or maybe she can 

tell us about how the new money that’s in there for social 

assistance is there because the caseloads have grown. Maybe 

she could tell us about that, Mr. Speaker. But she won’t. 

 

She’ll spend all this time talking about, you know, how great 

they are. They’ll spend their time patting themselves on the 

back. But when it comes to benefiting the people that are out 

there that are in real difficulty, Mr. Speaker, that are struggling 

with higher rent, that are struggling with higher utility rates, 

that are struggling to put bread on the table, that are going to 

food banks in greater numbers than ever, Mr. Speaker . . . you 

know, will we hear about that from those members opposite? 

We won’t hear a darn thing from those members opposite. 

We’ll hear about how great things are. 

 

So when it comes to the impacts that are being felt on the 

ground by different organizations . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the members if 

they want to have a private debate, if they would either meet in 

the halls or behind the bar and allow the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre to make his speech. I recognize the member 

from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. And again it’s 

hard to take these members seriously when the story is so 

incomplete, and it’s just so much propaganda. 

 



4554 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

And again we’ve seen last year, Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite talk about how last year’s budget was the greatest of 

all time and the greatest in the universe and different things like 

that. And again you know, the story of the year played out, and 

the real numbers started to come in. And then by the mid-term, 

it was clear that this government had put the province into 

serious jeopardy, serious jeopardy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the problem with that is of course if it was just them that 

paid the price for that, there’d be some kind of justice in that. 

There’d be some kind of equalling out of the responsibility for 

this mess, Mr. Speaker. But it’s not them that pays the price. 

It’s the people that are on the growing Social Services caseloads 

that pay the price. It’s the people that are trying to get their kids 

to early childhood development programs that now have to 

figure out how they get the transportation sorted out. 

 

It’s the community-based organizations that are already out 

there working on very tight margins, Mr. Speaker, that have an 

even harder time to work on this than ever. And I guess it’s, you 

know, where to start with the ironies and the hypocrisies, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

You know, one of the community-based organizations that’s 

had their GED [general equivalency diploma] program cut and 

that they had to beg for it to be continued has been used at 

different occasions in the past couple of years, Mr. Speaker, by 

that government over there for photo ops. And again when it 

comes to the photo ops, we know that the members over there 

are quite happy to come out with the cameras and you know 

smile and wave and get their picture and then take off. 

 

But when it comes time to stand by these programs to support 

them, in terms of the front-line work that they’re really doing, 

they get cut in the budget. Or you know, so you look at different 

things like the $280,000 that was cut from Aboriginal education 

K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] from the Department of 

Education. Or you look at the community solutions program 

that was cut out of the Department of Education that is having a 

bad impact on different child care centres throughout the inner 

city in Regina. And again you don’t hear anything about it from 

the members opposite in their speech. All you hear is that 

everything is great. But this has worn thin to the point of 

embarrassing for those people opposite. 

 

There’s a reality on the ground that those folks are so out of 

touch with, Mr. Speaker, that it’s a wonder that they continue to 

get up in this House and make the kind of speeches they do. But 

I guess once they’re in motion, they tend to stay in motion, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s some kind of inertia that’s seized the Sask 

Party over there. They can’t recognize what’s happening on the 

ground, so they’ve got to keep rolling right along with their . . . 

You know, you mention any of these things, and you’re 

somehow a purveyor of doom and gloom. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s not the reality on the ground. It’s not the 

reality in housing, Mr. Speaker. You know, in Regina we’ve got 

a point seven per cent vacancy rental rate, and the impact that 

that’s having on families and the kind of squalor that people are 

having to put up with because they’re scared if they speak up 

about the places they’re living in, then the terrible place they’re 

living in is better than no place at all. 

 

Or we can talk about the food bank caseloads and the fact that 

there was no help on the way in this budget for those people and 

the tremendous work that they do. And you know, again we’ve 

had all kinds of fancy speeches over the years from the 

members opposite on these scores. But when push comes to 

shove in this budget, when it comes time to pay for their 

mistakes, when it comes time to pay for the fact that . . . You 

know, we should I guess be thankful that they didn’t take the 

member from Kindersley’s advice on the potash projections and 

go 3 billion instead of 2 billion. 

 

But any time you’ve got people saying just don’t worry, be 

happy, you know, that’s the most frightening thing of all, Mr. 

Speaker, in politics because you know that there’s some kind of 

sham going on. You know that there’s some kind of ruse being 

played. 

 

So in terms of the way that this budget impacts people, we see 

more of the same in this budget, Mr. Speaker. We see numbers 

that are lowballed. The health . . . I guess we’ll wait for the 

midterm to get the real picture on what happens with this 

budget or perhaps the third quarter or perhaps the fourth 

quarter, Mr. Speaker, because in terms of what’s happening in 

health care, in terms of education, in terms of the way that 

they’ve played with the accounting principles of this budget and 

changed their horses midstream on that, Mr. Speaker, we know 

that there’s going to be a big impact on the health care workers 

in terms of the settlements that are outstanding. We know that 

the teachers are outstanding. And neither of those things have 

been worked into the budgetary projections. Can you believe 

that, Mr. Speaker? I know you’ve seen a lot of things in this 

Chamber, but it’s hard to believe. 

 

And it’s following on the heels of a budget last year that was $1 

billion in deficit. So you know, right off the top, they’re owning 

up to a $622 million deficit off the top. And I’ll bet you this, 

Mr. Speaker . . . and I hope this bet proves wrong because 

again, if it proves right, it’s yet another terrible thing happening 

to the finances of this province and then the way that that plays 

out into normal people’s lives. But that $622 million deficit, on 

a summary basis right now, we’ll see where that’s at, at the 

year. We think it’s going to go to another billion. 

 

You know what? I don’t know if they’re the billion dollar 

babies over there, Mr. Speaker, but $1 billion deficit one year, 

$1 billion deficit the next year, and then we’ll see what other 

kind of terrible, terrible cuts they have to impose on people next 

year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I hate, I hate to be this negative, Mr. Speaker, 

because there are good things in this budget. There are good 

things in this budget. But in terms of seeing the way that 

announcements don’t necessarily translate into real action or 

real impact on people’s lives, even those things that look good 

on the surface, Mr. Speaker, it makes you feel like a fool to sit 

there and to salute whatever good has been done. You know, in 

terms of . . . I hope to goodness that the money’s been put out 

there for autism. I hope that has an impact because those 

families, they need that support, they need that help. But if that 

$2.5 million doesn’t translate into action, of course, we’ll be 

there to call them on it, Mr. Speaker. If the monies that has been 

put there for additional police officers don’t translate into police 

officers, we’ll be there to call them on it. But on the face of it, 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4555 

these things look good. 

 

But I guess you know, Mr. Speaker, on the face of it, things like 

long-term care centres, those look good. The surgical care 

centre for Regina, that looked good. And now we find out that 

they’re going to find some efficiencies by operating some kind 

of private runaround with the system. And in terms of what that 

does to the health care system, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this 

play out in other jurisdictions. We’ve seen the impact that it’s 

had in other jurisdictions, and it hasn’t been good for this 

system, and it certainly hasn’t been good for the patients that 

those people over there claim they want to put first. 

 

You know, we’ve seen them beat their chests about the 

children’s hospital and then defer it and then defer it some 

more. We’ve seen them play some games with the 

Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford and then play some 

more games. We see something with what’s happened in Moose 

Jaw in terms of the hospital there and the games that they 

continue to play. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they can make a lot of great announcements, 

but we wait for these things to actually show up because when 

it comes to trusting these guys on that path from announcement 

to reality, they like to take a whole lot of detours, Mr. Speaker. 

And again, in terms of the budgeting of this outfit opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of the budgeting, again we know that they can 

make these announcements in the budget and they can talk 

about how it’s the greatest budget of all time and the greatest 

budget in the universe and on and on and on with the 

self-congratulation and the back-patting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But then of course the numbers come in. The cheques come 

due, Mr. Speaker. The bills need to get paid. And then we find 

out that things are getting deferred, and they’re going to be put 

off into the future because they can’t run the books. And again, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s bad enough in and of itself. But we always 

have to remember that when the government can’t manage its 

finances, it’s the people that pay the price. So again even the 

things that look good being announced in this budget, we wait 

very anxiously and with a great deal of concern to see how they 

play out in real life, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to say a few things about First Nations and Métis 

Relations in this budget, Mr. Speaker. You know, in the 

question period before the budget, Mr. Speaker, we’d asked 

about the Aboriginal employment development program and the 

Premier said, you know, stay tuned, there’s going to be . . . you 

know, we’ll have lots more to say about it in the budget speech. 

And the only thing they had to say about it in the budget 

speech, Mr. Speaker, the only thing that they touched on with 

regards to First Nations and Métis people . . . Métis people 

didn’t get mentioned at all, not once, Mr. Speaker. Métis people 

didn’t get mentioned. What did get mentioned was, in passing, 

the impact that the tobacco control measures of this 

government, they’re going to have on First Nations. And so that 

was their big centrepiece for First Nations and Métis people in 

this budget. You know, it’s more than passing strange. 

 

In fact the Premier had more to say about First Nations the 

week before when he was announcing his move on tobacco in 

front of the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. And of 

course, you know, he had the guts to get up in front of the 

chamber of commerce to make this announcement and then to 

talk about how he was going to work in partnership . . . 

[inaudible] . . . and how he was going to consult. Well I guess, 

Mr. Speaker, we on this side would like them to table that 

record of consultation. We would like to see what they’ve done 

internally to consult, to see if that First Nations and Métis 

Relations minister is actually earning his paycheque over there. 

 

And we’d also like to see the legal opinions upon which they’ve 

launched this initiative because there’s some pretty interesting 

arguments out there, Mr. Speaker, that the authority by which 

they’re proceeding in this endeavour is highly suspect. And 

again this is not unlike the Sask Party to go out for the cheap 

applause line, to go out to make sure something gets turned into 

a communications exercise, but it turns out they haven’t really 

thought it through or they haven’t asked for the advice from the 

officials. 

 

[20:30] 

 

So we await the tabling of legal opinions that back them up in 

their ability to even do this. And we wait to see how they square 

what they’ve done with the fact that they’ve, you know, quite 

happily proclaimed that we’re all treaty people and that the duty 

to consult and accommodate is so very important. You know, if 

that was true, Mr. Speaker, would this have proceeded like that? 

And I don’t think it would have. 

 

I think announcing something to the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce that affects First Nations in this province, I think 

there’s some kind of . . . I think there’s a profound disrespect 

involved in that, Mr. Speaker. And I think when, before 

Christmas when that government made announcements through 

the press about the impact that their fiscal mess was going to 

have on revenue sharing with the municipalities, when they 

made those announcements through the press, the Premier 

wound up getting to the SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 

Municipalities Association] convention, and he apologized to 

the SUMA delegates, as well he should have because they’re an 

order of government, they’re a partner in this province, and 

that’s not how you treat partners. 

 

So I guess, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be waiting to see when the Premier 

comes forward with an apology to First Nations for his 

approach to consultation and his approach to working in good 

faith on something that . . . again we wait to see what their 

authority is in this matter in the first place, Mr. Speaker. But I 

perhaps will go on and wait for that. 

 

I guess the next thing I’d like to speak about, Mr. Speaker, 

concerns the Aboriginal employment development program. 

This past weekend, we had our convention. It was a very 

successful affair, Mr. Speaker, a lot of folks from around the 

province that are thirsting for change from what the Sask Party 

was putting on the table. And one of the things that came 

forward as an emergency resolution deals directly with the 

whole question of Aboriginal employment development. 

 

And I want to quote this resolution. I want to read this 

resolution into the record, Mr. Speaker, just to draw it to the 

attention of the House and to draw to the attention of the House 

the outrage that a very sizable, broad section of Saskatchewan 

people feel at the destruction of a valuable program. The first 



4556 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

whereas states: 

 

One of the most important challenges facing 

Saskatchewan is the need to better engage First Nations 

and Métis people in the social and economic life of this 

province; and 

 

Whereas the Aboriginal development program has played 

and should continue to play a valuable role in taking on 

this challenge; and 

 

Whereas since its establishment in 1995, nearly 5,000 

First Nations and Métis people have been hired directly, 

40,000 people have received cultural awareness training, 

and over 2,000 who have work-based skills training; and 

 

Whereas 111 AEDP agreements have signed bringing 

together unions and businesses, employers and 

employees, communities, First Nations and Métis people; 

and 

 

Whereas AEDP fights racism and fights it very 

effectively; and 

 

Whereas the $786,000 investment in AEDP leverages 

about $1 million in federal funding each year; and 

 

Whereas the Saskatchewan Party government unilaterally 

killed the Aboriginal employment development program 

in the provincial budget of Wednesday, March 24, 2010; 

 

Therefore be it resolved that the Saskatchewan New 

Democratic Party condemns, in the strongest possible 

terms, this attack on efforts to better include First Nations 

and Métis people in the social and economic life of 

Saskatchewan by killing the Aboriginal employment 

development program; and 

 

Be it further resolved that the Saskatchewan NDP calls 

for the restoration of funding to the AEDP and for further 

investment and expansion of efforts to enable First 

Nations and Métis people to take their rightful place in 

the social and economic life of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now this was moved by the president of the Aboriginal New 

Democrats, Mr. Speaker, and by one of the most prominent 

labour leaders in this province. And these are people that, in the 

case of the individual who is our president, have seen the 

impact of this in terms of his peers and in terms of the labour 

leader, representing a union that has participated in this 

program in a good faith basis, and has become a real believer 

and champion in this program. 

 

And the thing that I find hard to believe, Mr. Speaker, is that 

when you scan the list of the partnerships that have been signed 

which — you know, up until the budget speech, Mr. Speaker — 

was available on the government website in both alpha and in 

chronological order . . . But of course all this has disappeared, 

you know, the moment they started reading the budget. But you 

look at the different First Nations that have been involved. You 

look at the different Catholic school boards, the different public 

school boards. You look at the Métis locals. You look at the 

chambers of commerce. You look at the private businesses. You 

look at the municipalities. You look at, you know, Cumberland 

College, SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies]. 

In some of these cases, Mr. Speaker, there are deals that have 

been put together that involve upwards of half a dozen groups. 

 

And this has been a successful program. You know it’s less 

than a million dollars in funding. It levers, you know, for every 

dollar it levers more than a dollar from the feds, and this 

government kills it. You know, is the better engagement of First 

Nations and Métis people in the economic life of this province, 

in the social life of this province, is that a serious challenge for 

this province or not? If it is, then these are the things you back. 

These are the . . . you know, if there are problems that they had 

with the program, then come forward with the solutions. But 

what they’ve come forward with instead, Mr. Speaker, is to 

take, you know, 111 deals that have been worked on since 1995 

and tear them up. 

 

And they sent a letter out, Mr. Speaker, to all of the partners on 

March 24th, and I’m going to quote from that letter. This letter 

is over the signature of the deputy minister of First Nations and 

Métis Relations. There’s the opening, you know, 2010-11 

budget today: 

 

While a new direction for Aboriginal employment and 

economic engagement evolves, the government has 

terminated the Aboriginal employment development 

program. Current Aboriginal development partnership 

agreements are no longer valid. 

 

No longer valid, Mr. Speaker. I want to underline that. All these 

deals that have gone before, the 111 deals that have been signed 

with a myriad of different community partners, are no longer 

valid. “Anticipated agreements will not be entered into and 

funding supports are not available.” I scan down a bit into the 

letter, Mr. Speaker. “The ministry will no longer be supporting 

Aboriginal employment directly.” Now isn’t that an odd thing 

for the lead government ministry on First Nations and Métis 

issues to say, “The ministry will no longer be supporting 

Aboriginal employment directly”? 

 

And I guess I want to quote from what the Minister of First 

Nations and Métis Relations had to say on budget day because I 

think it displays the kind of ignorance and lack of 

understanding that led to this decision, Mr. Speaker. Okay, 

where are we here? Okay. So in regards to the cuts to the 

Aboriginal employment development program, the minister: 

“Yes, AEDP is actually probably the easiest way to remember 

it.” I’m glad that he’s got an easy device by which to remember 

it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Reporter: 

 

They’ve cut the funding. Is that sort of rolled over to the 

CIC $3 million program? Was it a case of duplication? Is 

that why they cut the program out of the First Nations and 

Métis Relations? 

 

The minister: 

 

Well first of all what we can mention is that there are 

three million new dollars that have been included in this 

budget specifically to help First Nations with their 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4557 

economic development aspirations too, so we’ll be happy 

to chat with Chief Guy Lonechild and his colleagues at 

FSIN and other stakeholders, the tribal councils and the 

First Nations, to find out how this new amount of money 

might be best invested. 

 

So that’s three million new dollars that we didn’t have 

before the budget. The AEDP, this program was started 

many years ago. A lot of the impetus was to try to 

encourage corporations, municipalities, all kinds of large 

employers to do a better job in achieving representative 

workforces. 

 

Let’s imagine for example that you lived in a community 

where the Aboriginal population was 10 per cent and you 

only had two or perhaps three per cent of an Aboriginal 

workforce. Would you like to do better? We’d be happy 

to encourage you [Mr. Speaker] and we brought funding 

to the table. We think that a lot of the groundwork has 

been done now. We also know that we are able to 

encourage employers, municipalities, banks, credit 

unions, all the larger companies to do this simply by 

providing them access to the resources. 

 

We already have those resources. We can provide them to 

them without actually paying them to do it. These people 

have money of their own. They have their own resources 

[and this is the critical part, Mr. Speaker] they’re simply 

asking for the right insight, the right experience, and 

we’re delighted to be able to provide it so all that kind of 

effort will still move ahead. 

 

Close the quote, Mr. Speaker. So what’s so enlightening about 

that quotation, Mr. Speaker? Well the expertise is in the 

Aboriginal employment development program which he just 

finished being delighted about how it had been cut. It’s not a 

massive expenditure of money, Mr. Speaker. It’s $786,000. It 

levers more than that from the feds, but they cut it, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s exactly where the expertise is situated. That’s exactly 

where the people who have been bringing together labour force 

need with educational institutions, with the people that can fill 

those needs to do some very successful things in terms of 

Aboriginal employment. There’s the Saskatchewan Institute of 

Public Policy, in 2007 did an evaluation of AEDP for the 

Human Resources Skills Development Canada, for the feds. 

And what they said about AEDP was that was a best practice in 

Aboriginal engagement and employment for the country, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One of our neighbours right now is currently embarking on this 

very approach to better engaging First Nations and Métis people 

in the economy. But they cut it, Mr. Speaker, and for the life of 

me I can’t understand why. I can’t understand why, Mr. 

Speaker. You know, they cut it on the one hand, and they offer 

up some, some vague promise on the other in terms of monies 

that had been reallocated. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen that even when they 

announce money. It’s one thing to have that announcement. It’s 

another thing to actually get to it. And in terms of the $3 million 

that they’ve announced for economic development for First 

Nations out of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan], again, Mr. Speaker, he’s going to go out there 

and chat with the First Nations. You know, I’d suggest to him 

that when he should have been chatting was before the budget 

about what they were doing on tobacco control and how that 

impacts First Nations in terms of their autonomy or their 

authority under the constitution, you know. Or you know, they 

want to talk about the health concerns involved in tobacco. Fair 

enough, Mr. Speaker. Fair enough. But perhaps they could also 

talk about the other health afflictions that are facing First 

Nations people. 

 

But again there’s the cut on the one hand, Mr. Speaker, and the 

light in the window on the other side. So it’s like they’ve got 

. . . you know, this way we’ll have something to say when we’re 

in the scrum, Mr. Speaker. But in terms of it having a real 

impact, you know, we know how that works out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The one thing I will give them credit for in this budget, Mr. 

Speaker, is the $1.4 million that they put into the Clarence 

Campeau Development Fund. And again it’s a budget that has a 

track record, has, you know, their own delivery for it in terms of 

the Métis Nation, a corporation that has been doing good work. 

So we’re glad to see that that $1.4 million goes into that. But 

even then, Mr. Speaker, it’s always on the one hand this and on 

the other hand. 

 

This budget represents the wrapping up of the First Nations and 

Métis business development program. So the million-plus that 

they cut from that over the past three years of their existence, 

you know, is that balanced out by, on the one hand, this vague 

$3 million in CIC and, you know, by the 1.4 million in Clarence 

Campeau? Well we’ll see, Mr. Speaker. To quote the member 

from Kindersley, we’ll see. But if their track record is anything 

to judge them by, Mr. Speaker, you know, their approach to 

something like Aboriginal employment development I think 

tells the story of just the sort of bizarre decision making that 

goes on over there. And I think bizarre is a kind word for it, Mr. 

Speaker, because if they can’t face one of the largest challenges 

facing this province with some more common sense than what 

they’ve shown, I don’t know what’s up for this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I guess, you know, the last thing I want to say about 

Aboriginal employment development at this juncture, Mr. 

Speaker, is the fact that, you know, over the past two budgets 

when there’s been expansion in other departments, this has been 

a ministry that got cut. The only new money that went into this 

department was through the gaming framework agreement that 

we signed, that we built in partnership with First Nations. And 

but for those dollars, Mr. Speaker, that was it for new money 

going into the department. So they got cut in the two good 

budgets, so guess what happened this year? Well they got cut 

again. 

 

And the thing that surprises me about Aboriginal employment 

development, Mr. Speaker, is that of the fewer and fewer things 

that those members opposite do in partnership with First 

Nations and Métis people out there in the community. 

 

[20:45] 

 

In 2008 when the member from Kelvington-Wadena was still 

the minister, that department, if you can use news releases as 

sort of an indication of a ministry’s activity, the member from 



4558 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

Kelvington-Wadena when she was the minister had a total of 34 

news releases. And you know, this also includes things like, 

congratulations, it’s National Aboriginal Day. Or we’re having 

a feast at the legislature; come on down. Of those 34 releases, 

Mr. Speaker, 12 of them related to the signing of Aboriginal 

employment development partnerships, so fully 35 per cent of 

the activity as represented through their website to the rest of 

the world was related to Aboriginal employment development. 

 

Move forward to 2009, Mr. Speaker, and of course in the spring 

of that year we had a change of minister and the member from 

Regina South moved into the ministry. And I’m surprised he’s 

not thumping his desk right now as he is so often wont to do. 

But the thing is about this, Mr. Speaker, he was even worse. Of 

the activity in the department, of the 21 news releases — and 

again this includes, you know, congratulations, it’s going to be 

Year of the Métis, and congratulations, it’s National Aboriginal 

Day — in terms of his news releases that he sent out, of the 21 

news releases, 10 of those news releases were announcing the 

signing of Aboriginal employment development programs or 

partnerships, for 48 per cent of the activity as represented on 

that government’s, on that ministry’s website. 

 

So what does this tell you, Mr. Speaker? Well it tells you that 

they like to sign deals. They like to have the signing ceremony. 

They like to have the big photo op. But when it comes time to 

backing up these programs and the real-life difference that it 

makes in people’s lives, what happens? You know, when things 

are tough, you find out what the priorities are. And they cut it, 

of course, Mr. Speaker. They cut it. 

 

I think one of my favourite sort of representations of this kind 

of hypocrisy is the signing of the 100th Aboriginal employment 

development partnership with IBM [International Business 

Machines Corporation]. It is the centrepiece of the big 

provincial action council on the representative workforce 

conference. And the smiling pictures that you can see on the 

web, Mr. Speaker, of this minister signing with officials from 

IBM and just, you know, how glad they were to be there for a 

photo op, but when it comes time to backing the program up, 

Mr. Speaker, what happens? They cut it. 

 

One more thing I want to, or a couple more things I want to say 

about the program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Or you could wrap it up. I’m anxious to 

get up. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well I’m sure the member is, but if you’d . . . 

I’ll make those members opposite a deal, Mr. Speaker. If they 

give us less to sit there and wonder what the heck they’re doing, 

if they can do that for us, Mr. Speaker, we’ll make for shorter 

speeches on this side of the House. How’s about that? 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I would like to 

remind the member that it would be appropriate to be very 

careful of how the member chooses his words. And I was 

listening earlier on and I’ve gone to Beauchesne’s and I’m also 

going to ask the member to apologize for a comment made 

earlier. 

 

Beauchesne’s on page 145 uses the term “has not the guts” as 

unparliamentary, and the member made that comment in regard 

to, in relation to the Premier. I’d ask the member to stand and 

apologize. And I’d ask the member as he continues his speaking 

to be mindful of the words he’s choosing. The member from 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — I apologize and withdraw that remark, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One of the other things I want to say about AEDP. This is from 

the 2007 Saskatchewan Institute of Public Policy study that was 

done for the federal government, Mr. Speaker. There’s an 

example cited in terms of the Aboriginal employment 

development program with the Prince Albert Health Region, 

where we spent the last weekend, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 

quote at length. This is from page 24 of that report. 

 

One example was in the Prince Albert Health Region. 

They wanted to increase the numbers of Aboriginal 

people in the health workforce and worked in partnership 

with the Dumont Technical Institute and created a 

Licensed Practical Nursing program for Aboriginal 

people. It graduated 77 in the first year, with 100% 

employed. 

 

And if I can say, Mr. Speaker, parenthetically, here’s the thing: 

 

Soon after the retention rates fell to almost 0%, so the 

partners came back and developed a cultural awareness 

package suited to the health workplace. After this 

training, delivered by the Saskatchewan Association of 

Health Organizations and the Canadian Union of Public 

Employees, the retention rate is up to 60% and climbing. 

 

And this is the program they cut, you know? This is what makes 

these workplaces better for Aboriginal people. This is what 

makes us get along better in this province, in that critical 

workplace that we all share in some way, shape, or form, Mr. 

Speaker. So they cut Aboriginal employment development. 

 

I want to just say one last thing on Aboriginal employment 

development, Mr. Speaker. And this was brought to our 

attention by one of the groups that have received the letter. And 

again I quote from the letter dated March 24th from the 

ministry, announcing that all these 111 partnerships were no 

longer valid and over the signature of the deputy minister in 

First Nations and Métis Relations: “Current Aboriginal 

employment development partnership agreements are no longer 

valid.” 

 

The contact that we’ve had from people that have been party to 

these agreements, the question that they raise is, what gives 

them the authority to do that, Mr. Speaker? These were 

multi-party agreements. They were signed by, you know, 

different parties in good faith, some of them by up to half a 

dozen parties representing municipalities and First Nations and 

Métis locals to name just a few, Mr. Speaker, private 

businesses. 

 

Where does this government draw its right to tell them that their 

agreements are no longer valid? It’s signal to the approach of 

this government in terms of, you know, not thinking through 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4559 

what they’re doing. And that’s the most charitable way I can 

explain it, Mr. Speaker, because if you enter into a multi-party 

agreement in good faith, surely there’s some kind of 

compunction to work in good faith if you are going to exit that 

agreement. 

 

And surely those 111 different agreements and the groups that 

signed them, surely they would have something to say about, 

was it really about the photo op for these people, or was it about 

making a real difference in people’s lives and in real 

workplaces across this province and in terms of better engaging 

First Nations and Métis people in the social and economic life 

of this province? I’ll bet they’ve got something to say about it, 

Mr. Speaker, and I’ll bet they’ll have something to say about it 

more and more in the days ahead. 

 

So again, if the government could explain for us instead of, you 

know, going on at length about how they’ve got . . . how great 

the uptake has been on the recycling bag program at the Sask 

Liquor and Gaming Authority, if they could spare us some of 

the lengthy diatribe that they go into about that, Mr. Speaker, 

and maybe tell us exactly how some of these things work and 

how it works out there in the real world. Because there are lot 

of people that signed these agreements and entered into them in 

good faith and worked in them and saw the positive impact that 

it’s had, and they want to know, where does that government 

get the right to tell them that “Current Aboriginal employment 

development partnership agreements are no longer valid”? 

 

You know, there’s a strange combination of arrogance and 

foolishness involved in that, Mr. Speaker. A strange 

combination. So we wait to see what happens on that front. 

 

I guess the last thing I want to say on this in terms of First 

Nations and Métis Relations at this stage of the game, Mr. 

Speaker, is regarding First Nations University. And last night I 

had the honour of attending the First Nations University 

powwow, the 32nd annual. This is an institution that a lot of 

people put their lives into, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know, was our record perfect on it? It was not. It was 

not, Mr. Speaker. But did we work in good faith and in 

partnership with the institution and with First Nations and with 

educators and with the students to try and get it back on track 

after February 2005? We absolutely did, Mr. Speaker. And in 

terms of what’s happened over the past two months, in terms of 

the miscommunication that’s gone on, in terms of the different 

games that have been played with different of the actors in this, 

in this equation, we find alarming, Mr. Speaker. And I guess I 

want to say just very clearly that we are glad on this side of the 

House to see the province put their money back on the table. 

And we want to see that funding continued for this very 

important institution, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I guess the other thing we would like to see is that the 

province quite happily led the federal government out, and we 

are watching very closely to see what they’re doing to lead the 

federal government back in. Federal dollars in Saskatchewan 

are, you know, too often hard to come by, Mr. Speaker. You’d 

think that would be different with the representation we have in 

the House of Commons, but that’s not the case. So once federal 

dollars are taken out of this province and the 7.2 million that 

have been taken out by the federal government, we hope 

full-heartedly, wholeheartedly to see that that funding is 

restored to make sure that this institution gets back on its feet. 

 

There were problems there for sure, Mr. Speaker, but it’s 

interesting to talk to the people that were in the trenches on this 

issue from day one in terms of some of the faculty, Mr. 

Speaker, and the kind of things that they fought for and endured 

and the questions that they had at different passes in terms of 

the actions of this government and the federal government. 

 

But I’m not going to say anything more on it right now, Mr. 

Speaker, because I want to make sure that the deal gets signed 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And again the Minister for 

Advanced Education is yelling from his chair. And this is a 

minister who very happily used the students as some kind of 

media opportunity and then, you know, and made different 

undertakings to them that were not lived up to, but has 

continued to talk about how concerned he is about the students 

and, you know, to the point where the students came to the 

legislature, Mr. Speaker, with a letter saying how much they 

resented how fraudulently represented they were by the words 

of that minister. So why not? I guess I’ll leave it at that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I wish that this university succeeds, I hope that this university 

succeeds, and I hope that they have partners working in good 

faith with them around the table, Mr. Speaker, good faith and 

respect. Because this institution is something that should be 

bringing this province together, not being used as a political 

punching bag and not being used as a photo opportunity for 

crass politicians that are out to get a gig. That’s the last I’ll say 

about that for now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In conclusion on the budget, Mr. Speaker, the different things 

that we see in this document, again we’ll see how the numbers 

play out over the year to come. And again, with past being 

prologue, we worry mightily that what looks like bad news now 

is going to be disastrous news come the mid-term and that again 

we’ll be into another round where the people pay the price for 

the mistakes of that government opposite. 

 

So in terms of the numbers in this budget, we find them to be a 

— reflecting on the ruling that you delivered this afternoon, Mr. 

Speaker — we find them to be not a true statement. We find 

them to be not a true statement of the fiscal realities of this 

province. And we think that when the cheque comes due, 

there’s going to be a price to pay and the terrible thing about 

that, Mr. Speaker, is that it won’t be those people paying the 

price. It’ll be the people of this province. 

 

But we’re going to fight from our side for that interest of the 

people. We’re going to fight with our leader who stacks up very 

well against what passes for leadership across the way, Mr. 

Speaker. And you know, well I guess I’m getting a second wind 

in my speech here, Mr. Speaker. I’ve got a number of things 

that perhaps should get on the record here. 

 

Okay. I guess just one other thing that is sort of particularly 

dumbfounding in this budget, Mr. Speaker, over the years 

there’s been a lot of work and effort and, you know, creativity 

put into a very innovative sector of our economy. And we’ve 

got members on that side of the House that like to talk about an 

innovation economy. And what is not the film industry if but an 



4560 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

innovative, creative part of the economy? 

 

We’ve got a member over there that likes to quote Richard 

Florida a lot. And, you know, you don’t have to delve too 

deeply into Richard Florida to find out what kind of role that, 

say, the people attached to the film industry play in a creative 

economy and how that benefits a vibrant city or a vibrant 

culture, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[21:00] 

 

But in terms of the inaction that this government has displayed 

on making sure that the industry is competitive, in terms of the 

lack of action that they’ve taken in terms of making sure that 

the tax credit is processed appropriately so that you can get the 

cash in hand to finance deals, you know, that was the problem 

over the past two years, you know, and increasingly so. And 

you know again, Mr. Speaker, there has been a downturn in 

production, and what’s telling though is that the reaction of 

other jurisdictions has been very different from our jurisdiction. 

 

You know, we’ve got a government over there that won’t take 

meetings, and when they do take meetings say, oh well, you 

know, wait for the budget. And then when the budget comes 

down it’s like, well you know, that’s the budget. You know? 

It’s not working in partnership with an industry, Mr. Speaker. 

Again it displays some kind of weird mixture of arrogance and 

foolishness or foolhardiness that I don’t quite understand, but 

that you see in a lot of the things that those people opposite do. 

 

And in terms of the film industry, again members opposite were 

quite happy to trot around the set of Corner Gas, and whatever 

sort of photo ops they could weasel their way into, Mr. Speaker, 

you know, they’re quite happy to do that. But when it came 

time to support the industry, what did they do? You know, it’s 

almost like flash back 10 years to when we were having debates 

in this Chamber about the building of the sound stage. And we 

know that the members opposite were huge detractors of that 

project. But of course when it became a success, Mr. Speaker, 

then they were quite happy to show up on the set and try to pal 

around with Brent Butt and all of this. 

 

So . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, well I hear one of the 

chief critics of the sound stage bellowing from his chair. You 

know, there’s the guy that runs the witch hunts for the 

government over there. You know, this is the thing that’s sort of 

odd, Mr. Speaker. When the members opposite go to the polls, 

they try to keep that member under his desk or far off the centre 

stage. And they want to have the member for Swift Current out 

there saying, no, no, no, we’re a very moderate, reasonable 

bunch of people. You know, disregard all the things that the 

member from Wood River said over the years about the sound 

stage. 

 

And they’ll get up in front of the Arts Alliance at different 

conferences and say that no, no, no, we’re very reasonable 

people. We read Richard Florida. We like the creative economy. 

But the actions of the members opposite, and certainly the 

words on the record from the members opposite, tell a very 

different story. So we find it not surprising at all, Mr. Speaker, 

that the words of someone like the member from Wood River a 

decade ago seemed to be catching up in this budget with the 

cutting of the Saskatchewan Communications Network. 

And again, Mr. Speaker, if ever there was a case of, you know, 

penny-wise and pound foolish, it’s this government writ large. 

Because in terms of the importance of the Saskatchewan 

Communications Network, in terms of being a pillar of this 

creative industry for this province, an industry that attracts a lot 

of young, creative people and that attracts people to this 

province from around the world, the importance of that industry 

or the importance of that institution to this industry has been 

made very clear by industry partners throughout the past few 

days. 

 

And you’d think that they would have their own officials telling 

them that, Mr. Speaker. So if they’re not telling them that, how 

does that work? And if they are telling them that, then why 

aren’t they listening? 

 

One of the last times they did an economic impact analysis of 

the broader spinoff of SCN [Saskatchewan Communications 

Network] was in 2007-2008. And we asked the officials about 

this in the budget briefing, Mr. Speaker, the day that the budget 

was delivered. And the officials couldn’t deliver any 

information on a broader analysis that had been done in terms 

of the multiplier effect of SCN and its importance to the film 

and video industry. You know, it was just this sort of straight 

dollars and cents, the straight jobs that are attached to it — 

that’s it, that’s all; no more, thank you very much. 

 

And of course the last time that they did an economic analysis 

of the impact of SCN on the industry in terms of bringing 

dollars, not just from other partners in the province but from 

around the country and indeed throughout the world, it was a 

ratio of about 10 to 1. So for every $1 that was spent, you got 

about 10 more dollars back in terms of economic activity. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of is it, in this case, the 

arrogance that’s driving this government or is it the foolishness, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to tell which. But we do know that 

there’s an industry that has already had enough to deal with in 

terms of the action or the inaction of this government. And now, 

you know, when they need to be thrown a helping hand or reach 

out a helping hand, they get the anvil thrown on it. 

 

So in terms of the young people that are contacting my office 

saying that, I’m going to leave the province, this is the 

government that likes to say, you know, with the brain gain. We 

had, you know, the previous speaker rattle on about the brain 

gain. Well how does this work for the brain gain in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, in terms of those young, creative 

people? And that they’re also highly mobile, Mr. Speaker, so 

what does that do to an industry? What does that do to — you 

know, as the member from Greystone, I’m sure would talk 

about — the creative culture and a vibrant city and a vibrant 

economy? What does it do in that regard? Perhaps he could tell 

us in his speech when that comes up. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You bet I will. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Yes, I bet he will. Anyway, Mr. Speaker, in 

the meantime we’ve got people with real lives that are sitting 

here wondering what the heck they’re going to do, how they see 

their career playing out in front of them in Saskatchewan. And 

they’re very worried, Mr. Speaker. And the thing that we find 

hard to understand on this side of the House is that this is an 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4561 

industry that’s been a point of pride for the past 10 years. 

 

And again, those members opposite, pretty quick to show up for 

the photo ops, pretty quick to show up for the palling around 

and the glad-handing. But when it comes time to have a real 

understanding of what the industry needs to survive and sustain, 

those members, you know, missing in action. Or maybe this is 

what the handful of people that actually make decisions over 

there have to say, so they’ll trot out the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy to wear the decision of what the in-group 

over there has had to say. 

 

Oh yes, the member from Wood River thinks this is very funny. 

He’s just laughing it up at the efforts on his government’s 

behalf to drive an industry out of this province. And I guess 

that’s part and parcel of the contempt that will bring you down 

over there. You know, it will. If you want to be that arrogant 

and that sort of callous, there’s a price that gets paid for that. 

And your day of reckoning is coming sooner and sooner every 

day. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, on this side we’ve got 

leadership that’s got experience. And unfortunately, Mr. 

Speaker, one of the great areas of experience for our leader was 

as deputy premier in the early ’90s when this province was, you 

know, nearly put into bankruptcy by different of the members 

opposite, you know. 

 

And we’ve heard the member from Kindersley talk about how 

the conservatives wear the pants over there, you know. So I 

think that figures in terms of the financial management 

approach that we’ve got over there — or the fiscal 

mismanagement approach, Mr. Speaker because in terms of the 

$1 billion deficit last year; you know, second worst in the 

history of this province — and Lord only knows what’s coming 

down the line this year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again our leader was there to help put back the pieces 

together, help get the fiscal reputation of this province back in a 

place where our paper wasn’t traded at junk status, you know. 

And again the members opposite, they can laugh it up all they 

want, but what they’re doing over there, we had a decade of that 

kind of, Mr. Speaker, we had a decade of that kind of activity, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there was some terrible decisions that had to be made in 

1991. And the members opposite are only getting a brief 

glimpse of what the kind of heartbreaking decisions that that 

government had to make at that time to clean up the mess of 

their ancestors opposite. And you know I guess the thing that’s 

terrible about this, Mr. Speaker, is that the hard parts of this 

budget, they’re all by their own hand. They’re all by their own 

mismanagement. 

 

So again on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 

be working for the people. We’re going to be working with 

community. We’re going to be working with our leader who’s 

got a track record that speaks much more highly of itself than 

the fly-by-night web of fact that the member over there likes to 

put together in terms of what represents his CV [curriculum 

vitae]. So we’ll stack our leaders up. We’ll stack our caucuses 

up, you know. And again we’re coming at you hard because the 

people of this province are having a hard enough time. 

The member from Estevan asked if that’s a threat. That’s not a 

threat; it’s a promise. It’s a promise. We’re going to criticize 

you for the things that you’re doing that are hurting the lives of 

ordinary people. We’re going to call you on it every step of the 

way. So if you think that we’re just going to roll over and join 

the laugh-in that regularly goes on over there in terms of the 

decisions you’re making . . . And, you know, who cares? We’ve 

got a comfortable seat in the back of the caucus room or, you 

know, at the cabinet room, but in terms of the impact on real 

people’s lives, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be there fighting 

them every step of the way. 

 

And that’s why I’m going to be . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Yes, okay. The member from Cannington is again yelping from 

his chair, Mr. Speaker. And again I’d ask them to look at their 

own health care record. I’d ask them to look at, I guess I’d ask 

him, how many long-term care facilities have you deferred, you 

know. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, his record speaks for itself. And again I 

guess, you know, I wonder why he’s such a bitter, sour person, 

Mr. Speaker, and perhaps it was being part of a party and a 

regime that nearly ruined this province. And again I guess if 

you’re in this regime, and you’re not even with it enough to stay 

in cabinet to continue on with the decisions, you know, I guess I 

would be bitter and sour too, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we’re going to be fighting in terms of the interests of the 

people. We’re going to be fighting for the interests of the 

people. And in this case, Mr. Speaker, this budget, there’s no 

way that we can vote for it on this side. So to conclude my 

remarks, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be voting against this budget. I’ll be 

voting for the amendment put forward by the opposition. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways, the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to join in the debate on the 2010 provincial budget. 

Before I begin, Mr. Speaker, before I begin, Mr. Speaker, I just 

want to point out I’m not feeling well today — sore throat, head 

cold, not sure what I’m coming down with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I was just going to mention, I mentioned to my good friend 

and colleague from Cut Knife-Turtleford that I wasn’t feeling 

well. And he said, well why don’t you sit out tonight and come 

back tomorrow? And I said, I’m afraid I’ll be feeling even 

worse tomorrow. And he said, well rest assured I don’t believe 

you could look any worse tomorrow. So it’s good to have 

friends, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, speaking of friends, my friend and colleague from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy’s anxious to get into the mix tonight, so I 

won’t go very long. He’s got some new glasses. He’s going for 

that academic look, and he really wants to show everybody in 

TV land that. So I won’t go near as long as my colleague 

opposite just did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take you back to just a little over three 

years ago. It was November 13th, 2006, to be exact. 

Incidentally November 13th is my parent’s anniversary that 

night, and it was also my nomination night, Mr. Speaker. It was 



4562 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

a big night for me. The Rosetown Civic Centre was packed to 

capacity and then some. And I remember the speech I made that 

night. I’d given it a lot of thought leading up to the event, and I 

wanted to speak about the reasons that I had decided to run. 

And there was two main reasons, Mr. Speaker. 

 

First of all, the NDP’s complete disdain and lack of respect for 

rural Saskatchewan. I grew up in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. I spent my career in rural Saskatchewan. And I saw 

what 16 years of NDP government did to rural Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, and I wanted to make sure that that would never 

happen in this province again. 

 

The second reason I decided to run was because I spent my 

years through high school and out of high school, when I was 

younger, Mr. Speaker, watching all my friends leave the 

province predominantly to go to jobs in Alberta because that’s 

where the jobs were, Mr. Speaker; they were in Alberta. And 

then a number of years later, watching my friends’ children also 

make that same trek, moving predominantly to Alberta but to 

other provinces anyway, leaving Saskatchewan once again 

because they had to, because the NDP government had scared 

away the industry from Saskatchewan for years. 

 

[21:15] 

 

I remember a young man the night of my nomination, a young 

man from Rosetown by the name of Drew McGregor. And he 

gave a very moving speech that night. He was one of my 

nominators, Mr. Speaker, 17 years old in grade 12. And he 

talked about the reason he was supporting the Sask Party. And 

he talked about the fact that his older brother and sister had left 

Saskatchewan to move to Alberta because that’s where the jobs 

were. And he talked about what that did to his family. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, just a few months later he also 

moved to Alberta, and I think that proved his point. 

 

I can remember thinking at that time that we could form the 

government, that we could start to turn things around. But I also 

remember thinking that I’d hope that people would be patient. It 

had taken many years of NDP government to get into the 

position we were in, and I didn’t think we could turn it around 

on a dime. We were at or near the bottom in just about every 

economic indicator in the country and we had been for years, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our province hadn’t got into that 

predicament overnight, and I was thinking it was going to take 

quite a while to turn it around. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been absolutely amazing what’s happened. We 

have the lowest unemployment rate in the country, Mr. Speaker, 

4.3 per cent. People are moving here, Mr. Speaker, people are 

moving back to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Ours is a province 

that’s finally living up to its tremendous potential, potential 

that’s recognized across Canada, such as when CIBC [Canadian 

Imperial Bank of Commerce] recently announced that 

Saskatchewan will again lead the country in economic growth 

this year. A further example is, in its most recent provincial 

outlook, RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] is predicting a 3.6 per 

cent growth rate for Saskatchewan this year, the second highest 

in the country. The outlook also predicts a 4.6 per cent growth 

rate for next year, the highest in Canada. 

 

People are responding to the opportunity that is Saskatchewan. 

In the past two years, we’ve grown by almost 30,000 people. 

These people came to Saskatchewan because business in this 

province created nearly 8,000 new jobs. They came because, as 

I mentioned, Saskatchewan continues to have the lowest 

unemployment rate in the country. And they came because 

weekly earnings in Saskatchewan have reached an all-time 

high. They came because today in Saskatchewan you keep more 

of what you earn, thanks to the largest single-year tax cut in our 

province’s history. The impact of our growth can be seen in the 

nearly 200 per cent increase in housing starts in Saskatchewan 

in the first two months of 2010. Incidentally, that’s the biggest 

increase in the country. 

 

So where are we now? We have more families, more students, 

more seniors, more entrepreneurs, more employees, and more 

than 1 million people all choosing to live and work in our great 

province. Mr. Speaker, this budget delivers on the promise that 

is the new Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take some time today to walk through a 

number of significant sections of our budget so the Legislative 

Assembly can understand why I so strongly endorse it. The 

Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure budget for the coming 

year is $551 million. I’m extremely pleased to say that that is 

the second largest budget for Highways in the history of our 

province. 

 

Our government’s commitment to transportation will be evident 

in the continuing work on several major multi-year projects 

like, for example, the twinning of Highway No. 11. It’ll also 

allow us to continue or commence 470 kilometres of rural 

highway upgrades, and it will allow us to do 600 kilometres of 

repaving. Even in what is generally a restraint budget, our 

government is continuing with near record levels of investment 

in transportation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget puts us on the edge of fulfilling yet 

another promise to the people of Saskatchewan. In the first 

three years of our mandate, this budget brings our total 

transportation investment to $1.7 billion, including a $760 

million investment in capital. In 2007 during the election 

campaign, we committed to spend a minimum of $1.8 billion 

over the four-year term of our mandate. Mr. Speaker, not only 

are we on schedule, but we’re going to far exceed that promise. 

 

I’d like to review our strategy for the transportation system and 

remind everyone where we’ve been and the work our 

government’s been doing. Our government’s focus with respect 

to economic development is about getting the fundamentals 

right. And arguably nothing is more fundamental to economic 

development in Saskatchewan than good transportation. We’re 

an exporting province with two-thirds of the provincial gross 

domestic product derived from exports, and we’re a global 

player with key markets on every continent. 

 

In 2009 our canola sales to China were up by 80 per cent to 

$553 million. Sales of peas were up by 51 per cent, and linseed 

sales were up by over 300 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 45 per cent of 

all Canada’s trade with India originates in Saskatchewan. All of 

this despite the fact that a quick look at a map will tell you that 

we are located a long way from either of these massive end 

markets. 

 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4563 

In the old Saskatchewan, where people were constantly being 

discouraged by the limited vision provided by the members 

opposite, we might have conceded those markets to Ontario or 

to British Columbia. Mr. Speaker, when people are repeatedly 

told that they live in a have-not province and they’re 

condemned to be living mostly as recipients of equalization, it’s 

difficult to see yourself competing in a global market. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP underestimated the people of Saskatchewan 

in 2007 and they continue to do the same today. In the new 

Saskatchewan we adapt and we respond to the world around us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government responded by 

transforming the province’s transportation system to one that 

better aligns with our export economy. Last year a record 1500 

kilometres of highway improvements were completed or under 

way over the course of the 2009 construction season. With the 

support of Saskatchewan’s heavy construction sector, we were 

able to take major strides forward to generate a 5000-kilometre 

expansion of the primary weight highway network; a total of 

235 kilometres in rural highway upgrades to create new primary 

weight corridors; 11 kilometres of new twin lanes opened; and 

22 kilometres of new roadbeds constructed on Highway 11 

between Saskatoon and Prince Albert. 

 

We’ve commenced construction of roadways to carry heavy 

traffic to and from the global transportation hub and on a new 

interchange and supporting roads at Lewvan Drive and 

Highway No. 1. There’s been 340 kilometres of repaving on the 

highways that carry the heaviest traffic, including Highways 

No. 1 and 16; 970 kilometres of maintenance work completed 

on paved highways through the province; 55 bridge and culvert 

replacements. 

 

And to achieve this level of construction, we relied on the 

strong working relationship we have with organizations like the 

Saskatchewan Heavy Construction Association. I attended their 

annual convention last fall. And here’s what this group thinks 

about transportation in Saskatchewan. I’d like to read you a 

quote, Mr. Speaker, from the president of the Saskatchewan 

Heavy Construction Association, Shantel Lipp. This is a quote, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

At the start of the season we said we were ready to meet 

the challenge, and we were. The volume of work 

accomplished this season is a good example of how 

industry and government can work together to efficiently 

deliver infrastructure projects. Project coordination and 

early tendering are all factors in getting a large amount of 

work done in a short construction season. As we look to 

the work expected next season, we will be building on a 

spirit of partnership developed this year. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this budget furthers that partnership and the 

commitment that we’ve made to all the people of our great 

province. 

 

I’d like to outline for you some of the key initiatives that are 

part of this budget. The first priority I’d like to highlight is 

gateway corridors. Our gateway corridors include the 

components of the transportation system that connect us to the 

rest of the world. They include our connections to the main line 

rail system that moves our exports to ports and to all our global 

markets. They also include the national highway system routes 

that connect us to major Canadian and US markets. Our 

investments in gateway corridors support economic growth by 

expanding capacity. 

 

A case in point is the twinning of Highway 11. Highway 11 is a 

gateway to the North and links the resort sector to Saskatoon, 

Regina, and the main line rail system. Prior to the 2008-2009 

fiscal year, the province was on a pace that would have taken 14 

years, Mr. Speaker, 14 years to complete this corridor. That was 

in NDP days, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been able to capture $62 

million in federal funding to accelerate the twinning of this 

corridor to four years. This means the $62 million provincial 

investment has leveraged matching federal funding. We will 

complete the Highway 11 twinning in 2012. 

 

Projects like these help to ensure that the Saskatchewan 

trucking industry is able to remain competitive in a very 

dynamic industry. Mr. Speaker, we’ve worked closely with the 

Trucking Association and we’ve listened to their ideas of how 

together we can enhance their competitive edge. It’s why, Mr. 

Speaker, on budget day, the Saskatchewan Trucking 

Association put out this news release, and I quote: 

 

Steadfast budgetary support towards highway 

infrastructure programs coupled with new roadway 

development, will pay major dividends to the people of 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

. . . “Treating highways and infrastructure as a longer 

term investment shows the government’s vision for the 

bigger picture.” 

 

We will invest $63 million in gateway corridor initiatives this 

year. This will enable us to advance key multi-year initiatives 

that will have immediate impact on economic development in 

the province. These include $7.7 million to continue 

construction of the Yorkton bypass that’s critical to the 

development of the new canola crushing plants in that city. We 

anticipate completing this project in 2010. Six and a half 

million dollars for year 2 of the Lewvan interchange at Regina 

that is allowing for the new development of Regina’s southwest 

sector. $26.1 million to continue the Regina west bypass that 

will support development of the global transportation hub and 

accommodate population growth on Regina’s west side. In total 

for projects across our ministry, we’re receiving $113 million in 

federal funding this year, the largest single-year federal 

investment in our transportation system ever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are also realigning the provincial 

transportation system to better support economic activity in our 

province. One component, the rural highways strategy, is 

designed to enhance the collector system that feeds into 

gateway corridors, improving connections to international 

export markets. This will be achieved through a focus on 

sustainable primary weight expansion and investments to 

complete strategic corridors. 

 

An example of this is Highway 13. Highway 13 from Eastend 

to the Manitoba border is an important economic corridor for 

southern Saskatchewan. This region was hit particularly hard 

when the grain handling system began to consolidate. At the 

same time, new industries began to develop that are changing 

the face of that region. However, transportation infrastructure 



4564 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

was not able to accommodate heavy truck haul. Through 

Transportation for Growth, we’ve completed or commenced 

some $23 million worth of structural upgrades and 

rehabilitation on this corridor. This will have significant 

impacts on both the regional and provincial economy. 

 

As you can see, our government has made progress, tremendous 

progress in improving the transportation system, one that better 

supports our economy and provides the citizens of this province 

with better, safer roads. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan expect their 

government to manage within its means. We have responded 

with a budget that is fiscally responsible. At the same time we 

are mindful of the commitments we have made and the need to 

make investments that will grow our province. Since coming 

into office, our focus has been to put in place the fundamentals 

that ensure growth, enhance public safety, and also keep our 

promises. 

 

This year’s transportation budget continues that work. In 

addition to construction, we will continue work on the policy 

and regulatory fronts as well. Over the past year, I have had 

discussions with my counterparts in Alberta and Manitoba 

regarding continued harmonization of commercial vehicle 

regulation. Discussions, I believe, will result in tangible results 

in the coming year. 

 

We will continue to bring forward the most comprehensive and 

aggressive plan of maintaining highways, bridges, and culverts 

in the province’s history, and as our cities and their 

neighbouring communities grow and expand, our government is 

developing a strategy to ensure high-traffic corridors are 

prioritized for timely inclusion in the five-year plan. 

 

Most importantly, we will continue our focus on developing 

effective partnerships. Perhaps the most successful part of 

Transportation for Growth has been the formalized structures 

such as the rural highways advisory committee and the northern 

transportation advisory committee that give you a real and 

active role in prioritizing investments and determining how 

they’re prioritized. Too often in the past, industrial investment 

and transportation investment decisions have been made in 

relative isolation from each other. 

 

We will continue to work with municipalities, contactors, 

trucking companies, and businesses to ensure the system 

develops in a manner that responds to the needs of industry and 

of our communities. Mr. Speaker, I believe our Finance 

minister has once again done an amazing job on this year’s 

budget. Mr. Speaker, I would encourage all members to support 

this budget as a clear, progressive, balanced approach to move 

our province forward. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[21:30] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 

extremely pleased this evening to enter into the budget debate. 

And at the conclusion of my remarks, I will be moving an 

amendment to the motion before the House, seconded by the 

member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I get to the point of moving my 

amendment, I would like to talk in some detail and depth about 

the budget before us and make the people of Saskatchewan 

aware of the things that are contained within the budget, but 

most importantly, Mr. Speaker, make the people of 

Saskatchewan aware of the many, many harmful cuts to 

programs and services that affect the people of this province 

that are contained within this budget. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to start with some of the fundamentals. 

First of all, we sat on budget day and heard the Minister of 

Finance tell us that this was a balanced budget. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, he stood in this House and told us it was a balanced 

budget. He told the people of Saskatchewan it was a balanced 

budget, but the facts say otherwise. Mr. Speaker, if you go to 

their own document, and it’s a summary of the 2010-11 budget, 

financial highlights, it shows on a summary financial basis, Mr. 

Speaker, that we in fact have a $622.7 million deficit. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t know where the Minister of Finance went to 

school, or I don’t know where the members opposite learned 

their mathematics but, Mr. Speaker, on a summary basis this 

budget, by their own documents, is a $622.7 million deficit. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this type of mathematics before 

in the 1980s. In the 1980s we saw a government that ran 

continued deficits and increased the debt on a regular basis. 

But, Mr. Speaker, what’s even more incredible than the fact that 

we are currently running a $622 million deficit is the fact that 

the Minister of Finance today stood in the House and 

acknowledged many things he didn’t put in his budget that he 

knows are going to cost the people of Saskatchewan money in 

the 2010-2011 budget year, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to be 

hundreds of millions of dollars, bringing the total deficit in 

excess of $1 billion by the end of the fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, when they come to 

hear the budget presented by their government, want to hear the 

true facts of what that budget contains. Mr. Speaker, by their 

own document today it’s a $622.7 million deficit. Mr. Speaker, 

that doesn’t contain money for contract settlements for health 

care workers; it doesn’t contain money for contract settlements 

with teachers. Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t contain money for 

fluctuations in many, many areas of the provincial budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but those two items alone — the contract 

negotiations with the Health Sciences Association, with the 

25,000 members of health provider unions; with the 

11,000-plus teachers of the province — those contracts alone 

make this a $1 billion-plus deficit. Then you have to look at the 

doctors and the others, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government knows this budget, even the 

budget they tabled in this House doesn’t contain all the 

financial liabilities they’re going to have to pay out in this year 

and they should have contained in their original budget. So, Mr. 

Speaker, why do you do that? Well you do that with the intent 

of hiding that information from the people. And, Mr. Speaker, 

why would you do that? Do they think the people of 

Saskatchewan aren’t going to learn after last year? We came in 

saying we were going to have a surplus budget; the end of the 

year, we had a $1 billion deficit. 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4565 

Now, Mr. Speaker, last year what they did is they tried to make 

the revenues match their expenditures after they’d already 

agreed on what their expenditures were going to be. So what 

did they do? They inflated what the royalty structure would 

return on potash. And they were out by, not $1.9 billion, but a 

total of $2.1 billion by the time they were done. Not only did 

we not make any money last year, we had to pay $204 million 

to the potash companies. That’s never happened in our history, 

that we had to pay money to the companies for the minerals 

they’re taking out of the ground. It’s never, ever been where 

you have to pay the companies, have to pay the company for the 

minerals that belong to the people of Saskatchewan. Even the 

most third world, backward country in the entire world, would 

you see a government pay a company to take their profitable 

minerals out of the ground. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is only the first of many, many 

problems in this budget. We have a government say we’ve got a 

balanced budget when their own documents said it’s a deficit. 

Then the Minister of Finance admits that he’s excluded a 

number of things he knows is going to cost the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan a significant amount of money. So 

that deficit isn’t going to be 622.7 million. It’s going to be more 

than 1 billion by the time it’s done. Does this ever sound 

familiar; sounds a lot like last year. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it also sounds like a decade when we had a 

premier named Grant Devine. And why does it sound similar, 

Mr. Speaker? Because it seems to be they’re doing things in the 

same way. And it seems to be that the current Premier was 

tutored by then Premier Grant Devine. So why would I expect a 

significantly different outcome? Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t, 

frankly. But the people of the province of Saskatchewan did. 

They bought the bill of goods that this Premier sold to them 

about how he was going to manage this province. And, Mr. 

Speaker, and he’s proved, he’s proved since the day he became 

Premier, he couldn’t manage a two-car parade. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, why is that? Well I’ll tell you why it is. 

Because he was trained in a period of time by another guy who 

couldn’t do, couldn’t manage a two-car parade either, who 

drove this province into nearly $15 billion in debt, which the 

people of Saskatchewan for many, many years had to sacrifice 

steeply to pay that debt back. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that leads me to my next concern — the debt 

of the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, we have a 

government that says there’s no increase in debt. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, I just don’t know how they can draw some of these 

conclusions, Mr. Speaker. First of all, they had to change the 

accounting practices and procedures within their budgetary 

documents in order to show that they can say they don’t have 

any debt increase, Mr. Speaker. But even with that, their own 

documents show an increase in debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just refer members to page 62, 62 of 

their own budget summary. Now ironically their budget 

summary says, balanced, forward-looking, and responsible, Mr. 

Speaker. Those are good sounding words, but I wish that the 

practices represented what they’re actually portraying on the 

front of their budget. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, in 2009 it showed the total debt would be 

$7.7 billion in the General Revenue Fund. In 2009 it shows that 

the total debt in the General Revenue Fund would be $8.1 

billion. And in 2011, Mr. Speaker, it’ll be $8.8 billion. It goes 

on, Mr. Speaker. And I’m going to have to get my glasses out. 

I’m sorry about the small print here, Mr. Speaker. By 2012 . . . I 

thought I was wrong, Mr. Speaker. I thought I was wrong 

because the jump was an entire billion dollars in 2012 to 9.8 

billion. By 2013 we’re up to $11 billion. And by 2014, we’re up 

to $11.9 billion. That’s just in the GRF, Mr. Speaker. This 

sounds a lot like the Grant Devine years, Mr. Speaker, going up 

by over $1 billion a year. Shameful. Absolutely shameful. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, and the other measure that we measure debt 

by is the amount of debt compared to the GDP [gross domestic 

product] in the province of Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to say this: as a percentage of GDP, in 2009 it was 11.9 

per cent; in 2010 it’s 14.3; 2011 it’s 15 per cent; 2012 it’s 15.1; 

2013, 16.1. Mr. Speaker, in each of the next five years, debt to 

GDP’s also increasing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what does that tell the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan? Well what it tells them or should tell them is 

that this government’s going further in debt each year. And 

even though the economy’s growing each year because the 

amounts of goods and products that we produce in this province 

grows each year as well, Mr. Speaker, what that tells me is our 

level of debt is increasing faster than the growth of our 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that is a very dangerous situation for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. And we’ve seen that record before, 

Mr. Speaker. We saw that record during the 1980s under a 

premier named Grant Devine, a premier that had an individual 

working for him by the name of Brad Wall, who today claims 

. . . is the Premier of Saskatchewan. And what’s the Premier of 

Saskatchewan today doing? Exactly what his predecessor and 

tutor, Premier Grant Devine, did — increasing debt faster than 

the rate of growth in the province, Mr. Speaker, and putting the 

people of Saskatchewan further in debt every year that he’s 

going to be in power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what do the people of Saskatchewan say to that? 

Well they’re not going to let it happen, Mr. Speaker, because 

they’ve seen that record before, and they’ve seen this type of 

track record. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re a heck of a lot smarter 

the second time around than they would have been the first time 

because, Mr. Speaker, the first time that slick talk by an 

individual fooled them. I don’t think they’d get fooled twice. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, so we have established without doubt, by 

the government’s own documents, that we’re running a deficit 

this year and that many items that contributed to that deficit 

aren’t even included in his budgetary documents. So the deficit 

will be much larger at the end of the year than the budget that 

he gave and presented to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been able to establish in fact 

debt’s on the rise. And by their own documents, debt is rising 

each of the next several years, including debt to GDP’s rising, 

Mr. Speaker. Now have we seen this before? Yes. Do we want 

this to continue? No. Mr. Speaker, the people of this province 

need responsible government that understands that you have to 



4566 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

live within your means. You have to budget based on your 

income and you have to live within that income coming into 

this province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to see 

growth in income. GDP continues to rise each year. You can’t 

increase the debt and increase your spending greater than the 

GDP, the growth in GDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, so we’ve established we have both a debt 

and a deficit problem that’ll continue to grow under the formula 

of the current government. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re not 

denying it. It’s in their own documents. How can they deny it? 

Mr. Speaker, so what does that mean? What does that mean for 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Well I’ll tell you what it means, Mr. Speaker. It means that this 

government’s going to sell off the assets of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan in the Crown corporations. Mr. 

Speaker, it means that they’re going to sell off Crown assets. It 

means that they’re going to privatize Crown corporations by 

stealth. So they’ll sell off portions of Crown corporations or 

they will privatize new entities within the Crown corporations, 

instead of stabilizing and building our family of Crown 

corporations which the people of Saskatchewan value dearly. 

Mr. Speaker, what are they doing? And I’m going to give you 

some examples, and I’m going to quote from their own 

budgetary documents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what do we see them doing? We see them in SaskPower 

with the Northland Power deal: approximately 261 megawatts 

of power, Mr. Speaker, it’s being produced and built by an 

Ontario company, Mr. Speaker. And we’re hearing for rates as 

high as 20 cents a kilowatt hour is what SaskPower will have to 

pay for each kilowatt of power, Mr. Speaker, considerably 

higher than when we produce it ourselves today. 

 

But the most important and most significant thing about this 

deal is, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower are experts in producing 

natural-gas-generated power within the corporation. We don’t 

need to pay a private company from Ontario that needs to make 

a profit. Its shareholders are largely from outside the province 

of Saskatchewan. We don’t need to pay them to make a profit, 

Mr. Speaker. We could keep that money right here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[21:45] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan value keeping 

that money within the province. They don’t want Ontario 

shareholders to be the benefactors of their dollars. They would 

prefer that money to stay in the province of Saskatchewan. It 

makes sense, Ken. It makes sense. It makes sense to the people 

in my community. It makes sense to the people of the province, 

Mr. Speaker. If it doesn’t make sense to the minister 

responsible, then I don’t know what we can do to help him, Mr. 

Speaker, because it’s common sense. 

 

Why would the people of Saskatchewan want, why would the 

people of Saskatchewan want to pay an Ontario company and 

shareholders that may be from anywhere in the world, Mr. 

Speaker, hundreds of millions of dollars for the production of 

power in the province of Saskatchewan, when our own Crown 

corporation are experts in the delivery of that power? And, Mr. 

Speaker, why would the taxpayers of Saskatchewan want to pay 

higher utility rates to pay the shareholders a profit in a private 

corporation, when any profit that would be made, if it were 

done by our own Power Corporation, would remain in the 

province of Saskatchewan to benefit the people of our 

province? Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s important. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, what are they doing in our Crown 

corporations? I’m going to use SaskTel to illustrate this point, 

Mr. Speaker. They are selling off portions of our Crown 

corporations. They’re taking profitable business units that have 

made a return for the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 

and they’re selling them off. And why are they doing that? 

Because they put a policy in place called Sask-first. Mr. 

Speaker, it doesn’t matter that the policy doesn’t make good 

business sense. It doesn’t matter that the policy doesn’t make 

good economic sense, Mr. Speaker. They’ve got an ideological 

drive to destroy our Crown corporations through divesting of 

profitable shares, interest in companies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now one of the most recent is the Hospitality Network, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Hospitality Network provides phone 

and television services in hospitals, Mr. Speaker, both core 

practices of a telecommunications corporation. 

Telecommunications corporations provide phone service. 

SaskTel provides a phone service within the province of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, SaskTel also provides Max, a 

cable service in the province of Saskatchewan to the people of 

the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we had an entity called Hospitality Network 

that provided those services in hospitals around the province 

and around the country, Mr. Speaker. It’s within the core 

business of SaskTel. We do it for people in the province, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s profitable, making about $4 million a year, Mr. 

Speaker. And what did we do? We sold it. We sold a company 

that was making an annual profit to the people of Saskatchewan 

which would be used to reduce our own internal costs of phone 

services in the province, Mr. Speaker. But we sold it. We’ve 

owned this company for many years; there’s no risk continuing 

the business. It had been profitable for many years, returning 

approximately $4 million a year to the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan, but we sold it. We just sold it. 

 

An Hon. Member: — They sold it. They sold it. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well that’s true, Mr. Speaker. It wasn’t we, it’s 

they. It’s the Sask Party government sold it. And they sold it, 

Mr. Speaker, without any good business case to do so. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just quote from the government’s 

budget document. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m talking about their 

budget summary, page 14: 

 

SaskPower plans to add 200 megawatts of wind power to 

its generation profile as early as 2013. Wind power will 

help to satisfy a portion of the province’s future power 

generation needs as well as provide a source of 

renewable, clean power. 

 

Well that we agree with. We think renewable green power from 

wind power is good. But then it goes on to the next paragraph 

and says, “Consistent with the Government’s direction to 

facilitate private sector involvement in the economy, all of this 

generation will be procured from the private sector.” 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4567 

So, Mr. Speaker, here again we have a government who, 

because of its ideology, is saying all of the power generated 

from wind power will be done by the private sector, Mr. 

Speaker. I go on to quote another quotation from their budget 

document on page 19, Mr. Speaker. And it’s under the title 

Crown capital investments, and it says the challenge of 

maintaining our power structure “. . . will require a major 

re-investment in the Province’s electrical infrastructure and 

SaskPower intends to partner with the private sector to ensure 

the reliability and long-term security of the system.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, so again we’re not talking about our own utility, 

our own Crown corporation building our infrastructure, 

maintaining our infrastructure, looking after and securing and 

building our Crown corporation. No, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking 

about privatizing our Crown corporation and privatizing the 

services of our Crown corporations. 

 

And are they telling the people of Saskatchewan this in a 

forward way, a straightforward way that the people of 

Saskatchewan understand their intent is to privatize SaskPower 

and privatize SaskTel operations? No, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

trying to do it by stealth. And Mr. Speaker, I again would like 

to go back to their budgetary document and go to page no. 25. 

Mr. Speaker, it says that “Consistent with the SaskFirst Policy, 

SaskTel, SaskEnergy and SaskPower will sell non-core 

out-of-province assets to support required capital investment in 

Saskatchewan.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, so not only are we going to privatize operations of 

power generation, Mr. Speaker, not only are we going to sell off 

out-of-province, or sell off . . . [inaudible]. Mr. Speaker, it says 

they’re going to continue to sell off profitable business units 

within our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, which will 

destabilize our Crown corporations and lead to this government, 

Mr. Speaker, doing what they said they wouldn’t do. They will 

lead to the privatization of our Crown corporations. Even 

though they say they won’t do it, Mr. Speaker, they’re doing it 

right before the people of Saskatchewan’s eyes. And, Mr. 

Speaker, their own budget document confirms they are going to 

continue to do it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, then we heard today, now privatization 

won’t only be confined to our Crown corporations, Mr. 

Speaker. We heard today that the Minister of Health is going to 

privatize core health services, Mr. Speaker. And what was his 

reply? What was his reply when the members of the opposition 

challenged him that the people of Saskatchewan cared, Mr. 

Speaker? We challenged that the people of Saskatchewan cared 

about their health services. What was his response? No, they 

don’t; they don’t care. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think he’ll find out 

that the people of this province do care. Mr. Speaker, he will 

find out, I’m sure, in November of 2011 that the people of 

Saskatchewan do care. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we need to talk a little bit about health 

services and what they mean to the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. In the budgetary plan in 2007, there was money for 

ambulatory surgical care centres in both Regina and Saskatoon. 

Mr. Speaker, one of the first actions of the new government was 

to cut that funding. Mr. Speaker, that would have provided new 

surgical capacity within the public sector, hospital sector in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and allowed considerable more 

surgeries to be done. 

 

Now this government, this government promised that they were 

going to deal with surgical wait times, Mr. Speaker. Then two 

years into their mandate they say, well we’ll deal with that over 

the next four years. And, Mr. Speaker, what we see today is 

their plan to deal with surgical wait times is about doing it in 

the private sector, Mr. Speaker. And when asked today what his 

financial plan was and to table for the members of this 

legislature his cost structure, Mr. Speaker, he said he didn’t 

know what the cost structure was. He didn’t know if it would be 

cheaper. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got another plan that hasn’t been 

thought through, another plan that we don’t know what the cost 

implications are, another plan that we don’t know how it will 

benefit the people of the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, he’s prepared to pump money into the private sector, 

to privately owned clinics and privately owned surgical 

facilities, Mr. Speaker, but he won’t do it in the public system. 

He won’t do it within the public system that the people of this 

province . . . Medicare was started in this province. People 

value publicly owned, publicly funded, and publicly delivered 

health care services, Mr. Speaker. They value those services. 

 

And I hear some of the members chirping from their seats at the 

back, Mr. Speaker. Why don’t they, if they want to say 

anything, get into the debate, Mr. Speaker? We’ll be prepared to 

debate them anywhere, anyplace, Mr. Speaker, because what 

they’re doing in this province, Mr. Speaker, the people of this 

province won’t take. The people in this province won’t take, 

Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, the more they chirp, Mr. 

Speaker, the more they understand that they’re wrong — they 

know they’re wrong, Mr. Speaker — and the more they tell the 

people of the province that they really don’t care about the 

things they’re doing to the people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a few minutes talking about the 

future tax structure of the province, Mr. Speaker. We saw a 

shining light into the future on Saturday over the weekend when 

the Minister of Finance at a public meeting and dinner of the 

chamber of commerce in Saskatoon talked about harmonizing 

the sales tax, Mr. Speaker. Talked about debating, said it was 

time to debate the harmonization of sales tax, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, within a couple of hours we had the Premier 

trying to slam the door shut. We hope the Minister of Finance 

got his head out of the door before it got slammed shut so he 

didn’t get hurt. We have some concerns; we don’t want to see 

the man hurt. It was so quick that, you know, Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier says it’s no go. Well, Mr. Speaker, one minute the 

Minister of Finance says it’s up for debate. It is a go. The next 

minute, we’ve got the Premier saying no. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what we saw was a moment of truth, a 

moment of reality where the Finance minister actually exposed 

what the government’s true agenda was. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

seen many examples in this House, many, many examples 

where the government said they weren’t going to do something. 

And, Mr. Speaker, lo and behold, they do it. 

 

Now I could go through a litany of examples starting from the 

present going backwards, Mr. Speaker. I could start from the 



4568 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

days before they were government moving forward, but, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m just going to use a few examples. We heard in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, many times prior to the election that 

members weren’t going to, as an example, institute changes to 

the construction and labour relations Act, Mr. Speaker. What do 

we see after they form a government? Changes to the 

construction and labour relations Act, Mr. Speaker. So they say, 

before an election, they won’t do it. They say before an election 

they won’t introduce essential services, and I believe that was 

the Minister of Health saying that. And what are one of the first 

things they do after they form a government? They introduce 

legislation on essential services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s not that the legislation, Mr. Speaker, is the issue. What’s at 

issue here is they say they won’t do it to the people. They tell 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan and the people 

believe them. When asked directly, Mr. Speaker, they asked 

directly of ministers — or then members of the legislature, 

leaders in the opposition caucus — whether they would do 

things, and they said no. They stood fast and said, absolutely 

no. And then they form a government, Mr. Speaker, and they do 

exactly what they said they wouldn’t do. 

 

Then, Mr. Speaker, since they’ve been the government, we’ve 

seen many examples of the very same thing, where they said 

they wouldn’t do it and then they did do it. So, Mr. Speaker, 

what do the people of this province believe? We heard that we 

were going to build a children’s hospital and then the funding’s 

pulled. We heard we were going to build 13 nursing homes in 

rural communities and then the funding’s pulled, Mr. Speaker. 

People of this province believed what the government told them 

when they said they were not going to do something; then they 

did it. They believed them when they said they were going to do 

something; and then they don’t do it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that leads us to today. It leads us to today 

when we ask questions in this House about the amalgamation of 

the GST [goods and services tax] and PST [provincial sales 

tax]. And we asked those questions because the Minister of 

Finance opened the door again. He told the chamber of 

commerce in Saskatoon that it was on the table. It was up for 

debate. It was in play. Then all of a sudden two hours later, the 

Premier says no and slams the door shut, Mr. Speaker. But we 

don’t believe him any more. We don’t believe him because, Mr. 

Speaker, so many things they’ve said were not in play, they did. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we believe we saw a moment of truth where 

the Finance minister took a brave step to tell the people of 

Saskatchewan what was their true agenda. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

unfortunate for the people of Saskatchewan that today, today 

we are facing a government that will harmonize the sales tax. 

And the people of this province need to know and understand 

that that’s the agenda of the current government. They can say 

no, but the Finance minister says yes. They can try to backtrack 

now, but he didn’t have to say anything. He didn’t have to say it 

was in play. He didn’t have to say it was in debate, Mr. 

Speaker, but he did. He told the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan that a harmonized sales tax was in our future. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk for a few minutes about the 

implications of a harmonized sales tax on the people of our 

province, Mr. Speaker. There are many things today that are 

exempt from provincial sales tax, Mr. Speaker. If we harmonize 

the GST and the PST, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to have to pay 

tax on things like restaurant meals. We’re going to have to pay 

tax on children’s clothing. We’re going to have to pay those 

taxes on utilities. We’re going to have to pay those taxes on 

books. We’re going to have to pay those taxes on many things 

today that are exempt, costing the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

hundreds of millions of dollars — Mr. Speaker, hundreds of 

millions of dollars in new taxes on the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[22:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take a couple of minutes and just explain 

for the people of Saskatchewan what the implications of a 

harmonized sales tax do. Mr. Speaker, what it does is shift the 

tax base off business and onto the consumer. Mr. Speaker, the 

most recent numbers we have would estimate between 450 and 

$470 million would be shifted from businesses to consumers in 

new taxes. Mr. Speaker, that represents about $1,600 for each 

Saskatchewan family, $1,600 annually for each Saskatchewan 

family. Mr. Speaker, that’s a significant amount of money. And 

the people of this province have a right to know. In fact not 

only do they have right to know of such an enormous tax shift, 

Mr. Speaker, and have a right to know about the government’s 

plan to do so. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have the Minister of Finance say it’s in 

the works, and we have the Premier saying no. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, quite frankly, the track record of the current Premier 

and government, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province need 

to be aware that we’re facing, if they win the 2011 election, a 

harmonized sales tax in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s of grave concern to the 

people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take some time now to talk about a 

number of very harmful actions by the government in the 

budget that we have before us, Mr. Speaker — 125,000 

chiropractic patients in the province of Saskatchewan who, up 

until budget day or up until April 1, actually two days from 

now, Mr. Speaker, have had their chiropractic care treatments 

supplemented by the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. A 

portion of the treatment was paid for by the government. Mr. 

Speaker, chiropractic care in our province, those 125,000 

people face a significant increase in the cost of getting 

chiropractic treatment starting on Thursday. Mr. Speaker, that’s 

hardly fair. Mr. Speaker, chiropractic care in this province, 

costs $10.4 million to supplement to chiropractic care — the 

increased services within the regular health services system, 

Mr. Speaker, and through doctors and emergencies and 

physiotherapy. 

 

And a study done by the New Democratic Party government in 

1991, when the province was facing perhaps its worst fiscal 

situation in history as a result of eight years of Grant Devine, 

Mr. Speaker, even then — when we had a federal government 

prepared to take away our rights as a province to make us a 

territory because we were bankrupt, Mr. Speaker, as a province 

— even then, chiropractic services were not removed. And they 

weren’t removed because of a study showing that that $10.4 

million that was going out to chiropractic care would cost over 

$30 million in the regular health system. 

 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4569 

Mr. Speaker, cause and effect, Mr. Speaker, needs to be 

analyzed before making a decision. Mr. Speaker, today we have 

a government that made a decision, we don’t believe properly 

analyzed because, had they looked at that decision, Mr. 

Speaker, and looked at the various studies done, they would not 

have made that decision because it won’t save them money in 

the long run. It will cost you money. So, Mr. Speaker, if you’re 

in a budgetary situation where you want to save money, you 

don’t cut something that’s going to cost you more on the other 

end. It doesn’t make economic sense. It doesn’t make good 

budgetary sense, Mr. Speaker. And they can laugh. They can 

laugh, Mr. Speaker, about these types of things. They can talk 

about money going to the pulp mill, Mr. Speaker, a proposal to 

assist keeping a forest industry in Saskatchewan. But, Mr. 

Speaker, in just two short years the members opposite, now the 

government, were left with $2.3 billion, and last year on top of 

that they ran a $1 billion deficit. 

 

They’ve got no, they’ve got no ability to talk to anybody about 

financial management, no ability to lecture anybody about fiscal 

prudence, and no ability to lecture anybody about how to run a 

government. Now, Mr. Speaker, governing is about making 

choices, and those choices affect the people of the province, 

each and every one of them. But it’s about making choices 

today, and people have a right to understand what the impact of 

those choices will mean in the future. And we have a 

government before us today that are willing to mortgage the 

futures of our children and our grandchildren again. 

 

And we saw this record one time in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

getting to be rather difficult to see some of the actions that we 

are seeing by this government who once again is prepared to 

mortgage the future of our children and our grandchildren, Mr. 

Speaker, by changing the budgetary accountability, by changing 

accounting practices so you don’t have to account for the full 

amount of money in a capital project, hiding the true deficit and 

debt through accounting changes and procedures, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s like smoking mirrors . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It’s not 

funny. It’s not funny, Mr. Speaker. It is not funny at all to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan when you have a 

government who’s trying to hide from you what really is going 

on within their province. And it’s going to affect their futures, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s going to affect the children, the grandchildren, 

Mr. Speaker. The people of this province care, but they need to 

have the true facts in front of them in order to make an 

informed decision. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a minute talking about a 

minor item in the budget, but it goes to the very spirit of a 

government that would cut things with the intent, Mr. Speaker, 

to hurt those less fortunate in our communities, with the intent 

to take advantage of those that have less in our communities, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s a minor thing, Mr. Speaker, but they cut 

funding for central vehicle agency vehicles, for third party 

NGOs, Mr. Speaker. And many of those NGOs needed, needed 

the availability of CVA vehicles to offset increased costs in 

their organizations, Mr. Speaker. They couldn’t afford to buy 

vehicles. They couldn’t afford to lease vehicles, Mr. Speaker, 

without having the support and help of the government. 

 

But what did we do? Do we care about third party NGO 

organizations, Mr. Speaker, delivering services to First Nations 

children, to vulnerable children in our communities, to 

vulnerable adults, Mr. Speaker, to transition houses? Mr. 

Speaker, do we have any, did we see any care whatsoever from 

the government? None. They cut this, and it’s such a petty little 

issue in the budget, Mr. Speaker, it goes to show the nature of 

the government before you. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s mean-spirited. 

 

Mr. Yates: — It’s mean-spirited, Mr. Speaker, absolutely. As 

my colleagues . . . I like to use the term mean-spirited. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what else do we see from this government? 

We saw a government who decided unilaterally, without 

thinking through and without understanding the full 

consequences, a government decided they were going to have a 

program called four by four. They were going to reduce the size 

of the civil service 4 per cent in each of four years for a total of 

16 per cent, Mr. Speaker, about 1,800 positions. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when the official opposition raised that 

issue in the House before their budget day, what did they go do? 

Because we know they hadn’t printed their budget; they went 

and moved it from 16 per cent to 15. Mr. Speaker, they were 

trying to hide the fact that we knew what they were planning in 

their budget. Well, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter if we knew 

what they were planning in their budget. It matters about what 

the impact of that budget implication is on our province and on 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s not attainable. And they will find that 

out. They will find that out because it’s not attainable for a 

number of reasons. One, through attrition, many of the people 

who retire . . . And I do admire the fact that they’re trying to do 

that through attrition and in a more humane way than just 

cutting thousands of jobs. I do commend the government for 

attempting to do something in a humane way. For that, I would 

give them credit. But it’s not achievable in the manner in which 

they’re thinking they can do it. 

 

And I would like a few minutes to explain that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, to the members opposite. I’ll tell you why. When a 

snowplow operator in the Department of Highways retires, Mr. 

Speaker, he needs to be replaced because our communities in 

rural Saskatchewan need to have safe highways in the middle of 

the winter, Mr. Speaker. They need to have the ice removed. 

They need to have the snow removed, Mr. Speaker. They need 

to ensure that in fact that those roads are going to be maintained 

in a safe standard. Mr. Speaker, it’s the same thing with a home 

care worker. Mr. Speaker, if a home care worker retires, Mr. 

Speaker, they need to be replaced. They need to be replaced so 

our parents and grandparents get the types of services they need 

to maintain, continue living in their own homes, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s absolutely important to the community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, members opposite can say they have this 

great plan to do things by attrition, but I think they will find 

within a year, I don’t think it’ll take them more than a year to 

find out that they can’t do it in the method in which they plan to 

do it, and that it’s not achievable, Mr. Speaker. And then they 

will move to more draconian methods to try to achieve their 

targets. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what they have to keep in mind, what they 



4570 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

have to keep in mind as well, Mr. Speaker, is there needs to be 

career planning for the civil service. There needs to be the 

ability to maintain a knowledge base and a service base 

throughout the civil service, Mr. Speaker, for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. These people deliver valuable 

services to the people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, 

there are children today in foster care, children today that are in 

the protection of the government, the Department of Social 

Services, Mr. Speaker. And we need to maintain those services 

to protect children. We need to ensure that children are properly 

educated and looked after in our communities and within our 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to just say you will cut jobs and not replace 

jobs or retirements, Mr. Speaker, leaves many programs 

potentially, Mr. Speaker, volatile as we move forward. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, on top of that, we see a government that is 

prepared to attack the civil service, Mr. Speaker. And I’m going 

to use a couple of examples, Mr. Speaker. One would be 

through their essential service legislation. And I’ll say this, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’d like to challenge the minister to review some 

of the cuts, Mr. Speaker, and find out how many of the jobs he 

decided to cut, prior to being cut, were deemed to be essential. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the minister to look at that because he will 

find that many of the positions that he deems don’t need to be 

there, he also deemed to be essential. Mr. Speaker, that tells us 

how ridiculous, how ridiculous their essential service program 

was, when the job’s not essential when you cut it, but it is 

essential before you cut it. Mr. Speaker, if it’s not needed, Mr. 

Speaker, how can it be essential? How can it be essential if it’s 

not needed? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, all I ask of the minister is to think before they 

make such draconian legislation that’s so encompassing that it 

takes away any balance in the collective bargaining system at 

all, to understand, understand that if you’re going to make 

something essential you shouldn’t just cut the job and say it’s 

not needed because why would it have been essential if you 

don’t need it? I think, all I’m asking the minister is to review 

because he will find that many of the jobs that are being cut 

were actually deemed essential. And all I’m saying is, Mr. 

Speaker, I think the minister should review what he’s doing and 

see whether or not it really makes a lot of sense. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a minute or two talking 

about the firing of a civil servant who they believe provided 

information to the opposition. Mr. Speaker, they fired an 

individual and they’re saying . . . what they’re trying to do is 

send a message to the civil service, is if you talk to anybody in 

the opposition, you’re going to be fired. It’s an intimidation 

tactic. We saw this type of intimidation tactic once before by 

government, and that was the government of Grant Devine. 

 

And I’m going to talk about an individual. I’m going to talk 

about an individual who served many years in this Assembly, 

24 years as one of my colleagues. I wasn’t here the entire 24 

years. But, Mr. Speaker, we saw this when my former 

colleague, Mr. Van Mulligen, Harry Van Mulligen was going to 

be moved to Prince Albert unilaterally because of something he 

said against the Grant Devine government. Mr. Speaker, he 

stood up to the Grant Devine government, and what was his 

punishment going to be? They were going to move him 

unilaterally to Prince Albert, knowing full well he couldn’t go, 

which would end his job in the government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that was shameful. It was 

absolutely shameful, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

seeing the same type of tactics today. Now will they work? No 

they won’t, Mr. Speaker, because people will be afraid of a 

bully for a short period of time, but then they start to stand up to 

a bully. Then they start to stand up. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you can push around some people for a 

period of time. You can hurt people that have families and 

children, and that’s exactly what they did with this individual. 

You hurt a person with a young wife and child, Mr. Speaker, 

that they don’t know what their future’s about. But that 

individual will get his day in front of an arbitrator and hopefully 

in front of a court, Mr. Speaker. And it’s going to cost a lot of 

money. It’s going to cost a lot of money. Unfortunately it’s 

taxpayers’ money. It’s not their own. Unfortunately you’re 

playing with taxpayers’ money. 

 

[22:15] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, does anybody over there care about an 

individual? Does anybody care about that person’s family? 

How would any of you like that done to their families, Mr. 

Speaker? I tell you and I give you . . . I tell you something 

today, Mr. Speaker. If we were the government, we wouldn’t 

treat any of their family members or anybody in that manner. 

We wouldn’t do it. We wouldn’t do it. And I’ll tell you why we 

wouldn’t do it, Mr. Speaker, because that is not a humane way 

to deal with people. And we wouldn’t do it, and we won’t do it 

moving forward, Mr. Speaker. We won’t do it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I hear the members up there getting upset 

because even they don’t feel good about what they did. Many of 

them do not feel good about what they did, Mr. Speaker. And I 

actually admire those that don’t feel good. I really do. Because 

then I see some grain of humanity, some grain of humility there, 

and I think there are many members over there who actually 

don’t feel good about that. And for that I respect, I do respect 

them for not feeling good about deliberately hurting people. 

That I respect. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to spend a few 

minutes talking about a number of things contained within the 

budget that are of a fairly serious concern to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Looking at the time, I probably 

won’t be able to conclude my remarks tonight. I will probably 

need an hour or so tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, because I have 

considerable more that I’d like to talk about. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go to the summary documents of 

public debt on page 62. Now, Mr. Speaker, it says that the 

forecast, the actual for 2009 was $7.701 billion, Mr. Speaker, 

public debt. Forecast for 2010 would be 8.097 billion, and the 

estimate for 2011 is 8.792 billion, Mr. Speaker. This is in their 

own document, in a document where they say there’s no 

increase in debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t quite understand. I don’t think the people 

of Saskatchewan understand. And as I pointed out, by their own 

documents, Mr. Speaker, it shows debt increasing each of the 



March 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4571 

next several years through 2014, including the debt to GDP 

ratio, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, how can you say debt isn’t going up when it 

actually is? How do you do that? I don’t understand, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t know how you try to make people believe 

things that aren’t factual, Mr. Speaker. They simply aren’t 

factual by their own documents, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

numerous, numerous places within their own documents, Mr. 

Speaker, there are contradictions to what they have said 

publicly to what their own documents say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go to page 79 talking about their 

schedule of borrowing requirements, Mr. Speaker. It shows that 

their borrowing requirements for this year will be $1.067 

billion, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again we have the 

opportunity to see that the government’s own statement and 

change of debt shows a substantial increase in debt, Mr. 

Speaker. So this is a budget that has a substantial deficit as well 

as substantial debt, Mr. Speaker, that they’re trying to pass off 

as a balanced budget. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what are we seeing on the other side? What 

are we seeing on the program side of this budget, Mr. Speaker? 

What are the people of Saskatchewan experiences as a result of 

this budget? 

 

We’re seeing increased property taxes because the government 

hasn’t lived up to their commitment to the one full per cent of 

PST which municipal governments have counted on. They have 

made their budgetary decisions, they have made their budgetary 

decisions based on a promise by the Government of 

Saskatchewan that they’re not keeping, Mr. Speaker. They 

made their budget estimates based on a promise from the 

Government of Saskatchewan that they’re not keeping. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can say anything you want, but the facts are 

clear. They made the promise; they’re not keeping it . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well sure they do. They know 

you’re not keeping your promise. We know they know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also see proposed tuition increases of around 5 

per cent from the universities, Mr. Speaker, by any estimate at 

least 5 per cent. And the minister may argue with me, but I’d 

like him to because then he might give us the insight to what 

they’re actually going to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing a $2 million cut to early childhood 

development. We’re seeing literacy initiatives cut by $200,000. 

We’re seeing Saskatchewan, we’re seeing Saskatchewan going 

from the most affordable province for people earning $25,000 a 

year or less to fifth in just over two years — from first to fifth. 

Boy, what a drop — first to fifth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we’ve seen in this 

budget that’s of grave concern to the people of the province is 

where the cuts are. We see targeted cuts based on the members’ 

ideology, in our belief. And if the members opposite disagree 

with that, Mr. Speaker, I hope that they make points in their 

budget speeches, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we see the Aboriginal business development program has 

been eliminated, a loss of 786,000 people to help Aboriginal 

people in this province gain employment. Mr. Speaker, First 

Nations and Métis pre-K [pre-kindergarten] education has been 

cut by $237,000. We see the Northern Trappers Association 

grant eliminated. We see Aboriginal relations in the 

Environment department cut by $180,000. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

those are significant cuts to programs to help Aboriginal people 

in employment and education in our province. Now, Mr. 

Speaker, is this a targeted, orchestrated cut to hurt Aboriginal 

people in our province? We believe so, Mr. Speaker. If it’s not, 

if it’s not, Mr. Speaker, let the members defend what they’re 

doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the great defenders of agriculture, the great 

defenders of agriculture, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the 

great defenders of agriculture. Mr. Speaker, they’re cutting 

$93.3 million from the farm income stabilization program. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, $54.3 million is lost to municipalities due to 

the broken promise on PST; 16.9 million in cuts for grants to 

rural municipalities for roads, Mr. Speaker; 2.8 million cut for 

the building communities fund; 1.3 million cut for enterprise 

regions; $3.3 million cut from the Saskatchewan infrastructure 

growth initiative. Mr. Speaker, that’s not to mention the 13 

long-term care facilities in rural Saskatchewan that have been 

cut. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk to you a little bit about some 

of the other cuts we see in this budget, Mr. Speaker. As the hour 

grows closer to the end of the evening, Mr. Speaker, I am 

cognizant that I must move my motion by . . . Oh, pardon me. 

I’m told I can continue on tomorrow and actually move the 

motion tomorrow in my speech, Mr. Speaker. That’s good to 

know . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you very much. 

Amendment, pardon me. Yes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we saw a $3.1 million cut from the Watershed 

Authority. We see $2.2 million has been cut from the industrial 

environmental protection program. We’ve seen $4 million in 

funding for green initiatives programming diverted to recycling 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are seeing cuts across the board that hurt the 

people of this province. Mr. Speaker, and I want to talk for a 

minute about a program that is so important to both the film 

industry and the cultural industry in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and that would be, Mr. Speaker, 

the SCN. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan had one of the few actual licences 

under the CRTC [Canadian Radio-television and 

Telecommunications Commission] to deliver television 

services, to deliver television programming in the province of 

Saskatchewan, one of the few governments that actually had a 

licence. Mr. Speaker, we’re giving it up. We are giving it up, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We don’t think it’s a good idea to give up a communications 

tool like the SCN, Mr. Speaker. It will save about $5 million a 

year, but it is significant to the film industry in our province, 

Mr. Speaker. It is significant to the arts and cultural 

organizations in the province of Saskatchewan to get across 

their programming, Mr. Speaker. They have an opportunity in 

order to profile, Mr. Speaker, the achievements of the cultural 

organizations in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 



4572 Saskatchewan Hansard March 29, 2010 

They’re taking away SCN, Mr. Speaker. They cut over 

$500,000 from heritage programs, Mr. Speaker, and they cut the 

film development tax credit . . . Pardon me, has not been 

changed to be competitive with other jurisdictions, putting our 

film industry at a significant disadvantage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also seen cuts in our park capital of over $4 

million, and funding for regional parks has been cut in half, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what does all this tell us? This tells us, Mr. 

Speaker, that we have before us a budget that on one hand, on 

one hand is not laying out the facts to the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan in a way that is honest and straightforward so 

they can understand them, Mr. Speaker. They’re saying we 

have a budget that has a surplus when we have a deficit. 

They’re saying we have a budget with no debt increase that has 

a significant debt increase in it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see a budget that hasn’t got significant expenditures in the 

upcoming months in it that are going to be there, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m talking there about salary increases for teachers, health care 

workers, Mr. Speaker, and others. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we see a budget, we see a budget that leads 

to greater privatization in the health care system. We see a 

budget that leads to greater privatization in our Crown 

corporations and the sell-off of assets in our Crown 

corporations. Mr. Speaker, destabilizing our Crown 

corporations so that the members opposite, the Government of 

Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Party government led by Brad 

Wall, a premier . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Please address by the constituencies 

and not by their names. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, you are absolutely correct 

and I apologize for using the member’s name, Mr. Speaker. Led 

by a premier, Mr. Speaker, the member from Swift Current, 

who has the intention of destabilizing our Crown corporations 

to sell them off. To privatize them, Mr. Speaker, privatize the 

very assets the people of our province value and cherish. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that they put that agenda 

before the people of Saskatchewan when they were elected in 

2007. It’s not what they said prior to being elected but it’s what 

they are doing today. And I don’t know who the engineer over 

there or the architect of their program is. It is selling off our 

Crown corporations by stealth and selling off business unit by 

business unit, and destabilizing our Crown corporations, Mr. 

Speaker. But I’ll tell you this. Before they were elected in 2007, 

they said they wouldn’t do it. And they’re doing it, Mr. 

Speaker. They’re doing it. 

 

They said before that they wouldn’t privatize the Crown 

corporations, and what are they doing, Mr. Speaker? They’re 

doing just that. The Northland Power deal, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 

made numerous references to in their own budget documents to 

talk about future power generation in our province will be done 

in the private sector. Not by the very Crown corporation the 

people of Saskatchewan built and cherish, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Why do we have SaskPower? Because when SaskPower came 

into being, Mr. Speaker, when it was created as an entity in this 

province, no company would come in and deliver electrification 

to rural Saskatchewan. It was a much-needed utility for the farm 

families of our province, Mr. Speaker. And they cherish it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And members opposite can say we’re talking back in a Stone 

Age. We’re not talking back in the Stone Age. We’re talking 

just a few short years go, Mr. Speaker. And many of their 

parents and their grandparents will remember not having power 

in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, until a man by the name of 

Tommy Douglas decided it was time to do so and he created a 

power corporation, Mr. Speaker, owned and operated by the 

people of this province, whose assets are owned by the people 

of this province, Mr. Speaker. And they went out and they did 

what some thought was impossible to do in any profitable way. 

They provided electricity, electrification to every farmyard in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They provided a quality of life 

improvement in this province that we haven’t seen in many, 

many years. 

 

And at that time the people of this province cherished that. Just 

as they built the telephone company, Mr. Speaker. Just as they 

built in SaskEnergy, a natural gas distribution company, Mr. 

Speaker. These Crown corporations are owned by the people of 

Saskatchewan. They cherish those Crown corporations, Mr. 

Speaker, and they do not want to see them ruined or sold off. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time of adjournment having been 

reached, this House now stands adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow 

afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4543 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4546 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4549 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4552 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4561 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4564 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4544 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4552 

 

 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


