




















































Hansard: November 17, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 12A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6077 

 November 17, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — If members would just allow me this 

afternoon to begin by introducing some guests who have joined 

us in the Speaker’s gallery. We have with us this afternoon Mr. 

Bob Pringle who has been joined by his wife, Tanya, and 

daughter, Rachel, who are here for the announcement that will 

be made a little later in the proceedings. And I’d invite Mr. 

Pringle and his wife and daughter to please stand and be 

recognized. 

 

We also have with us Mr. Kevin Fenwick who’s the Provincial 

Ombudsman and has been acting as the Children’s Advocate for 

the time being. And we welcome Mr. Fenwick. 

 

And joining us as well from the Children’s Advocate’s office 

and from the Ombudsman’s office we have a number of 

employees who are working in those two offices. And I’d invite 

them as well to stand and be recognized. 

 

I recognize the Minister Responsible for Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly I would 

like to introduce representatives of the government’s 

scholarship, bursary, and loan committee. They’re over in the 

west gallery. I’d like to acknowledge and thank them for their 

tireless efforts. 

 

I’ll begin with student leaders who are participating on this 

important committee. Jeanette Murphy, the SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 

student association president for Kelsey and Woodland 

campuses. And it was great to see you earlier, Jeanette. With 

her is Tara Pejski, vice-president for SIAST for the Kelsey 

Campus. Great to see you again. Shanda Rogoschewsky for the 

SIAST student association at Palliser Campus; and Lorisa 

Earnshaw, the SIAST student association president for 

Wascana. I was able to spend a little bit of time with these 

specific student leaders, and we appreciate how engaged you 

are at this present time. 

 

Joining them from the universities, and certainly with equally 

impressive leadership, Kaytlyn Barber, vice-president, external 

affairs from the University of Regina student union, and Blair 

Shumlich, vice-president, external affairs from the USSU 

[University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union] from the 

University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today with these student leaders, they are joined 

by a number of other representatives, both from the ministry 

and various institutions. Tammy Bloor Cavers is here, the 

executive director of student financial assistance within the 

ministry. Wendy Row is here, assistant registrar and manager, 

awards and financial aid from the University of Saskatchewan. 

Wendy, it’s great to see you again. 

 

And welcome, Sandra Kush, donor and alumni relations 

coordinator, the SIAST Wascana Campus; Heather Dorcas, the 

student services coordinator from the Southeast Regional 

College; Russell Fayant, from the Gabriel Dumont Institute of 

Native Studies and Applied Research; Kirk Wosminity, the 

director of strategic initiatives from within the ministry; Karla 

Worsley, acting senior policy analyst, again within the ministry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to you and to all members of the Assembly, please 

join me in welcoming all of these individuals to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the minister in welcoming these individuals, whether they 

be student leaders or working in the administration on one of 

the institutions here in Saskatchewan or in the ministry. I’d like 

to thank them for the good work that they’re doing on 

promoting students, student interests, and we look forward to 

the discussions coming out of the process that they’re engaged 

in and hope that it provides a real benefit to Saskatchewan 

students, Mr. Speaker. So I join with the minister in welcoming 

these individuals to the Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Trade. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to other 

members of the Assembly a gentleman that the Minister of 

Crown Investments Corporation and I met with this morning 

here with the realtors, Mr. Herb Cox who is also our 

Saskatchewan Party candidate in The Battlefords and the next 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for The 

Battlefords. So welcome, Herb. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

would join the Minister of Enterprise and Trade in welcoming 

The Battlefords’ Herb Cox. 

 

I also want to take the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to welcome all 

the realtors who are in the Chamber today, and who have spent 

the last two days meeting with members of the Legislative 

Assembly on both sides of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The realtors here had a very simple message for all of us, Mr. 

Speaker, and that was that affordable housing is important in 

the province of Saskatchewan. They’ve told us about seniors 

and young people looking for work in our communities, about 

students who need affordable housing, Mr. Speaker. And 

whether that’s rental properties or whether that’s buying a 

home, Mr. Speaker, this is a critical issue. 

 

I want to on behalf of the official opposition thank the realtors 

of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Real Estate Association for 

their efforts on behalf of Saskatchewan people this year and in 



6078 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2010 

the past. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to take the opportunity to 

challenge the government to get the debate started, to 

acknowledge that indeed affordable housing is a challenge and 

a priority. And as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, I welcome the 

Saskatchewan Realtors association membership here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And along 

with the member from The Battlefords, I too want to also 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

legislature today the group of realtors that are in your gallery. 

But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, to name just a few of them, 

they’re led by their president, Gary Busch of Saskatoon; Al 

Didur, Chair of their government relations area; and Bill 

Madder, executive vice-president. 

 

This group includes members from all parts of the province, an 

organization with the finger on the pulse of Saskatchewan, and 

whose policy proposals we are always happy to receive. They 

have a meeting today and yesterday with MLAs in the building 

on behalf of their organization. 

 

Yesterday I had the opportunity to meet with four Prince Albert 

realtors, and we discussed the needs of our city and how to 

continue to make this province thrive. Their contributions to 

Prince Albert and continued efforts to enhance our city will 

augment the growth and prosperity of Saskatchewan. 

 

I invite all members to welcome them to the Legislative 

Assembly this afternoon and welcome their contribution to 

public policy in Saskatchewan. And as Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs, I look forward to working with you. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wanted 

to welcome on behalf of the official opposition a large 

delegation of citizens that have come to this Assembly 

representing a number of people who are concerned about the 

reduction of educational assistants in the province of 

Saskatchewan. These folks have travelled to the Assembly from 

across the province to make their voice heard. 

 

Today we have in the gallery educational assistants, parents, 

organizations that are concerned about special-needs young 

people in the province of Saskatchewan and students, Mr. 

Speaker. And I want to particularly welcome a young man — 

23 years old, I think — Shawn Rosenfeldt who is here. He is 

now a heavy-duty mechanic in the province of Saskatchewan, 

and he pays taxes in the province of Saskatchewan. This is a 

young man that had the benefit of an educational assistant in 

order that he could qualify to go into heavy-duty mechanics at 

SIAST. 

 

This is a courageous group of people. They are here because 

they’re advocating on behalf of children and youth in this 

province. And I want to welcome them very much to the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Seated 

in your gallery is a friend and a constituent and a civic leader 

from the city of Swift Current. He is a practising lawyer in 

Swift Current and currently on city council. I’d like all 

members to join with me in welcoming Ryan Plewis to his 

Legislative Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with other 

members in welcoming Mr. Pringle to the Assembly today. And 

congratulations, Bob. 

 

To the realtors and to the EAs [educational assistant], a special 

welcome to all of you. 

 

My main intent though is to introduce Jeanette Wicinski-Dunn, 

who is with us here today. Jeanette is the president of the 

chamber of commerce in Big River. She is also a past 

councillor for the town. She is as well involved in doctor 

recruitment in the area and a number of other areas including 

the forestry strategy for that part of the province, and I might 

add, most importantly, running for candidate for the New 

Democratic Party in Sask Rivers. Welcome, Jeanette. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, too, would like to 

welcome Jeanette. Jeanette and I have been on a lot of meetings 

together in Big River, trying to develop the community. And 

it’s nice to see you here. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I 

would like to introduce a couple of prominent labour leaders in 

the east gallery. We have with us today President Larry Hubich 

of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour and Tom Graham, 

president of the Canadian Union of Public Employees. I ask all 

members to welcome these two labour leaders to the Assembly 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s also my pleasure 

to introduce to you, through you, and to all members of the 

legislature a woman who is sitting in the east gallery. Her name 

is Jen Britton. She is the spokesperson for the Save our 

Saskatchewan coalition. 

 

She’s been doing a phenomenal job travelling across the 

province. She’s invited to meetings from all different sectors 

and all sorts of interested groups who want to learn more about 

why the Saskatchewan Party is attacking the Crown 

corporations in Saskatchewan. And I want to commend her for 

the good work that she’s doing. So welcome to the legislature, 

Jen. And I’d like to ask all members of the legislature to join 

me in welcoming her. Thank you. 



November 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6079 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the members opposite, and on behalf of the government 

welcome Mr. Hubich and Mr. Graham to the Assembly today. 

We always value their input. We certainly appreciate the hard 

work that they do on behalf of their membership and are 

pleased that they’re here today and look forward to working 

with them in the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I’d like 

to welcome the group that’s here to lobby on behalf of our 

students and our schools. And being that my son was also a 

young man who needed assistance and got that assistance in our 

education system, we are very proud of the hard work that . . . 

Tutors worked with him to make sure that he got an education 

and did the best he could. 

 

I would just like to welcome you here and say I support you 100 

per cent in your endeavours. I wish you all the best. And on 

behalf of I guess all the kids in our province, we need to make 

sure that everyone has a fair, level playing field and an 

opportunity at education. I commend what you are doing. And 

welcome to your legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned 

over the steady deterioration and safety of our highways. Mr. 

Speaker, I will read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and 

junction of No. 1 in order to improve the safety of the 

Saskatchewan’s motoring public. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition was signed by the good folks from 

Fort Qu’Appelle and Dysart, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present petitions on behalf of the people that support the 

Saskatchewan Seniors Association that has approximately 180 

senior centres throughout the province, the vast majority of 

those in rural Saskatchewan. And these centres provide such a 

needed recreation and social activity spot and do a lot to 

contribute to the enhanced quality of life for many of the 

seniors who use them. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Without these senior centres, many of those seniors would end 

up in special care homes or long-term care facilities or in 

hospital. And many of them are facing high costs of utilities and 

are on the brink of closure. So the undersigned . . . The petition 

reads as follows: 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan: to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to provide the 

much-needed funding to assist seniors’ recreation centres 

to remain open and active within their communities. 

 

This is more than 50 signatures from the communities of 

Denare Beach, Edam, St. Walburg, Frenchman Butte, Mervin, 

Spruce Lake, and Paradise Hill. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

petition that I want to lay on the Table that is signed by a 

number of people from our province. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Cause the government to provide funding for the required 

number of educational assistants to provide special needs 

students with the support they need and maintain a 

positive learning environment for all Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

I so present on behalf of citizens from Major, Regina, 

Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and, I believe, Fort Qu’Appelle, Mr. 

Speaker. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition regarding the need for hospice and palliative 

care here in Saskatchewan. 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that all Saskatchewan people deserve quality 

end-of-life and bereavement care; that hospice and 

palliative care is known to help enhance the quality of life 

for those facing advancing illness, death, and 

bereavement; that a publicly funded and administered 

hospice and palliative care system, including residential 

hospices, would increase end-of-life care options for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan cause the 

provincial government to enhance and increase publicly 

funded and administered hospice and palliative care, 

including in-home hospice services and residential 

hospices, in order to ensure that all Saskatchewan people 

have access to high quality end-of-life care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Regina. I so present. 

 



6080 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m here 

to present another petition on behalf of the residents of Furdale. 

 

The government ministry has directed SaskWater to cut off 

supplies of water for domestic use to Furdale customers. The 

same government ministry has directed that customers may no 

longer treat non-potable water using methods approved by Sask 

Health. The Furdale residents, in dealing in good faith with 

SaskWater for over 30 years, have paid large amounts for the 

domestic systems and in-home treatment equipment, as well as 

for livestock irrigation lines. And the alternative water supply 

referred to by the government ministry is a private operator 

offering treated, non-pressurized water at great cost, with no 

guarantee of quality, quantity, or availability of water. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Furdale and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the true cost of human 

suffering or loss of human life cannot be measured in dollars 

and cents. And yet this government allows the fines levied 

against companies for violations of The Occupational Health 

and Safety Act to be treated as tax-deductible expenses. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to amend the law so companies will not 

be allowed to get a tax deduction for fines levied against 

them under The Occupational Health and Safety Act and 

regulations, and to remove the existing cap on fines levied 

against such companies. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by residents of Hudson Bay, 

Annaheim, Creighton, and Denare Beach. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

present a petition in support of affordable rents and housing for 

The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. The signatures on the petition 

represent residents of some Battlefords area apartments that 

have recently been given note of rent increases of more than 40 

per cent. They note the vacancy rate for rental accommodation 

is very low and that the number of units is becoming very small. 

Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call 

upon the Government of Saskatchewan to develop an 

affordable housing program that will result in a greater 

number of quality and affordable rental units to be made 

available to a greater number of people throughout The 

Battlefords and that will implement a process of rent 

review or rent control to better protect tenants in a 

non-competitive housing market. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures are from residents of The 

Battlefords and area. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 

from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive deficit budgets. They reference the 

billions of dollars of debt growth that’s accruing underneath this 

government — $4.2 billion in just over the next four years, Mr. 

Speaker — and they understand what kind of risk this provides 

to the future of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by good folks and concerned citizens 

from Regina and Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Tribute to Howard Anderson 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, yesterday 

the George Gordon First Nations community said goodbye to 

one of its most prominent members. Howard St. Clair Anderson 

passed away last Friday night and was laid to rest yesterday in 

his home community. 

 

I met Mr. Anderson a number of years ago, and our most recent 

meeting was this past Remembrance Day when we were both 

present at the Gordon’s Band office for the unveiling of a 

special veterans’ cairn. One of the things about Howard 

Anderson is he was always welcoming and made you feel very 



November 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6081 

comfortable. And I think those of us that knew him over the 

years will always remember his hearty laugh. 

 

Mr. Anderson was many things, Mr. Speaker. He was a 

grandfather, a father, a great-grandfather, a businessman, a 

sports enthusiast. But what he will be most remembered for, 

Mr. Speaker, is his tireless efforts on behalf of First Nations 

veterans. He worked tirelessly on their behalf to correct some of 

the inequities that they received as not being recognized for 

their service to our country, and as grand chief of the Veterans 

Association, he was able to obtain some redress, Mr. Speaker. 

One of the things he’ll also be remembered for is tireless efforts 

for the construction of the veterans’ teepee at the First Nations 

University, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The time we’re allotted does not allow one to pay true tribute to 

a man so great. So, Mr. Speaker, Howard Anderson was a 

person who made a great difference in his community and our 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Recovering Our Connection at City Park Collegiate 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. City Park 

Collegiate is located in my constituency of Saskatoon 

Meewasin. It offers alternative versions of compulsory courses 

from grades 8 to 12 as well as courses in fine arts, technology, 

horticulture, and food services. Its students come from all areas 

of Saskatoon and from all socio-economic levels and 

backgrounds. 

 

City Park Collegiate places strong emphasis on programming 

that is culturally responsive. Community school coordinator 

Janie Funk and other City Park staff organize an annual round 

dance and other events for students and the community that 

includes hand drumming, bannock making, and other aspects of 

First Nations and Métis culture. 

 

This past week, City Park offered Recovering Our Connection 

in which traditional knowledge keepers led sessions on our 

connection with each other and with our world. Patti Yuzicappi 

from the Whitecap Dakota First Nation discussed the traditional 

roles of Aboriginal women and parenting and about healthy 

living. Tommy Christian from the Fort Peck Sioux and 

Assiniboine Tribe in Montana talked about the traditional and 

modern roles of Aboriginal men and the spiritual beliefs that 

underpin Aboriginal life and customs. Bob Badger from the 

Kawacatoose First Nation spoke about his life as an artist 

grounded in his culture. Cort Dogniez, a Métis educator from 

Saskatoon, led a workshop on Métis history on the prairies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, City Park Collegiate continues to develop and 

offer innovative programs that honour the cultural diversity in 

our province. 

 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating City Park 

Collegiate staff and the Saskatoon Public School Board in these 

endeavours. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

Saskatchewan Addictions Awareness Week 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November 14th to the 

20th is Saskatchewan Addictions Awareness Week. 

Saskatchewan Addictions Awareness Week or SAAW aims to 

raise awareness of alcohol, drugs, gambling, and potential 

addiction concerns. Mr. Speaker, the theme of this year’s 

awareness week is Your Community has the Connections to 

Help. 

 

During SAAW, community partners have planned activities that 

promote healthy lifestyle choices; educate people about 

substance abuse, misuse, and signs of addiction; and let people 

know where to go for help. The Ministry of Health funds a full 

range of alcohol and drug treatment services. There are over 

300 treatment beds and outpatient services in over 50 centres 

across the province. 

 

In Regina, a new 45-bed brief detox facility opened early this 

spring. And this October, Mr. Speaker, we officially broke 

ground on a 15-bed youth addictions treatment centre in Prince 

Albert, a facility that will greatly increase access for our youth 

to the treatment programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in October the What Else Got Wasted prevention 

campaign aimed at youth won an Achievement in 

Communication Excellence Award. This campaign graphically 

showed the pitfalls of alcohol abuse, and I would like to 

congratulate all who worked on this effective campaign. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my fellow MLAs and I would like to recognize 

the tremendous work of those in the addictions field and the 

SAAW task force for their ongoing efforts. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Celebrating Saskatchewan Writers and Publishers 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, today and yesterday are great days 

for Saskatchewan literature and publishing. I’m proud to rise 

today to recognize the achievements of Dianne Warren of 

Regina and Allan Casey of Saskatoon, two outstanding citizens 

who have won the Governor General’s fiction and non-fiction 

literary prizes, respectively. The 2010 GG [Governor General’s 

Literary Awards] winners were announced in Montreal 

yesterday, and the awards will be presented at Rideau Hall on 

November 25th. 

 

Dianne Warren’s book, Cool Water, is the story of Juliet, 

Saskatchewan, a small town of approximately 1,000 people. In 

the space of a single day, it tells the overlapping and 

intertwined stories of several people who live in or near the 

town, giving the reader an intimate portrait of a farming town 

and its people stumbling towards change and the future. 

 

Saskatoon’s Allan Casey, his book is called Lakeland: Journeys 

into the Soul of Canada and explores Canada’s connection with 

its freshwater system. It is described as part geographical study 

and part memoir, and he looks at the recent surge in 

development around our lakes and wildernesses. 

 



6082 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2010 

Also, Regina’s Sandra Birdsell was a finalist for her book, 

Waiting for Joe. Coteau Books got an award for publishing the 

teen novel Fishtailing by Wendy Phillips. And today, right as 

we are here, Glen Sorestad, our first poet laureate from 

Saskatchewan, is receiving the Order of Canada at Rideau Hall. 

So let’s celebrate all these great writers and publishers. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Diabetes Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

acknowledge November as Diabetes Awareness Month and to 

encourage all members as well as all residents of Saskatchewan 

to note the seriousness of this condition that is the leading cause 

of death in Canada by this disease. 

 

In our province more than 70,000 people, or 1 in 14, are 

affected directly by diabetes, and this number continues to 

increase. Furthermore, 20 people are diagnosed with this 

disease every hour, every day. If not managed properly, 

diabetes is a condition that poses serious life-threatening 

complications including heart disease, stroke, kidney failure, 

and blindness. 

 

Members of this Assembly will have the opportunity to show 

their commitment today to healthy living and diabetes 

awareness by participating in a blood glucose testing session 

today, 2010, at 11:30 at the Saskatchewan gallery, facilitated by 

the Canadian Diabetes Association. 

 

Since its creation in 1953, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Diabetes 

Association has provided leadership in raising the profile of 

diabetes and improving the lives of those living with that 

disease. I know; I’m one of them. 

 

The association provides essential information to those at risk 

and continues to accelerate the search for a cure through the 

funding of world-class research. Mr. Speaker, I would ask the 

Assembly to join me in thanking the Canadian Diabetes 

Association for all the work they do in Saskatchewan and in 

Canada. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

La Ronge Elder Receives Lifetime Achievement Award 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I mentioned the importance of 

elders to the Aboriginal community in the past. And I’ve 

mentioned my gratitude for support, guidance, wisdom, and 

prayers from Elder Catherine Charles of Lac La Ronge Indian 

Band has provided to me personally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although I share a personal relationship with her, 

an elder is a resource of the community. In that way, Catherine 

has guided many people, young and old. An elder is not just a 

senior citizen, but someone who has gained respect from their 

community for the good work they have done during their 

lifetime. 

On Monday, October the 18th, Mr. Speaker, Elder Catherine 

Charles received the Women of the Dawn Lifetime 

Achievement Award at the First Nations Awards ceremony at 

Dakota Dunes complex near Saskatoon. The Lifetime 

Achievement Award, Mr. Speaker, focuses on the individuals 

who have displayed and demonstrated achievements in many 

areas. 

 

Those who have received this award have worked towards the 

enrichment of their communities, have a long story of 

accomplishments, and have played a leading role in the 

development of First Nations communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to please join 

me in congratulating Elder Catherine Charles on her 

achievement and life’s work. Tēniki, Catherine. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Report Impaired Drivers Program 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In March of this year, 

the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority and SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] joined with the 

Saskatoon Police Service to launch the Report Impaired Drivers 

program, the acronym of R-I-D, in Saskatoon. 

 

The RID program encourages people to pull over and call 911 if 

they see a driver they think is impaired. Mr. Speaker, it appears 

that Saskatoon residents heard this message loud and clear. 

From the program’s launch in March through to the end of 

October, Saskatoon police received almost 1,800 calls reporting 

a suspected impaired driver. Thanks to these calls from the 

public, I’m very pleased to share with you that the Saskatoon 

police have now caught and charged 100 impaired drivers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of the RID program’s success in 

Saskatoon, the program expanded to Regina in September. And 

between the 8th of September and October 31st, there were over 

300 calls made to 911 reporting a suspected impaired driver. As 

a result, Regina police intercepted 12 drivers who were 

subsequently charged with impaired driving offences. And in 

addition to these charges, police sent warning letters to more 

than 700 vehicle owners advising them that their vehicle was 

reported as possibly being operated by an impaired driver. 

 

This sends a strong message that there are many eyes on the 

lookout for impaired drivers in Regina and Saskatoon, Mr. 

Speaker. And I’d like to thank the citizens of those two cities 

respectively who have called to report a suspected impaired 

driver. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Funding for Education 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier. It deals with the deteriorating finances of the province 

of Saskatchewan. The people of the province know that when 

this government took power, there was $2.3 billion in surplus. 

We’re now running deficits two years in a row. And this 



November 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6083 

mismanagement is now having a harmful effect on the 

education system in the province. 

 

Yesterday in The StarPhoenix, it was reported that the 

Saskatoon Public School Board would not be getting the $2 

million they need for increased enrolment costs. In fact Kevin 

Waugh, who’s a trustee of the school board, says, and I quote: 

“This is the second consecutive year we’re short. We see a 

pattern forming here with this government.” 

 

To the Premier: why is it that the families and students in 

Saskatoon and other areas of the province have to suffer for the 

mismanagement of his government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is truly a 

delight to stand today and address this particular issue when 

education is so important to our province. Since we formed 

government, Mr. Speaker, the school divisions have received a 

13 per cent increase, which is quite significant in only three 

budgets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon school division received at the 

beginning of this year, or at our budget year, $185 million, and 

the discrepancy is over a $1 million lift to the LINC [local 

implementation and negotiation committee] agreement. So 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked to the board Chair and told 

him that the $1 million . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I think guests would like to also 

hear the answer. I’d like the opposition to allow the minister to 

finish her response. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve talked to 

the board Chair, Mr. Morrison, and I have informed him that 

the $1 million LINC agreement lift will be addressed along with 

other LINC agreements. All of the school boards were given a 

budget earlier this year. It had a 2 per cent increase over last 

year, and the other school boards understand that and are 

working within that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the sad thing is the school 

boards across the province, but most of all the public school 

board in Saskatoon, don’t have much choice if the Premier and 

the government refuse to give them money for the increase in 

enrolment, which is what this money is for. They don’t have 

much choice but to live with it. But what sense does it make 

that the families in Saskatoon and other parts of the province 

have to have inferior education as a result of the lack of funding 

for increased enrolment? 

 

The minister says, and I quote, in a letter that she sent on 

November 4, 2010 to the Chair of the board, Mr. Ray Morrison, 

and I quote the minister as saying: 

 

In conversations between the ministry and the school 

division prior to the budget submission, your school 

division was instructed not to include grants other than 

those approved on budget day. However, additional grant 

revenues were submitted. 

How is it possible that, as enrolment goes up, the minister’s 

solution is to direct the board not to ask for more money? How 

is that possible that families suffer as a result of the 

mismanagement of this government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

unfortunate that member doesn’t understand. This is a practice 

that’s been long going. Any increases in enrolment in a year is 

addressed in the following year’s budget. However there was a 

LINC agreement increase request, Mr. Speaker, that I have 

assured them will be coming forward as soon as we have all of 

the LINC agreement increases that have occurred with all of the 

different school divisions. 

 

I want to repeat, Mr. Speaker, that we have increased school 

division budgets over the last three years by 13 per cent, which 

is very significant. The Saskatoon Public School Division 

budget that they had is over $185 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we’re not going to do is what those members opposite 

did, which was ignore the issues of property tax for education. 

They did nothing to change the system, Mr. Speaker. They said 

the status quo was not on, but they did absolutely nothing about 

it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, question to the minister. 

The fact is that when the changes were made to the policy 

around funding, there was a promise made that a new formula 

would be in place. That has not happened. We’re now in our 

third year. This is not the first year that the board has been 

shortchanged in Saskatoon. 

 

Last year it was 1.5 million; this year it’s 1.9 — for a total of 

$3.4 million for education for students and the increase in 

enrolment. Now the minister makes light of the fact and says, 

well 3.4 million, that doesn’t matter. Well to the families in 

Saskatoon, it makes a huge difference on the quality of 

education. 

 

The minister will want to explain how, at a time when the 

government has $2 million for a big, flashy ad campaign to 

attract more people to Saskatoon, we don’t have the money to 

finance education, that we’re short 2 million, almost exactly the 

same amount, in the Saskatoon school board. How is that 

possible that in the priorities you have, you choose an ad 

campaign over the children in Saskatoon? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would love to tell the 

member opposite one more time, since we’ve been government 

we’ve increased funding to school divisions by 13 per cent. 

That is quite significant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for early learning and child care, we have 

increased that by 33 per cent, Mr. Speaker. For provincial 

libraries, we’ve increased that by 23 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We 

have had the largest education property tax reduction in the 

history of our province. It is something the people of this 



6084 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2010 

province have asked for. It is something those very families 

he’s talking about asked for, Mr. Speaker. It’s something that 

when they were in government they promised time and time 

again and . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The minister may 

complete her answer. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the reduction in property 

tax and to move the responsibility for education funding to the 

province was asked for for decades within this province. When 

they were in government, they promised over and over again 

they would look at it. They did absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker. 

They did not want to do anything about it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Educational Assistants 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I do note the increased 

spending by 32 per cent across government services, but only 

13 per cent for school boards. Now, Mr. Speaker, educational 

assistants provide support to students with special needs, 

including learning disabilities and behavioural problems. EAs 

are an essential part of the team that provides support to 

students with different needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, students, parents, grandparents, and educational 

assistants are here today from across the province and they’re 

looking for an answer to a very simple question. To the 

government: what is their government’s policy with respect to 

reducing the numbers of educational assistants to our province’s 

special needs students? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Very direct and very simple answer — 

there is not a direction from this government on employment 

numbers. That is the responsibility of the school divisions. It 

has always been and it remains so. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, we all have to keep the needs of the 

children first, and that is what is extremely important to this 

government as it is to the school divisions. Education assistants 

play a very important role in that. 

 

However parents more and more are asking for additional 

supports for their children. Our government recognizes this, as 

does the school divisions, so we are moving towards a new 

model that recognizes the need of the person, child, rather than 

just a diagnosis. 

 

As well, the school divisions have moved towards a personal 

program plan. Mr. Speaker, that includes the parent and all of 

the caregivers in that child’s life to help plan what is the best 

supports for that child. They agree upon that plan, and that is 

the funding that the school division asks for. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister claims that 

this isn’t her policy. But this is a time of rising enrolments. This 

a time of increased numbers of students who require intensive 

supports, and the number of EAs in our province is falling. 

 

Between 2007 and 2008, the last year of the former NDP [New 

Democratic Party] government, and 2009-10, the last year for 

which we have numbers, the number of educational assistants in 

the province of Saskatchewan has fallen by 200 positions. 

That’s according to the minister’s own numbers. 

 

So to the minister: if it’s not a policy of the Sask Party 

government, then how do you account for the fact that the 

number of EAs in the province is falling at a time when we 

need them more than ever? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At one time, 

unfortunately, special needs children were kept at home, and 

they were often hidden. And that was not acceptable within our 

province. And over time we have evolved where we have more 

and more inclusion of special needs children. That movement is 

also under way within our school divisions. We have more 

inclusion in the schools than ever before. So I want . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I think there are guests here 

who would like to hear the response to the member’s question. I 

recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

once again recognize the good work that the EAs do within the 

school division. However the parents are asking for other 

support along with the EAs, Mr. Speaker, and the school 

divisions are trying very hard to meet the requests of those 

parents. 

 

If you look at what happened over the last year, Mr. Speaker, 

there was a reduction of EAs, of 80 EAs across our entire 

province. However there was an increase of 286 other 

specialists — be it occupational therapists, speech pathologists, 

special education teachers — that were brought into the school 

divisions. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, just for the minister’s 

information, we’ve had a policy of inclusion in Saskatchewan 

classrooms for decades. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, many students and parents credit the support 

they receive from their EA for helping them succeed in school 

and get the best possible start in life. Shawn Rosenfeldt is one 

such person. Shawn needed help with his math in order to 

prepare him for his entrance exam at SIAST. His EA, Monica, 

gave up her breaks and her lunches to help him. Shawn pays 

taxes and is a productive citizen today because of the support he 

received from an educational assistant. 



November 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6085 

Tina Friesen has a learning disability. Tina was so inspired by 

the support she received from her EA that she went to SIAST 

and has now qualified for her EA certificate. 

 

To the minister: why is her government pushing school 

divisions to cut a support that has made a difference for people 

like Tina and people like Shawn and so many others? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to repeat one 

more time, our government’s not pushing for this. And I can tell 

that member that another successful, very young adult in this 

province that is paying taxes. Her name is Lindsay Harpauer. 

And Lindsay Harpauer had an EA. She has special needs. She 

had an EA, and I can’t say enough about the EA that was there 

for her. 

 

We are very, very, very supportive of inclusion of the parents 

and the decision. The parents are asking for more than just an 

EA in some circumstances — not in all — and the school 

boards are trying to address the requests of those parents. 

 

I’ve talked to a number of associations. I have talked with the 

Teachers’ Federation since the school year began. I have talked 

to the League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 

Superintendents. I’ve talked to some of the school boards. And 

I have asked if they received more concerns this school year 

than before and they have told me no, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My office received a lot of phone calls and correspondence 

throughout the summer. But since the school year started, there 

has been no correspondence on this issue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Prairie Spirit cut over 40 

EAs this spring for this following year. But anyway, so the 

minister claims this isn’t her policy. But last year’s funding 

guide for school divisions made it clear that funding is tied to 

reducing EAs. 

 

Dawn and Jeff Eilers are parents with two children. Their son 

has been diagnosed with autism, but only gets one hour support 

a day. Their daughter has a learning disability. She’s in grade 3 

but has to attend grade 1 classes if she wants the support of an 

EA. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the Eilers represent hundreds of parents 

across the province who want the answer to a very simple 

question: why are their children being denied the support of 

people like Tina Friesen and Monica, the kind of support that 

allowed Tina and Shawn and so many others, including the 

minister’s daughter, to succeed in life? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the funding is tied to the personal program plans, which is done 

basically in a circle of care. It includes the teacher. It includes 

the parents. It includes the EA that has been involved with the 

child. It includes other specialists that work with that child. 

There is a joint decision made, and that is the funding request 

from that decision that came forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I met with the Saskatchewan Association of 

Community Living to see if there was any concerns or any 

increase of concerns that they had been receiving. Their answer 

was no, but they would continue to watch it closely, as will we, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Down Syndrome Society had this to say, Mr. Speaker, and 

I quote: 

 

A few of our members have commented that they are 

seeing positive results with recent increases in specialized 

professional staff to our children’s school teams. 

Involvement of more professional staff has seen a shift 

towards stronger shared accountability among all team 

members. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Supply of Physicians 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Health 

careers website shows 121 physician vacancies in the province. 

That’s a 40 per cent increase in doctor vacancies in the province 

since 2007. We now know that 300 resident physicians have 

been without a contract for over two years. We know that the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association that represents 

Saskatchewan doctors has been without a contract since April 

of 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can the minister say with a straight face that 

he is working to fix the doctor shortage in rural Saskatchewan 

when he is refusing to negotiate a meaningful, fair contract with 

300 resident physicians and the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical 

Association]? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we know that negotiations are under way between the 

SMA, PAIRS [Professional Association of Internes and 

Residents of Saskatchewan], as well as with the Ministry of 

Health. Those negotiations will take their time. I think they’re 

getting very close to a final agreement. I sure hope they are, as 

do the physicians, as do the patients in our province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But what I will say is that we acknowledge that there is a 

physician shortage in this province, as we did acknowledge that 

there is a nurse shortage in this province. There is one reason 

why they are on the opposition side and we’re on the 

government side, is because we’ve listened to nurses and we 

listen to physicians. And we’ve listened to patients and have 

realized that and are taking steps to correct it. That opposition 

never once listened to those professionals, and that’s why 

they’re on that side and will be on that side for a very long time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



6086 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2010 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. According to the 

SMA, contract negotiations are going nowhere, despite what the 

minister seems to think, and there is no hint of an agreement in 

the near future. That’s according to the SMA. I don’t know who 

he’s talking to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s hypocritical for the minister to talk about a 

physician recruitment agency when he won’t negotiate with the 

doctors that are here in Saskatchewan. The president of the 

SMA is fearful that doctors are going to leave Saskatchewan if 

contract negotiations continue to be stalled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is the minister saying to communities like 

Central Butte, Spiritwood, Yorkton, Moose Jaw, Big River, 

Wakaw, Kamsack, Coronach, and Lestock, to name a few, who 

are losing services because they don’t have enough doctors? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as negotiations continue 

. . . And they are negotiating. I would not consider the progress 

of the negotiations stalled whatsoever. I think there is good 

progress being made. And it always seems that when we get 

close to the final agreement, we’ll hear the concerns from 

especially the unions, whether it was SUN [Saskatchewan 

Union of Nurses] at that time, whether it’s the provider unions, 

of the concerns. And shortly after, we seem to find an 

agreement. So hopefully that is the way this contract 

negotiations go. 

 

But what I will say, Mr. Speaker, is for years under that 

government, they had 60 training seats for the College of 

Medicine and 60 training seats for the residency positions — far 

short. In fact it was the smallest college of medicine in Canada. 

And in fact under the NDP at one point, the College of 

Medicine was so close to losing its accreditation under the 

NDP, Mr. Speaker, we wouldn’t have even had a College of 

Medicine had they kept in power, I’m sure. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A nice try at diversion. 

But, Mr. Speaker, people in rural Saskatchewan are sometimes 

travelling hours to see a doctor because that minister can’t solve 

the doctor crisis, and he’s refusing to negotiate with the doctors 

that we do have. 

 

The president of the SMA said November 12th that this was a 

frustrating contradiction where the government seems to 

understand the importance of doctors in keeping a strong health 

system, but “However, this government seems more reluctant to 

recognize the need to give physicians reasons to stay and 

reasons to come to our province.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister is off-loading doctor recruitments 

onto municipalities and failing to negotiate the doctors’ 

contracts. Why is he ignoring rural families? And is it that he 

has no money or that he just doesn’t care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we have a very, very 

strong physician recruitment strategy. First of all, it is training 

more of our own citizens here in Saskatchewan through the 

College of Medicine. Second, it’s attracting College of 

Medicine students into Saskatchewan to fill the residency 

positions, because we have more residency positions than we 

have seats in the College of Medicine. 

 

We are also changing the assessment process, Mr. Speaker. In 

the future we’ll no longer just accept physicians from seven 

countries. We’ll be accepting them from around the world — 

something that that former government never did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a physician recruitment agency that is 

working with communities, that’s working with health regions, 

that’s working with the College of Medicine, to make sure that 

we have the proper complement. We’ve had some spots where 

there have been shortages, Mr. Speaker. Those are filled. Be it 

in Nipawin, an increase of . . . how many per cent? Fifty-four 

per cent, Mr. Speaker, 54 per cent. 

 

We have communities of Leader, Leader that has increased the 

number of physicians, Mr. Speaker. We’re seeing communities 

across the province filling those vacancies. There are still spots; 

we’ll be addressing those in the near future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facilities 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, all across Saskatchewan, 

communities have worked diligently to raise their 35 per cent 

share for new health facilities, new long-term care. Bake sales, 

dinners, fundraisers — lots of hard work, Mr. Speaker, from 

lots of good people. 

 

But the Sask Party has signed a $27 million loan guarantee with 

an organization whose lawyer, Rod Donlevy, is the brother to 

the Premier’s chief of staff. Michael Stensrud donated 16,000 to 

the Sask Party and 1,000 in the last election to the Minister of 

Justice, and now has the untendered contract to build the 

facility. Now we hear rumours that the electrical company 

owned by the Minister of Justice’s brother has the electrical 

contract. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people across this province want to know, and 

they deserve to know, how much do they have to donate to the 

Sask Party to get $27 million loan guarantees, untendered 

building contracts, or electrical contracts? Is it $16,000? What’s 

the magic number, Mr. Minister? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell one magic 

number. Under the NDP, zero long-term care beds increase 

under 16 years. In the first three years of this government, 

there’ll be an increase of over 100 long-term care beds under 

the Sask Party government. Those are pretty magical numbers 

for seniors that are waiting in acute care settings. 

 

[Interjections] 

 



November 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6087 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, those are pretty magical 

numbers to seniors that are sitting in acute care centres, acute 

care facilities in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

around $1,500 a day to keep a person in an acute care centre. 

Once we get these beds in place in Saskatoon, that cost drops 

way down to about 170, $180 a day. 

 

It makes perfect sense, Mr. Speaker. This is a good deal for 

Saskatchewan, but even better, it’s a good deal for seniors in 

this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, if this government and that 

minister doesn’t like the nature of these questions on this 

project . . . From day one, full stop, period, should have been 

tendered, Mr. Speaker. Not doing so, not doing so, Mr. Speaker, 

concerns the public, and it makes them suspect to corruption, 

suspect to abuse, and suspect to waste, Mr. Speaker. Tendered 

projects are the way to go. 

 

The minister says that this is just a private deal — nothing to do 

with him and nothing to do with his government. But it just 

isn’t so, Mr. Speaker. The government has put taxpayers on the 

hook to pay off the mortgage even if Amicus walks away from 

the deal. Amicus has risked nothing in this deal. It’s 

Saskatchewan taxpayers who are on the hook, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It simply isn’t credible that no one in this government would 

have calculated how much this loan guarantee would have cost 

Saskatchewan taxpayers or is costing Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

They deserve a straight answer once and for all. 

 

To the minister: how much will this $27 million loan guarantee, 

with its untendered building and electrical contracts with Sask 

Party insiders, cost Saskatchewan taxpayers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve entered into an 

agreement with the Catholic Health Ministry to supply 100 

long-term care beds in the Saskatoon area, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the member who placed 

the question to allow the minister to respond. Order. Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we have asked the 

Catholic Health Ministry . . . We have entered into agreement. 

The Catholic Health Ministry has gone forward and are building 

the facility. It’s their responsibility to choose the contractor, 

whatever contractor. It’s their responsibility, not our 

responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if you want to talk about tendering and issues 

like that, let’s go back to what I talked about yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker. How many tenders went out on SPUDCO 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company] . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I believe the 

opposition members have the right to allow the minister to at 

least respond so that the public can hear the response. Order. 

The member from Cumberland will allow the Minister of 

Health to complete his answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, if you want to talk about 

tendering contracts, we will talk about the tender, the tender of 

SPUDCO. Mr. Speaker, we’ll talk about the tender of SPUDCO 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the whole issue around 

SPUDCO where that government lost $37 million, $37 million 

in 1996 dollars would have put an Amicus in every major city 

in this province, Mr. Speaker. I said it yesterday, and I’ll say it 

again: our side, Mr. Speaker, our government is working on 

supplying senior care, Mr. Speaker. That side is far more 

interested in potatoes. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’d ask members to come to order so 

the House can proceed. 

 

[14:30] 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 156 — The Freehold Oil and Gas 

Production Tax Act, 2010 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move Bill No. 156, The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax 

Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Energy and 

Resources has moved first reading of Bill No. 156, The 

Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act, 2010 be now read 

the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 



6088 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2010 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — I move that Bill No. 157, The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Act, amendment 2010, be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Energy and Resources has 

moved first reading of Bill No. 157, The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the . . . [inaudible]. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Private Bills. 

 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Private Bills to present its eighth report. 

Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills be now concurred in. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’d ask members to come to order. It’s 

been moved by the Chair of the Private . . . Order. It has been 

moved by the Chair of the Private Bills: 

 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. The motion is carried and pursuant to 

rule 98 . . . Order. The motion is carried. And pursuant to rule 

98, the private Bill 905, The Sisters of the Presentation Act, 

2010 is deemed to be read the first time and is ordered for 

second reading on the next private members’ day. 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I hereby inform the 

Assembly that the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly has 

received from the Acting Chief Electoral Officer a certificate of 

the election and return for Gord Wyant, a member of the 

constituency of Saskatoon Northwest. I hereby table the return. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I seek leave for a motion 

for an address to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked leave for a motion to 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. I recognize the Minister of 

Justice. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Appointment of Children’s Advocate 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That an honourable address be presented to His Honour 

the Lieutenant Governor: 

 

Recommending to the Lieutenant Governor in Council that 

Mr. Bob Pringle be appointed the Children’s Advocate 

pursuant to section 12.1 of The Ombudsman and 

Children’s Advocate Act.  

 

The Speaker: — The motion presented by the Minister of 

Justice is: 

 

That an honourable Address be presented to His Honour 

the Lieutenant Governor: 

 

Recommending to the Lieutenant Governor in Council that 

Mr. Bob Pringle be appointed the Children’s Advocate 

pursuant to section 12.1 of The Ombudsman and 

Children’s Advocate Act.  

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That this Assembly recess until 3:45 p.m., pursuant to 

rule no. 9, to allow members of the Legislative Assembly 

to attend the Speaker’s tea to mark the appointment of the 



November 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6089 

Assembly’s next Children’s Advocate. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader: 

 

That this Assembly recess until 3:45 p.m., pursuant to 

rule 9, to allow members of the Legislative Assembly to 

attend the Speaker’s tea to mark the appointment of the 

Assembly’s next Children’s Advocate. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly will recess to 

allow members the opportunity to join Mr. Pringle, his wife and 

daughter and possibly their son, and other guests from the 

Ombudsman’s office in the library for tea. And I would invite 

members to do so. 

 

[The Assembly recessed for a period of time.] 

 

[15:45] 

 

The Speaker: — The House will resume sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 100 through 102. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers are tabled to questions 100 through 

102. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 144 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 144 — The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

extremely pleased this afternoon to stand and speak on this very 

important piece of legislation. Mr. Speaker, this particular piece 

of legislation raises a number of concerns, from the point of 

view it’s being driven by a legal case, a challenge to the 

government whether or not the current system in fact reflects a 

situation that’s legal, Mr. Speaker, and whether or not people 

should have to pay the fees that are attached to the Act or in fact 

that those fees attached, Mr. Speaker, shouldn’t be paid by 

certain parties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, without some additional information that we hope 

to obtain over the next two or three weeks from the minister, 

hopefully sooner than that, it is difficult to determine whether or 

not, first, this will fix the problem and whether or not the fix is 

fair. However this piece of legislation is tied to a piece of 

legislation that was passed a year ago, and this piece needs to be 

amended before that piece can be enacted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So from necessity, the government needs to ensure that this 

piece of legislation is in order prior to being able to enact a very 

important piece of legislation. We clearly understand that. 

We’re hoping therefore that the information that we require we 

get at the earliest opportunity so that we can review that 

information and see that, in fact, that the changes being made 

are in the interest of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and that the various angles or 

various potentials of that piece of legislation have been 

reviewed appropriately and there’s been consideration of the 

impact on both business and individuals as a result of the 

changes being made. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, once we have that information and we have 

had a chance to review that, it would be most appropriate for us 

to ask a number of questions in committee. But today we’re still 

looking for some additional information and contacting a 

number of stakeholders in the community to see whether or not 

that they are supportive of the changes being put forward. So at 

this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move we adjourn debate on this 

piece of legislation. 

 

The Speaker: — The member for Regina Dewdney has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 144, The Litter Control 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 147 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 147 — The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy 

to rise and participate in the debate on this piece of legislation. 

It’s with some interest noting the reference to it in the Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker. I think what we have here is a 

government that is looking to not necessarily act upon the 

measures contained in their platform, but to provide the 

appearance of action on the measures contained in their 

platform in the 2007 election. 

 

And this particular measure here would seem to be a case in 

point. For we see, Mr. Speaker, it’s taken a few different runs at 

this previously, but have now only just come forward with 



6090 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2010 

legislation. And of course, Mr. Speaker, in terms of which 

Crowns, which portions of executive government, certain 

measures there will only be revealed when the regulations come 

to light. 

 

So in terms of what this Bill will actually do, certainly it’s got a 

very nice title, Mr. Speaker, and certainly will, I’m sure, result 

in the members opposite checking one off the list and 

proclaiming themselves to be promise keepers. But again this is 

a government that seems to be more preoccupied with the 

appearance of keeping a promise than actually keeping a 

promise, and appearance over action. 

 

While I look at the press release that accompanied the 

legislation, look at the legislation itself, look at the speech that 

the Minister of the Public Service gave in this Chamber when it 

was introduced . . . We’re certainly interested in the actual teeth 

for the legislation because of course teeth is what gives the 

legislation bite. And if the legislation doesn’t have bite, then 

again it’s part of this pattern of papering over unkept promises, 

leftovers from the platform from that government. 

 

Again it proclaims protection for the public service. This is a 

government that we’ve seen conduct witch hunts and certainly 

treat whistle-blowers in their midst as people to be driven out of 

the public service. Again the actions indicate something entirely 

opposite to the proclaimed intents of the legislation and 

certainly the fine words contained in the press release and in the 

minister’s speech. So again, Mr. Speaker, there’s a cognitive 

dissidence in that regard. There’s a gap between reality and 

rhetoric. And again we see this as part and parcel of the way 

that this government does business. 

 

Just today, Mr. Speaker, we had a discussion in this Chamber 

about the Amicus deal, and Saskatoon and the lack of tendering 

there, the lack of public disclosure. Again this is a Bill that is 

itself entitled The Public Interest Disclosure Act. When it 

comes to practising public disclosure as it relates to the Amicus 

deal — $27 million of taxpayers’ money and counting, Mr. 

Speaker; those taxpayer dollars, all 27 million of them — and 

you know, who knows what else, because again we’re not 

getting a straight answer out of this government on them. 

 

Where was the disclosure that is inherent in an open and fair 

tendering process? In that case, Mr. Speaker, it was absent. So 

again between the reality and the rhetoric that we see. The 

rhetoric being preached by that government opposite and the 

reality that they practise, they’re two very different things. So 

for a government that claimed it would be the most open and 

accountable government in the history of this province, we find 

at least 27 million reasons why that is not the case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so when it comes to measures like this that are being 

proposed by the government, we’re very interested to see how 

things that have been shipped out to regulations, how that 

actually takes effect, and then how it’s actually resourced, Mr. 

Speaker. Because we know also that one of the practises of this 

government has been to proclaim the importance of the 

different officers of this legislature but then to systematically 

underfund them. Or in the case of the Chief Electoral Officer, to 

play egregious games with the very appointment process by 

which that officer has been appointed in the past — a process 

that was fair, above-board, open and transparent, and which was 

very much rooted in a process that was about fair play. Instead 

we see things being trumped by members out of that caucus, 

and what used to be a bipartisan process become a partisan 

process in the worst sense of the word, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again, you go through the list of the things that they say are 

about the public interest, but it’s very much about the Sask 

Party interest in terms of how they’ve conducted their affairs 

around the Amicus deal, with $27 million at least involved of 

public money that’s gone out through a sole-source deal with 

some very interested, Sask Party-connected people all over that 

deal. 

 

When you see how they’ve approached the existing legislative 

officers and how the actual resourcing and the paying attention 

to the recommendations that flow from the Office of the 

Ombudsman or the Children’s Advocate or the debacle that was 

and is the Electoral Officer and how that has been conducted by 

this government, again it’s hard to read with a straight face 

something that’s entitled The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

when this government has practised something that is a million 

miles away from that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again, we await the regulations. We await the actual 

resourcing of this measure. But when it comes to siding up the 

reality with the rhetoric, we’ll be watching with great interest. 

But you’ll forgive us if we’re more than just a bit skeptical in 

terms of the record of this government and the way that it 

doesn’t jive with the actual actions of this government. 

 

As well, one other thing. And again, in terms of the way that 

they’ve approached, say for example The Freedom of 

Information and Protection of Privacy Act, the way that that 

intersected with the freedom of information requests that have 

been submitted in the Amicus deal where page after page after 

page came back blanked out, Mr. Speaker, where again this is 

something that deals with a very large expenditure of public 

money, but that doesn’t . . . It isn’t being conducted in the light 

of day. It isn’t being conducted in an open, transparent manner. 

We find that these things are referenced in terms of the rhetoric 

on the part of this government around this piece of legislation. 

We find that worrisome. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what can be defined in 

legislation and what may be crammed in through regulation, 

again there’s a practice on the part of this government that we 

find to be cause for concern for the people of Saskatchewan and 

certainly for the official opposition. And we’ll certainly hold 

them to account for that. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have much more to add at this 

time in this debate on this legislation, but suffice it to say we 

certainly will be watching very closely. We will be vigilant, and 

we will be holding that government to account for that yawning 

chasm that exists between their rhetoric on the one hand and the 

reality that they perpetrate on the people of Saskatchewan on 

the other. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 147, The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 



November 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6091 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 149 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 149 — The Income 

Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure this 

afternoon to join in on the discussion on an important piece of 

legislation, Bill 149, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, often our discussions in this Assembly have to do 

with revenue coming into the province and economic activity in 

our province. Sometimes our discussion focuses exclusively or 

narrows in on strict economic issues. And even, Mr. Speaker, 

when we’re talking about more social issues here in the Chamber, 

it’s always tied to the economic considerations of our province 

because we know that in order to run the social programs that we 

value here in the province and the programs that need to be 

expanded and improved upon, much of our ability to do that is 

determined by the financial means we have as a province. And it’s 

important that we as a provincial legislature pursue a path that 

ensures that we are on sound financial footing. And that occurs 

through sound financial policy and then also, of course, the 

management of the resources that we have at our disposal. 

 

And so while we talk about financial matters in a general sense 

often in question period, when we look at specific pieces of 

legislation like Bill 149, The Income Tax Amendment Act, it 

allows us to look at specific instances where actions may be 

required or actions may be requested by a certain group in order to 

improve or enhance the economic opportunities for a particular 

organization here in the province. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And this particular piece of legislation addresses the sector of 

mining in the province. And any person in this Assembly and 

any person on the street — especially after the discussions 

we’ve been having as a province on the issue of potash over the 

last few weeks here in Saskatchewan — any person on the 

street or in this Assembly would clearly recognize that mining 

is a very, very important part of Saskatchewan’s economy. It 

employs many people. The royalties that the province receives 

through mining is very important to our provincial coffers. And 

so it’s widely recognized that mining is an important aspect to 

our provincial economy and our provincial society in the way 

that programs are provided through the benefits of the mining 

sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my short time as an MLA I’ve had the pleasure 

of visiting a few different mining operations, whether it’d be 

potash, uranium, here in the province. In my past I’ve also 

visited coal mines in British Columbia. I’m by no means an 

expert on the area of mining, but it is always a pleasure and of 

great interest when one has the opportunity to visit a mining 

site, learn a bit about the operation at that spot and some of the 

challenges, and hear first-hand about some of the changes or 

concerns that employers, companies as well as labourers, 

workers on those sites would have. 

 

So this piece of legislation, as the minister describes in his 

second reading speech, seeks to address the area of mineral 

processing. And it seeks to do this by — as the minister 

suggests in his remarks — by providing an incentive for an 

operation to pursue more mining of materials within our 

provincial borders. 

 

So the legislation that is put forward doesn’t specifically talk 

about a potential project or a site, though, given the specific 

nature of the legislation, it’s possible that it is directly linked to 

the potential of an operation occurring in a particular place in 

the province, an operation perhaps that’s under way. But we 

certainly look forward to more details on that, on the aspect and 

on those specifics. 

 

So we know that mining is very important to the province. 

That’s been the track record of NDP governments for many 

years, Mr. Speaker, where when in government we pursued a 

path of increasing the level of mining activity in the province in 

a variety of different types of mining operations. We think 

that’s important because, as I stated, we know that mining 

operations provide great revenue to the province and employ a 

great number of people, provide good-quality jobs. 

 

So in principle, when there are steps that the government can 

take that are appropriate to encourage economic activity while 

not giving away our resources . . . Because it was clear in the 

debate that has occurred in the province over the past number of 

weeks if there’s one thing Saskatchewan people agree on, it’s 

that we as a province need to extract the greatest amount of 

revenue from our resources. 

 

And that comes down to the royalty structures, the taxation 

structures that we have in place when dealing with the natural 

resources that are in our province. Because everyone recognizes 

Saskatchewan has been blessed with a great amount of minerals 

and valuable quantities in the ground, and it’s important that we 

develop those resources. 

 

So in principle our approach, Mr. Speaker, as a party, has been 

to encourage mining development. And once positive steps can 

be taken to encourage mining activity, that is a good thing. But 

that being said, Mr. Speaker, whenever changes are made in the 

area of mining, it’s important to ask very important questions. 

Because it’s important to understand who the players are that 

are involved in a specific operation, who is requesting the 

change, how will this change affect operations that may be 

under way already in the province, operations that may not be 

experiencing the present benefit of a proposed change. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s also very important to carefully analyze 

what any sort of tax incentive or tax break for a mining 

operation . . . It’s important to examine how that may affect the 

provincial coffers. Will there be in fact increased economic 

activity that will offset lost revenue from the tax break? So 

that’s an important consideration. 



6092 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2010 

It’s important to look at the number of jobs that need to be 

created in an operation. And I see in this legislation, it is 

specific in saying that 75 full-time employees would have to be 

employed at an operation in order to benefit from this tax break. 

That’s an important aspect. And it also states that a minimum 

amount of capital needs to be invested. 

 

So it’s important to have the clear guidelines. And I know when 

we’ve had the recent discussion in weeks about potash, that’s 

been something that we as an opposition have been very 

concerned about. What are the government’s specific 

requirements for an operation in the province? In this case, in 

the debate that we’ve had — Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan — what are the requirements? How will those be 

enforced? Will the expectations be put in writing? And how 

will they be enforced and evaluated as to whether or not the 

company is abiding by the regulations that have been put in 

place? 

 

So in the same situation with the piece of legislation that we 

look at here, Bill 149, it’s important to also have a discussion 

about how the specific requirements of capital investments and 

number of employees, how that will be monitored, how that 

will be enforced. I think that’s a very important thing for 

Saskatchewan people to know and for us as legislators to know 

as we debate this piece of legislation. 

 

This piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, affects the tax structure. 

And in the minister’s remarks he talked about a number of tax 

changes that the government has pursued here in the province 

since they have come into power. And this, Mr. Speaker, caused 

me a little bit of worry because, when we look at even the 

content of today’s question period on the issue of taxation, we 

see that the government has pursued an approach that would 

suggest they did not clearly think of the ramifications and the 

implications of many of the tax changes that have occurred 

under their watch. And I’m speaking, Mr. Speaker, to the issue 

of property tax and the ability of local school boards to set the 

mill rate and collect tax. 

 

When the Sask Party government took that responsibility or that 

ability of school boards to impose a tax in order to provide the 

educational services that are needed in the area, it was with the 

promise, Mr. Speaker, of adequate funding to provide the 

resources. Adequate funding for the LINC agreements that 

occurred prior to the change which are legal, binding 

obligations that school boards have, as well as a pledge, Mr. 

Speaker. As I’ve had the chance to talk with some school 

boards throughout the province, there was a pledge made that 

adequate resources will be provided to provide the quality 

education that our school divisions want to and are accustomed 

to providing to Saskatchewan students. 

 

So when we saw in the newspaper today, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Saskatoon public school division has a shortfall of about $1.9 

million, as I recall — I think that’s the correct amount that was 

stated in the paper — when we see the board taking a very 

vocal, a very public stance about the shortfall from government 

of two years running and their inability to provide the quality 

education that they want to provide and are accustomed to 

provide, I know that’s concerning for many, many 

Saskatchewan families, many Saskatonian parents whose 

children are in the public school system. 

Because if there’s one thing in addition to the value that we 

ought to extract, the highest amount of value from our 

resources, that if there’s one other thing that all Saskatchewan 

people agree on, it is that our children deserve the very best 

educational system possible, that our children are indeed our 

future and need to have all the resources available to them. And 

whether that’s appropriate class sizes, whether that’s an 

adequate number of educational assistants in the classroom, 

these are all very important aspects to our educational system. 

 

So when we look at the approach the Sask Party has taken to tax 

policy, the government, in this piece of legislation that they’re 

putting forward, I assume is just asking us to trust. Trust them 

that they have thought through the implications and have a clear 

plan of how they’ll make up for lost revenue and still provide 

services that Saskatchewan people need. 

 

Based on the experience of property tax changes and the 

provision of resources to school boards, I’m not so sure, Mr. 

Speaker, that the government has made all of its decisions 

around tax policy in a well-thought-out manner. I think some of 

it may have been done for political expediency. Some of it may 

have been done because a few individuals thought it was a good 

idea. But without a clear plan as to how the province is going to 

adapt to the different tax structure, how the province is going to 

carry on in providing and enhancing the services that 

Saskatchewan people want and deserve without a clear 

indication that the government has thought through its approach 

carefully, it causes me to have some reservations on Bill 149. 

Because we’ve seen their track record when it comes to 

thinking through tax policy decisions. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while the minister presenting this Bill may 

want us to take him at his word that everything is thought out 

well, that there is a plan in place, that the loss in resources or 

revenue will be offset in some other way, while he may want us 

to just trust him at his word, based on the track record that 

we’ve seen in other tax changes, I know many Saskatchewan 

people have concerns. 

 

And among those concerned may be the public school board in 

Saskatoon who, in a very public manner in the newspaper, said 

that they are being short-changed funding even though they 

have binding agreements to do with the LINC and they have 

increased enrolment to do with new students in the Saskatoon 

school division. 

 

So it’s important when making changes to tax policy, it’s 

important that this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan 

are assured that the changes are well thought out, that there is a 

plan in place, and that when government says they’re going to 

provide the resources for a particular area, a particular service 

for Saskatchewan people, that they do in fact do that. I think 

that’s a concern for many, many people here in the province. 

 

So we know that mining is very important to the province. We 

know that tax changes are very important because they have a 

ripple effect throughout the provincial government with respect 

to the services that we provide. 

 

The other tidbit that was of interest to me when reading the 

minister’s remarks on Bill 149, the minister said that — this is 

on page 6035 of November 15th — he said, “The legislation is 



November 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6093 

a result of the work done by officials at Enterprise 

Saskatchewan who have been consulting widely with the 

business community . . .” And it goes on. 

 

This brings me to another topic, Mr. Speaker, and that is how 

Enterprise Saskatchewan actually works. Because it’s not clear 

to me, Mr. Speaker, how the government treats Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. It would seem that for some recommendations 

— recommendations that are convenient for the government to 

enact — they’re happy to make changes, and they will listen to 

Enterprise Saskatchewan and implement the changes. 

 

In other areas of tax policy, Mr. Speaker, even though 

Enterprise Saskatchewan may present a recommendation, the 

recommendation has been ignored. And in this instance, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m talking about the graduate tax exemption program 

of the Sask Party with Enterprise Saskatchewan providing the 

recommendation that the government ought to extend the 

program to master’s and Ph.D. graduates. With that 

recommendation being clear, it’s puzzling to me, Mr. Speaker, 

why the government would listen to the one recommendation of 

Enterprise Saskatchewan with respect to Bill 149 and changes 

to the refining industry, but they would ignore another area, Mr. 

Speaker, the grad tax exemption program that leaves many, 

many Ph.D. and master’s graduates out in the cold without 

benefits to the program. 

 

So to me, that’s a bit of a head-scratcher. And I’ve talked to 

people about Enterprise Saskatchewan. They too are puzzled as 

to how this works. It’s interesting because when Enterprise 

Saskatchewan legislation was brought in and it was formed, all 

the talk that the members opposite had was about how they 

were removing the political aspects of the decision-making 

process — removing those aspects — and getting the best 

information that they could get. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I highly respect many of the individuals that 

provided their time, many of them on a near-to-volunteer basis 

on Enterprise Saskatchewan. I highly respect these individuals 

for the expertise that they bring and the advice that they give to 

government. But it’s puzzling when advice is given and it’s 

cherry-picked, and that’s what it seems to me. So the 

government may say they are trying to take the politics out of 

the decision-making process. 

 

And if you recall, it was some time ago when the legislation 

was brought in and we discussed this here in the Assembly. 

There was talk that there wouldn’t be minister involvement on 

Enterprise Saskatchewan. Well then it turns out there actually is 

minister sitting on it, and there’s additional Sask Party MLAs 

sitting on Enterprise Saskatchewan. This imaginary divide that 

the members opposite suggested to us existed . . . Well they 

didn’t suggest it was imaginary. My view is that it was 

imaginary and is imaginary. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, it causes one to question how Enterprise 

Saskatchewan works, what recommendations are worthy of 

government taking notice, and what recommendations from 

Enterprise Saskatchewan are kicked to the curb, even though 

the individuals who are recommending them have provided 

many, many hours of service on a next-to-volunteer basis, just 

providing expertise and knowledge based on their experience. 

 

So I think in 149 it teaches us a number of lessons, in 149. It 

teaches us that the Sask Party record when it comes to clearly 

thinking out tax policy, it tells us that their record has been less 

than stellar. And that’s evidenced by the fiasco we see in the 

Saskatoon Public School Division right now where the board is 

$1.9 million short, as I believe The StarPhoenix stated. And we 

have board members in the public school division making very 

open remarks about how they were promised certain things by 

the Sask Party government, and the funding has not been there 

to meet the needs of students. 

 

So when we look at tax policy, in my opinion the record of the 

Sask Party government is one of not thinking through their 

decisions and it’s one of making decisions based on political 

expediency as opposed to sitting down and rationally looking at 

a problem. 

 

Now in some situations when tax policy changes, it wouldn’t 

only be about politics. There could be a great, a solid basis for 

the changes that are requested and the changes that are made, 

and that’s good. But it’s still incumbent upon the government to 

think through what the implications are. And so if revenue is 

lost through tax changes, it’s important for government to take 

that into account. And based on the shortfall we’ve seen with 

the school divisions, I’m not convinced that that is the approach 

the Sask Party government takes when pursuing tax policy 

changes. 

 

The other lesson, Mr. Speaker, I think we learn from Bill 149, is 

that the decision-making process around Enterprise 

Saskatchewan is still a very puzzling one. And it’s one, Mr. 

Speaker, that is designed to give the appearance, provide a 

facade of government hands-off decision making. But at the end 

of the day, Mr. Speaker, we know that the decisions being made 

are political, based on the involvement of Sask Party MLAs and 

ministers involved with Enterprise Saskatchewan, and based on 

the evidence that members opposite are quite happy to 

cherry-pick recommendations that suit their needs and ignore 

ones that do not. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that’s not a proper way to treat the 

many, many, many people now — with all these many sector 

committees cascading down and subcommittees and so on — I 

don’t think that’s a respectful way to treat those individuals that 

willingly provide of their time to provide advice based on their 

life experience and their training. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, those are some of my concerns 

around Bill 149. 

 

Mining is certainly very important, and it’s important that we 

encourage the development of the mining industry in the 

province, whether that’s the initial extraction or whether that’s 

the subsequent refining that takes place. It’s important that we 

pursue that plan. But when making those decisions, it’s 

important that we see all the cards on the table. It’s important 

that we have a clear explanation from government as to how the 

lost revenue through a tax break will be made up, and it’s 

important for us to understand as a province how these 

decisions are being made when Enterprise Saskatchewan is 

being used as the basis for making this specific change to help a 



6094 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2010 

specific location, perhaps. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I thank members for their time this 

afternoon, and I will adjourn debate on Bill 149. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill 149, The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 150 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 150 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

indeed a pleasure to be able to rise and speak to Bill No. 150, 

An Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill has a number of provisions, three of them 

that have been most clearly pointed out. The first is to clarify 

how spousal survivor benefits are to be calculated in the case of 

a person who may have been married more than once and who 

may have both current and former spouses who could claim to 

be qualified to receive some type of survivor benefit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition clearly wants to have a better 

understanding of the potential impact of this provision, 

particularly on vulnerable people, Mr. Speaker. However on the 

face of it, it appears that there may be merit in what the 

government is proposing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when one looks at the minister’s remarks 

from November 15th when he was doing the second reading on 

the Bill, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote what the minister said. 

He said, and he was talking about the three main provisions of 

this Bill. And this is, sorry, the Minister of . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Finance, right. So the Minister of Finance said: 

 

One, the first amendment to section 28.3 will enable the 

proper calculation of the surviving spouse’s pension after 

the member has retired. Two, the second amendment to 

section 48.1 is a housekeeping change that will make the 

Act comply with the Income Tax Act of Canada. Three, 

the third amendment to section 69 will eliminate the need 

to include personal information in the pension plan annual 

reports. 

 

And then when one reads . . . As I was saying anyways, so 

second provision, Mr. Speaker, is simply to comply with the 

Income Tax Act of Canada. And again there is a few details that 

we still want to review with that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But when one looks at the third provision, this is where the Bill 

is of concern to me, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure to many of my 

colleagues. And I’d like to read the section that is of concern. 

So it talks about repealing section 50 of the current Act and 

replacing it with this: 

 

“Annual report not to disclose personal information 

 

The report transmitted by a board to the president of the 

Executive Council must not show the names of 

individuals who retired or died during the period to 

which the report applies, the amounts of superannuation 

or other allowances or benefits granted in individual 

cases or any other personal information respecting any 

of those individuals”. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this may not seem like anything to be too 

concerned about to some individuals, but given the track record 

of the Sask Party government and its desire to be shady and 

hide things from the public, it’s of great concern to me, Mr. 

Speaker, as well as many of my colleagues. So we can see that 

there’s again a pattern of hiding important information from 

public view, especially information that is supposed to be 

reported, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again when one looks at the comments made by the minister 

on November 15th on second reading, he says, “The 

requirement for such reporting serves no practical purpose,” 

Mr. Speaker. He goes on to say, “It is not consistent with the 

spirit and intent of The Freedom of Information and Protection 

of Privacy Act. This amendment will remove the requirement to 

disclose personal information in the annual reports.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, what’s really interesting about this is that we see 

this new-found belief and understanding in protecting the 

privacy and the information of individuals in this province 

under the Act, Mr. Speaker, when only recently we saw the 

Sask Party government introduce a piece of legislation that 

would have given up the private information of anyone who’s 

used the hospital services in Saskatchewan to be used for 

fundraising purposes, Mr. Speaker. So on one hand we’re 

willing to give up, the Sask Party government is willing to give 

up that information to be used for fundraising purposes, Mr. 

Speaker, whether or not the person would want that information 

given out, because there is no way for that person to be able to 

sign away from that with their knowledge that that’s even going 

to happen. So it was, the onus was upon the person who had 

that hospital stay to make it known that they wouldn’t want that 

information given out without even knowing in advance that 

that would be a possibility of the end result to begin with. 

 

So we have a Sask Party government who will put forward 

legislation to have that happen in one session of the year, which 

was just this spring session that passed, and then we see them 

all of a sudden saying, oh my goodness, we want to protect your 

private information. 

 

So I’m not sure if this is a new-found understanding that the 

Sask Party government has or if it’s just another way for them 

to hide the fact that they don’t want to disclose the information 

that would be disclosed currently under this Act, Mr. Speaker. 

Because the government, Mr. Speaker, knows full well that any 

amounts over $50,000 paid to individuals or organizations in 



November 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6095 

one year have to be disclosed. 

 

Now why is that, Mr. Speaker? Why does this information have 

to be disclosed? It has to be disclosed, Mr. Speaker, because it’s 

using public money. It’s using public money, Mr. Speaker. And 

when we’re using public money, Mr. Speaker, when the 

government is using public money, the public has the right to 

know how their money is being used, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That disclosure is taking place for a reason. It’s taking place 

because the public has the right to know what the government is 

doing with their money, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, that 

amounts to accountability, which is something, Mr. Speaker, 

this Sask Party government seems to be failing the 

Saskatchewan people on many fronts on, Mr. Speaker, on many 

fronts. 

 

So the salaries of everyone who works for a minister of the 

Crown or for Executive Council and who makes more than 

$50,000 a year are publicly disclosed each year in public 

accounts. And the same holds true for all other employees in the 

public service. Now why is it, Mr. Speaker, that the Sask Party 

government thinks that former employees can be held to a 

different standard? They still have not yet explained that, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s why there are many questions that still 

remain with respect to Bill 150, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I said, there is still much to be answered. 

There’s still many questions that the opposition has, not the 

least of which when one looks at their, you know, platform 

document from the 2007 election with the, you know, smiling 

picture of the Premier on the front, and one turns to page no. 40 

. . . And I really enjoy this document, Mr. Speaker. I’ve used it 

often when I’ve spoken to various Bills that they’ve brought 

forward. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure I’m going to be able to use 

it a lot more with future Bills that are brought forward, Mr. 

Speaker. Because I think the Sask Party government fails to 

read their promises to the Saskatchewan people that they made 

in 2007 in their election document, when they bring forward the 

legislation that they do to the House, the Chamber of the 

legislature, and to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when one looks at page 40, titled “More accountable 

government,” that sounds pretty good. Sounds pretty good. And 

you know, Saskatchewan people were wanting to believe what 

they put forward in 2007, and they placed their trust in those 

men and women sitting across the way, Mr. Speaker. They 

placed their trust in those men and women that they would hold 

true to their promises, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what are they getting? Let’s take a look. So it’s entitled 

“More accountable government.” And I’d like to quote: 

 

Saskatchewan people expect their government to be open, 

honest, and accountable. A Saskatchewan Party 

government will provide Saskatchewan people with more 

transparency and accountability than any previous 

government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that sounds great. Unfortunately what’s 

happening right now is exactly, exactly the opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. They are taking a lesson from the Harper Tories and 

doing exactly the opposite of what they promised. The Harper 

Tories promised to be more open, honest, and accountable. And 

we’re getting exactly the opposite. The Sask Party government 

promised the same, and they’re giving us exactly the opposite, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Time and time again, we see nothing but shady dealings and 

questionable, questionable dealings, Mr. Speaker, with respect 

to the Sask Party government, and this yet is another piece of 

legislation that does so. Whether it’s signing out contract 

services to their friends, that haven’t been tendered, whether it’s 

signing a $27 million loan guarantee with their friends and 

handing over untendered contracts, Mr. Speaker, to Sask Party 

donors, it is unbelievable how unaccountable, how dishonest, 

and lack of open and transparency, this Sask party government 

is presenting to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, what are they trying to do? They’re 

trying to pretend that there’s something else yet again. But you 

know what, Mr. Speaker? We’re used to this. We’re used to the 

Sask Party government being the great pretenders. They pretend 

to be, you know, free market capitalists. But oh wait a minute, 

when a company does come to Saskatchewan and wants to 

make a bid on something that they have promised to people 

outside of the borders of Saskatchewan, they decide to do the 

backward shuffle because they’ve done some polling. They 

realize that Saskatchewan people don’t want their reserves sold 

off willy-nilly to control outside of the province, outside of the 

country. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And then they start doing the Captain Canada routine, Mr. 

Speaker, and saying, you know, here we are. We’re going to 

defend Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan people and make sure 

that those reserves are . . . those resource revenues, I should say, 

are properly preserved for future generations — which, Mr. 

Speaker, let me just remind the Sask Party government, has 

been the standpoint and the viewpoint of the NDP for ever and 

ever, Mr. Speaker. We have always felt, we have always felt 

that resource revenues are for the good and for the purpose of 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. We have always felt that 

those resource revenues should be to the betterment of the 

province, for the betterment of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we have also in the past, we had 

filed a complaint. And not just a complaint though, Mr. 

Speaker, a court case with the federal Tories as to their 

unfulfilled promise of equalization, Mr. Speaker, because we do 

feel so strongly about resource revenues being for the 

betterment of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that was to the tune of $800 million a year 

— $800 million a year. Now let’s look at what $800 million a 

year could do, given that the Sask Party has blown the finances 

as badly as they have, given that the Sask Party is now running 

a deficit, Mr. Speaker. Let’s look at what that $800 million per 

year could do for the Sask Party government to try and balance 

their books even, let alone what it would do for the people of 

Saskatchewan in terms of seeing some wonderful things that 

could be done in this province, for instance, health care, 

education and the superannuates of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m sure the superannuates would be very happy to see that 

$800 million come to the province of Saskatchewan and see 



6096 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2010 

some improvements made to their situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s interesting that although the NDP filed that court 

challenge, that the Sask Party government decided to drop the 

court challenge. Why? Because unfortunately our Premier made 

a backroom deal with the Harper Tories and Stephen Harper 

himself, Mr. Speaker. And here we stand today: no extra 

money, no extra promises or handshakes with respect to other 

monies that are coming into the province as the Premier said 

would happen if, you know, they give a peace a chance. Well 

giving peace a chance hasn’t gotten us very much money, Mr. 

Speaker, hasn’t gotten us very much money at all. 

 

As a matter of fact, some of the monies that have been promised 

to the province, Mr. Speaker, may not be seen because of the 

tight timelines that are now surrounding those monies that have 

been promised to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So 

we can see how the insincerity of some of their comments is 

shaking out now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now when one looks at the fact that they are now looking at 

wanting to protect the privacy of the individuals supposedly 

with this new provision, despite the fact that this new provision 

is an obligation that they have to fill because these are people 

who are, have earnings of over $50,000 a year, Mr. Speaker, 

let’s look at something else that the Sask Party tried bringing 

forward not too long ago. 

 

Now not too long ago, they wanted to bring forward Bill 9. 

Now Bill 9 would’ve raised the bar for non-disclosure of 

government spending from $50,000 to $350,000. That’s seven 

times the amount, Mr. Speaker, that they wanted to spend, that 

the Sask Party government wanted to spend without being 

accountable to Saskatchewan people for their spending 

decisions. Seven times the amount. 

 

Now it’s funny, they love to talk about the fact that the NDP 

was in government for 16 years. And you know, Mr. Speaker, I 

like talking about the fact that the NDP was in government for 

16 years. For 16 years, the NDP government — despite the fact 

that they inherited a $15 billion deficit and debt in 1991 when 

they were elected, despite that fact, Mr. Speaker — they were 

able to work within that $50,000 non-disclosure for government 

purposes. They were able to work within that $50,000 limit, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what the NDP was able to do. 

 

All of a sudden, the Sask Party government gets elected in 2007 

with a $2.3 billion surplus handed to them, and what do they 

need? They need to go from a $50,000 non-disclosure to a 

$350,000 non-disclosure. Now why is that, Mr. Speaker? Why 

don’t they want to be accountable to the people of 

Saskatchewan? What are they hiding? What are they always 

hiding, Mr. Speaker? 

 

It’s no different than all the questions that are being asked 

currently by our deputy leader, by our leader and by our 

opposition critic and by other critics that want full disclosure 

about some of the situations that are currently taking place in 

Saskatchewan. And you know what we’re getting, Mr. Speaker? 

We’re not getting answers, we’re getting responses. 

 

So that’s why the opposition happens to be more than a little 

frustrated with this, Mr. Speaker. That’s why the opposition 

happens to be raising the bar in terms of the noise level 

sometimes in this House, Mr. Speaker, because the opposition 

is getting frustrated. We’re not getting answers. We’re not able 

to do our jobs on behalf of Saskatchewan people in ensuring 

that there is public disclosure and ensuring that there’s 

accountability and ensuring that there’s transparency. They are 

handcuffing the opposition critics from doing their jobs. And 

they are thereby not being open and honest with the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because we can’t do the job on 

behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that is frustrating. And if it seems like I’m raising my 

voice, it’s because I personally am frustrated, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

personally frustrated. 

 

Unfortunately I wasn’t able to make any comments on the 

Throne Speech because I was ill with the flu. And I’m still 

suffering some of those after-effects, Mr. Speaker. But I want to 

make this clear, Mr. Speaker. I want to make it clear. I would 

have voted against that Throne Speech for one primary reason. 

It happens to do with my opposition critic portfolio. But there 

was no mention of anything substantive when it comes to the 

environment. There was absolutely nothing about climate 

change. This government has decided that Saskatchewan, it 

does not need to be protected with respect to the environment. 

And that’s why I felt . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the member to be 

mindful of the responses and direct . . . at least reflecting the 

legislation that we’re currently under debate, Bill 150. Thank 

you. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there are a good amount of 

superannuates who worked in Environment and would have 

reason to be interested in that as well. 

 

So when we get back to Bill 150 and the non-disclosure of the 

information with respect to superannuates, I found something 

very interesting in The Globe and Mail on November 16th, Mr. 

Speaker, which was interesting because that is the very day, the 

very day that the . . . I’m sorry, the day after the minister made 

his second reading remarks. And you know what I found in The 

Globe and Mail? It was this lovely cartoon. And it’s a cartoon 

of Prime Minister Stephen Harper holding a sign that says, open 

for business. And it has a lovely picture of Tony Clement 

beside him on a box that says, foreign investment rules. Playing 

a shell game, Mr. Speaker, playing a shell game. 

 

And do you know why I found that so interesting with respect 

to Bill 150? I found it interesting with respect to Bill 150 

because that’s what it feels like. It feels like Bill 150, with not 

wanting to disclose what’s happening with the superannuates, is 

exactly that — another shell game, Mr. Speaker. This 

government loves to do shell games. They, like I said, they are 

hand-in-glove with the Harper Tories in terms of not being open 

and accountable, not being transparent, not wanting to disclose 

the full details of their shady dealings and anything else to the 

people of Saskatchewan or the country of Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they are becoming experts at the shell game. 

The shell game is something that they are absolutely trying to 



November 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6097 

perfect, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at another 

shell game, another shell game being the $27 million loan 

guarantee with an organization whose lawyer, Rod Donlevy, is 

none other than the brother to the Premier’s chief of staff, Mr. 

Speaker. So we see the shell game that’s happening with 150, 

Bill 150, of not wanting to disclose what’s happening with the 

superannuates. 

 

And you can compare it with so many other shell games. Like 

for instance, this shell game with this $27 million loan 

guarantee that we can’t seem to get any answers on as an 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. I find it very interesting. So again let’s 

look at another shell game. Let’s look at the fact that the 

untendered contract to build a facility was given to Michael 

Stensrud, who donated $16,000 to the Sask Party and $1,000 in 

the last election to the Minister of Justice. So once again we ask 

questions about this particular untendered contract, Mr. 

Speaker, which is worth millions and millions of dollars. 

 

And then we see a Bill in front of us today, Mr. Speaker, Bill 

150, where yet again the government doesn’t want to disclose 

the details of something that they’re obligated to with anyone 

getting over $50,000 a year because it’s public money, Mr. 

Speaker. They again don’t want to disclose what’s happening 

with public money. 

 

And just today, Mr. Speaker, just today we hear from the 

opposition critic of Finance that there’s rumours that the 

electrical company that’s receiving another untendered contract 

with respect to this Amicus deal is owned by the Minister of 

Justice’s brother. And so now we see again that another 

company, Bridge City Electric, is going to get this untendered 

contract. Yet again another connection to the Sask Party. And 

yet again, no transparency, no openness and accountability 

when it comes to a deal that’s worth $27 million, Mr. Speaker. 

And because it’s a $27 million loan guarantee, guess who’s on 

the hook, Mr. Speaker? The taxpayers of . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. As I look at Bill 150, there’s a 

number of comments have been made by the member that really 

are quite broad. And while we’ve allowed some freedom of 

expanding, I would ask the member, as Speakers have in the 

past, to speak directly to Bill 150, The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act. 

 

Ms. Morin: — So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at Bill 150 and 

we look at the comments of the minister in second reading with 

respect to Bill 150, he talks about “The requirement for such 

reporting serves no practical purpose. It is not consistent with 

the spirit and intent of The Freedom of Information and 

Protection of Privacy Act,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well as I’ve just pointed out numerous times, it’s interesting 

that the Minister of Finance and the Sask Party are now 

concerned about disclosure of information when this happens to 

be a brand new revelation in their modus operandi so far, Mr. 

Speaker. So let’s take a look . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It 

does. It seems very devious and questionable at best, Mr. 

Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, we see a continued lack of 

accountability. 

 

Now the reason, Mr. Speaker, that this provision exists in this 

Bill of the superannuates to begin with is because there is a 

requirement for reporting mechanisms with respect to public 

money, Mr. Speaker. Public money is exactly that. It’s 

something that the public always has a right to know how their 

money is being used and how their money is being spent. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the government is obligated to 

report any amounts that are over $50,000 paid to individuals 

and organizations in one year. Those have to be publicly 

disclosed. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what’s interestingly absent from the minister’s 

comments on second reading of this Bill is the fact that the 

minister does not give any reasons, Mr. Speaker, no reasons 

whatsoever except for his new-found interest in protecting the 

privacy of individuals which, Mr. Speaker, I have to say is very 

suspect. I know that I’m not sure I quite believe that, and I 

know that most of my colleagues have the same problem in 

terms of believing that as well. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d be 

surprised if the general public didn’t have concerns with the 

government yet again not wanting to disclose what’s happening 

with public monies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we see many, many examples of how the Sask 

Party wants to simply play the shell game, not be open and 

accountable, not want to tender large contracts, not want to 

disclose to the people of Saskatchewan that they are on the 

hook for $27 million at this point, Mr. Speaker. And what’s 

interesting about that, Mr. Speaker, is that when one looks at 

the finances of Saskatchewan, that that won’t even show up, 

Mr. Speaker. Why? Because it’s going to be shown as a liability 

of the Amicus deal that’s taken place and by the organization 

that’s setting up this particular deal, Mr. Speaker. So it won’t 

even show under the government finances as a potential $27 

million debt or as a potential $27 million liability even, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So that’s of great concern to the opposition. It’s of greater 

concern to Saskatchewan taxpayers, given that we are seeing 

the surplus of $2.3 billion that they were left with having been 

completely spent. We’re now seeing the province of 

Saskatchewan going into a deficit position, which we’re all too 

familiar with, Mr. Speaker. We were . . . been there for a long 

time. We did our very best to work our way out of that, Mr. 

Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, been there, done 

that, and still have the debt to show for it, quite frankly, Mr. 

Speaker. The debt that that Sask Party, a.k.a. [also known as] 

former Progressive Conservative government of Saskatchewan, 

that the Devine Tories carried, is still here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when one looks at the fact that the minister refers to his 

new-found interest in The Freedom of Information and 

Protection of Privacy Act as being the reason for wanting to 

change the reporting mechanism in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, one 

has to be more than suspect about what the government is 

wanting to do. Because anything that puts taxpayers’ dollars at 

risk, Mr. Speaker, is of concern to taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

And any time large amounts of taxpayers’ money is being 

spent, Mr. Speaker, is something that the people of 

Saskatchewan want to be informed about. 

 

So why, Mr. Speaker, this provision is in here and why the 

minister didn’t make that clear in his second reading remarks, 



6098 Saskatchewan Hansard November 17, 2010 

despite the fact, Mr. Speaker, that’s the time that the speaker is 

supposed to give to presenting the Bill in its entirety, Mr. 

Speaker; that’s the time that the minister is supposed to give to 

the opposition and the people of Saskatchewan in explaining the 

full purpose of the Bill, Mr. Speaker. And instead of us having 

to stand and ask all these questions, Mr. Speaker, wouldn’t it 

have simply been a lot easier if the minister would have been 

forthright in what his decision was in not wanting to disclose 

the public monies that are being paid out under the 

superannuates Act, Mr. Speaker? It would have been so much 

easier. 

 

And unfortunately because the minister didn’t disclose that, we 

are now led to believe that there’s something suspect here, Mr. 

Speaker. Because unfortunately in their pattern since they’ve 

been elected in 2007, everything that they’ve done that hasn’t 

been fully disclosed has been suspect, Mr. Speaker. And many 

times those suspicions have been validated, Mr. Speaker, just 

like with the Amicus deal. Those suspicions are now validated, 

Mr. Speaker. And there’s more and more information coming 

forward all the time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are many other colleagues that want to 

speak to this Bill, obviously, because as I said, there is still 

many questions that need to be answered. There is still a lot of 

concern, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the carryings-on of the 

government, with respect to many of the other deals that are 

being asked about right now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And because the government is not being forthcoming in any 

answers to any questions about anything, Mr. Speaker, whether 

it’s the environmental concerns that I have about the proposed 

dome that the Premier wants to build in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, whether it’s the questions about Amicus, whether it’s 

the questions about why does the government not want to 

provide a reporting mechanism with respect to the 

superannuates that are receiving over $50,000 of taxpayer 

money, Mr. Speaker, it’s a constant question of lack of 

accountability, lack of transparency . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Exactly. 

 

It seems to be a pervasive theme with the Sask Party, Mr. 

Speaker, despite the fact, Mr. Speaker, that they promised the 

Saskatchewan electorate in 2007 in their very own election 

platform document, they promised the people of Saskatchewan 

a more accountable government — their words, Mr. Speaker, 

not mine. They promised a more accountable government, and 

we’re seeing exactly the opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if the Sask Party government truly believes the 

words that it printed in the document, “A Saskatchewan Party 

government will provide Saskatchewan people with more 

transparency and accountability than any previous 

government,” Mr. Speaker, we have yet to see that happen. We 

are seeing quite the opposite. 

 

We’re seeing a reporting mechanism of over $50,000 that is 

supposed to be reported that they now want to remove in this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker. They want to be less transparent, less 

accountable to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and 

without providing any explanation — any valid, credible 

explanation — as to why that should happen. 

 

We’re seeing that in many other situations, Mr. Speaker, 

whether it’s Amicus, whether it’s the environmental concerns 

around the dome in terms of who is going to pay the 

environmental cleanup on the dome site, Mr. Speaker. All these 

questions have yet to be answered, and none of it has yet taken 

place. We’ve heard a lot of lip service to accountability and 

we’ve heard a lot of lip service to transparency, Mr. Speaker, 

but once again, in Bill 150 we are seeing quite the opposite to 

what the Sask Party government is paying lip service to. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the provision of wanting to 

be in compliance with the Act, the federal Act I should say, the 

Income Tax Act of Canada, Mr. Speaker, we don’t see any big 

concerns at the time. But because of the fact that we don’t see 

any big concerns at the time with this particular provision, that 

says to me we’d better study it, and we’d better study it closely, 

and we’d better study it under a microscope. 

 

Because when things are glaringly obvious to us in terms of 

questions, we still don’t get any answers. When things aren’t 

glaringly obvious, I have more concern about the fact that we 

may miss something, Mr. Speaker. So we are going to, as 

opposition, do our due diligence and ensure that everything has 

been properly addressed with respect to the changes that they 

are now seeking to be in compliance with the federal Income 

Tax Act. 

 

And needless to say, Mr. Speaker, I have already spoken to the 

first provision, which is the amendments to section 28.3, to 

what the minister refers to — enabling the proper calculation of 

the surviving spouses after the member has retired. We want to 

ensure, Mr. Speaker, that there aren’t any mistakes done there 

either, Mr. Speaker. Because quite often also with the Sask 

Party government, we see Bills brought forward in haste 

sometimes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I mean for instance, let’s talk about for instance, you know, 

their climate change Bill that they brought forward in haste, Mr. 

Speaker, because they were getting too much pressure from the 

opposition. They were getting too much pressure from the 

people of Saskatchewan as to the fact that they were doing 

nothing with respect to that file, Mr. Speaker. There was 

absolute inaction with respect to the government dealing with 

climate change in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So they hastily brought forward a Bill, Mr. Speaker, which died 

on the order table within, I think — what was it? — the week 

that it was brought forward. Because it was brought forward at 

the end of the session to make it look like that, you know, they 

were doing something, gosh, golly, and they’re in talks with 

their federal cousins and, you know, there is this agreement to 

talk about an agreement and all sorts of things, Mr. Speaker. 

But again nothing came to fruition on that particular front. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we hear that they’re going to make some 

changes to provisions with respect to how pension calculations 

are going to be made, Mr. Speaker, with respect to survivor 

benefits, we want to ensure that those calculations are made in 

the best interests of the survivor beneficiaries, I should say, and 

done so especially for those who may be placed in a vulnerable 

situation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We want to ensure that there aren’t going to be any mistakes, 



November 17, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6099 

Mr. Speaker. So the opposition is going to ensure that it does its 

due diligence with respect to reviewing that provision very, 

very carefully, Mr. Speaker. So that means, unlike what the 

Sask Party government tends to do with its Bills, Mr. Speaker, 

that means going out and speaking to our constituents all across 

the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Luckily enough, we have representation from the North. We 

have representation from the South, from the larger centres, 

from the smaller urban centres, Mr. Speaker. We’re very 

fortunate to have representation, a good cross-section of 

representation that allows us to speak to constituents all over 

the province with different circumstances, with different types 

of employment situations, Mr. Speaker, because those do differ 

depending on where you live in the province, Mr. Speaker, and 

ensure that those situations are all being appropriately 

addressed. 

 

And who knows, Mr. Speaker? From our discussions, we may 

see that there is still something that is lacking or there’s 

something that’s been overlooked. And we may want to bring 

forward an amendment, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that those 

things that are overlooked and are lacking can be properly 

addressed in what the Sask Party government is proposing to 

change under Bill 150. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know, we’ve already heard from the 

superannuates on numerous occasions with respect to some of 

the changes that they would like to see take place. And I have to 

admit, Mr. Speaker, that in the discussions that I’ve had with 

them, I haven’t heard much about a couple of the provisions 

that are being raised in this Bill, Mr. Speaker. I’ve certainly 

heard some about the section 28.3 with respect to surviving 

beneficiaries in terms of some of the concerns that the 

superannuates have raised. But there are many other issues that 

the superannuates have raised as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what I find interesting is that, despite the fact that this Sask 

Party government likes to tout the record revenue that they were 

able to enjoy as a government when they were elected in 2007 

through the good, hard work of the Saskatchewan people and 

the policies of the NDP that got this province out of the 

quagmire of debt that it was in and inherited . . . So Mr. 

Speaker, it’s very nice to see that the Sask Party government 

was able to inherit a province that was showing record 

revenues. The Sask Party government was able to inherit a 

situation where there was $2.3 billion left to them, Mr. Speaker. 

In terms of what I would’ve hoped they would have done was 

put in a real . . . And I don’t like calling it the rainy day fund, 

Mr. Speaker, because unfortunately when you put money in a 

rainy day fund, they spend it even when it’s not raining, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, I’m really hoping that the 

government is going to be very relevant in its calculations of the 

survivor of spouse benefits, and that the superannuates also 

have their other concerns heard, Mr. Speaker. Because, you 

know, the Sask Party government made a lot of promises to the 

superannuates, a lot of promises. And the superannuates were 

letting us know that, that the Sask Party’s . . . You know, the 

Sask Party opposition is promising us this, that, and the other 

thing. And, Mr. Speaker, interestingly enough, it was concerns 

that were outside of what — except with the exception of 28.3 

— are currently entailed in Bill 150. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to ensure that all the changes that 

are contained in Bill 150 are being made appropriately, are 

addressing what they should address, Mr. Speaker. And that we 

are careful that, because this Sask Party government seems to 

continue this pattern of secrecy and lack of accountability and 

transparency which, quite frankly, defines this government, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’re going to ensure that they are held 

accountable. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to adjourn 

debate and allow my other colleagues to take their place and 

make their comments known as well. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh Acres has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 150, The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 153 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 153 — The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very happy to 

weigh in on the debate around Bill No. 153, The Provincial 

Court Amendment Act. 

 

So first I want to start by outlining what this Bill is designed to 

do, or so this is what the government has told us it’s meant to 

do. This Act, Bill No. 153, is going to repeal section 8.1 of the 

Act that established the civil division of the provincial courts. 

So this part will allow Provincial Court judges from other 

provinces to be appointed as temporary judges in Saskatchewan 

when required to deal with a file where all Saskatchewan 

Provincial Court judges are in a conflict or appear to be in a 

conflict position. So that there are occasions where judges do 

find themselves in a conflict of interest with one or more . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Being now 5 p.m. this Assembly will adjourn 

until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6077 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6077 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6077 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6077 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6077 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6078 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6078 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6078 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6078 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6078 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6078 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6078 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6079 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6079 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6079 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6079 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6079 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6079 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6080 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6080 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6080 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6080 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Tribute to Howard Anderson 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6080 

 Recovering Our Connection at City Park Collegiate 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6081 

 Saskatchewan Addictions Awareness Week 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6081 

 Celebrating Saskatchewan Writers and Publishers 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6081 

 Diabetes Awareness Month 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6082 

 La Ronge Elder Receives Lifetime Achievement Award 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6082 

 Report Impaired Drivers Program 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6082 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Funding for Education 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6082 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6083 

 Educational Assistants 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6084 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6084 

 Supply of Physicians 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6085 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6085 

 Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facilities 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6086 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6086 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 156 — The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act, 2010 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6087 

 Bill No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6088 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Private Bills 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6088 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6088 



 

MOTIONS 

 Appointment of Children’s Advocate 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6088 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6089 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6089 

 Bill No. 147 — The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6089 

 Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Broten ................................................................................................................................................................................................ 6091 

 Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6094 

 Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6099 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


