




















































Hansard: March 30, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 39A  TUESDAY, MARCH 30, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4573 

 March 30, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Assembly today some special guests that have joined us in 

your gallery. I won’t introduce all of them by name, but you can 

see, Mr. Speaker, we’re joined by current members of the naval 

forces of the country and naval reserves as well, some retired 

members, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I will introduce three very special guests who joined us earlier 

today for a ceremony in the rotunda. Commander Derek Moss 

is the commanding officer of Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship 

Regina; Lieutenant Commander Corey Thiemann is the 

commanding officer of HMCS [Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship] 

Queen; and also joining us from British Columbia, coming 

home from British Columbia, is Commander (Retired) Neil 

Sorsdahl of HMCS Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had the opportunity to gather in the rotunda 

today and pay tribute to the Royal Canadian Navy to honour 

their 100 years of service to our country, 100 years of 

protection and of defence of the freedoms in our country and 

also the defence and the securing of our prosperity in the 

country. And we also had the chance to accept from them a 

great token, a wonderful montage, a framed montage of HMCS 

Saskatchewan, both iterations which we will display proudly in 

the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would ask that you and all members of the Assembly pay 

honour and welcome to these who have joined us today in the 

Legislative Assembly, thanking them for their presence and for 

their service to Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 

like to join with the Premier in welcoming Commander Moss, 

commanding officer of Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship Regina, 

also Lieutenant Commander Corey Thiemann, commanding 

officer of Her Majesty’s Ship Queen, and also retired 

Commander Sorsdahl, who we learned during the ceremony 

today hails from Mossbank, which is just south of Moose Jaw. 

 

And I was very pleased this afternoon to hear the Premier’s 

comments when he spoke about the numbers of Saskatchewan 

and Prairie boys that joined the navy during World War II. I 

actually had a bit of a debate over this in Newfoundland. It got 

quite heated, I’m afraid, because they didn’t believe me that 

there was such a large Saskatchewan presence. 

 

The ceremony today was wonderful to mark the 100th 

anniversary, but I have to say it also brought back some very 

fond memories, as my late father-in-law served in the navy on 

the HMCS Kelowna and was based at Prince Rupert during the 

war. 

 

So this afternoon, good information, very good commemoration 

of the 100th anniversary and 100 years of the navy in Canada. 

But also some very good memories for many families I’m sure 

you’ve brought right across Canada. So thank you very much 

and welcome to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River, the 

Minister Responsible for Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d 

like to join with the Premier and the member opposite to 

welcome our guests to the Assembly this afternoon, our special 

guests. They are part of the senior service of Canada, which is 

sometimes a little tough for me to say, knowing my 

background. But I definitely would like to welcome our special 

guests here today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s other members in your gallery that I’d like 

to introduce to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly. 

And I’m very pleased to introduce Murray Daku. If you’d stand 

please, Murray. Murray is currently a vice-president at Hitachi 

Canada Industries in Saskatoon. 

 

Murray was born and raised in Saskatchewan, received his 

mechanical engineering degree from U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan], 1987. He has been employed with Hitachi in 

Saskatoon for the past 20 years. Murray is an active board 

member in the business community, and is currently serving as 

the Chair of STEP [Saskatchewan Trade and Export 

Partnership]. He is also the Chair of the Boiler and Pressure 

Vessel Safety Board under the Ministry of CPSP [Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing]. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I also have two other 

guests in the gallery, two brothers from my constituency that 

have quite an interest in politics. And I’d like to introduce 

Shaylor Layman. And Shaylor is from Woodrow. And his 

brother, Shelby Layman is from Assiniboia. 

 

And I would ask all members to welcome these guests to their 

Assembly this afternoon to watch the proceedings. Welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to you 

and to members of the Assembly 22 grade 10 students who are 

seated in the east gallery. They’ve come here today with their 

teacher, Erin Harlos. 

 

I want to say to the students and to their teacher, welcome to 

our Assembly. We’re going to be meeting with you a little later, 

so I just want to say greetings, and enjoy the question period. 

And we’ll see you shortly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Toth: — And if members would allow, the Speaker 

would like to extend a warm welcome to Murray as well, and 

your mom . . . Bert and Violet are doing well. Thank you. 



4574 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise today and present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens 

of Saskatchewan who are concerned over the condition of 

Highway 123. Mr. Speaker, Highway 123 is an important link 

to the outside world for the communities of Cumberland House. 

And like so many communities in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, the Cumberland House important link is the only road 

in and the only road out and therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is of 

great importance to the people living there. I’ll read the prayer, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining and repairing of 

this highway. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Cumberland House. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 

to introduce a petition that was originated with the 

Saskatchewan Student Coalition. This petition is in support of 

the implementation of the Saskatchewan scholarship fund, that 

being the fund that was promised by the Sask Party in the 2007 

provincial election. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement the promised Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the signatures on today’s petition are all from 

Regina and I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on harmonized sales tax, and that such a 

harmonized tax would adversely affect the people of 

Saskatchewan and that clearly, Mr. Speaker, there has been no 

consultation on any introduction of this unfair tax or this tax 

increase. And the prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

stand firmly opposed to the Saskatchewan Party 

government’s stated intent to pursue the implementation of 

a harmonized sales tax and thereby increase the taxes 

which Saskatchewan people pay on a range of items 

including agricultural products, books, children’s clothing, 

children’s footwear, dentures, electricity, food and drink, 

hearing aids, medical devices, newspapers, optical 

appliances and orthopedic appliances, and in doing so, to 

cause the provincial government to recognize the hardship 

it would cause the people of Saskatchewan if the 

government implemented a harmonized sales tax, and in 

doing, to cause the provincial government to refrain from 

handling . . . [oh jeepers, Mr. Speaker, sorry] and in doing 

so to cause the provincial government to refrain from 

handing over our taxing authority to the federal 

government. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, with some difficulty, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition on behalf of people protesting the Government of 

Saskatchewan’s heavy-handed essential services legislation that 

is making a mockery of collective bargaining in this province. 

And indeed, it has now been recognized by the United Nations 

internationally as being significantly flawed. And the petition 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to negotiating a fair and just 

collective agreement with health care workers in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the petition is signed by people from Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition in 

support of maintaining educational assistants. As we know, the 

Ministry of Education published a document in November that 

would see the drastic reduction of the number of educational 

assistants in the province. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

. . . cause the government to provide funding for the 

required number of educational assistants to provide 

special needs students with the support they need and 

maintain a positive learning environment for all 

Saskatchewan students. 

 

And this petition is signed by people in Mossbank, Moose Jaw, 

and Tantallon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reinstatement of the 

domestic abuse outreach program in Saskatoon. We know that 

the domestic abuse outreach program provided a number of 

valuable services to women victims of domestic violence and 

their children, including helping women find emergency shelter 

and accompanying them to their homes, court, and hospital, or 

the police station as needed. It was a model for other programs 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4575 

in Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to reinstate the 

domestic abuse outreach program as a provincial 

government service and make it available in all parts of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the good city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. With 

almost one full year of a waiting list for our seniors, this is 

appalling. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that has been circulated by the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition on the issue of tuition, and a call for 

affordable tuition costs and a request that the Sask Party 

government’s actions match its rhetoric on this issue. The 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average of 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 

present a petition regarding the expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The petition is being signed by residents of 

Saskatchewan because the Sask Party government amended the 

retention program to exclude master’s and Ph.D. [Doctor of 

Philosophy] graduates, as well as graduates from outside of 

Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the provincial government to immediately expand the 

graduate retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by the good folks 

from Southey, Kronau, and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition to the Legislative Assembly 

regarding the Sask Party’s lack of action with respect to climate 

change. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately, 

without delay, acknowledge and recognize that climate 

change is occurring and the impacts of climate change are 

escalating and worsening, and in so doing to cause the 

provincial government to undertake immediate actions to 

mitigate climate change by reducing greenhouse gas 

emissions, actions which will serve to protect the 

Saskatchewan people from the significant costs to our 

economy, global security, and the quality of life which 

climate change threatens to bring about, and to also protect 

Saskatchewan people from longer and more frequent 

droughts, reduced river flows as the glaciers which feed 

our rivers shrink, erratic rainfall with more frequent and 

more serious flooding, and loss of at least the southern part 

of Saskatchewan’s valuable boreal forest which is 

treasured by so many in our province. 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, begin the process of creating 

a meaningful, significant, comprehensive, and broad-based 

strategy including enacting substantial and meaningful 

legislation and substantial and meaningful regulations to 

meet the commitment solemnly pledged repeatedly in 

October and November of 2007 during the last provincial 

election by the Premier, the current member from Swift 

Current, who at the time of the last provincial election 

when he made the serious and significant commitment was 

serving as the leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, 

to reduce our province’s greenhouse gas emissions by 32 

per cent from the levels of greenhouse gas emissions 

which our province produced in the year 2007 and to meet 

said 32 per cent reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by 

the year of Our Lord 2020, 10 years from now or one short 

decade away. 

 

And in so doing, to cause the Premier to instruct his 

Minister of Environment, the current member from 

Martensville, to recognize the importance of honouring the 

Premier’s solemnly pledged commitment and to set about 

the important task of developing a substantial and 



4576 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

meaningful plan to seek a reduction of our province’s 

levels of greenhouse gas emissions, rather than continuing 

to evade all responsibility in her duties, to actually address 

this critically important issue which will directly affect our 

province’s economy and the quality of life for all our 

residents. 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, reject the intensity-based 

reduction targets which the provincial Sask Party 

government has shamefully followed the federal 

Conservative government in adopting, in favour of 

absolute reduction targets, and to immediately enact said 

absolute reduction targets in the new management and 

reduction of greenhouses gases Act. 

 

And in so doing to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, reverse its ill-advised decision 

to cut all funding to the prairie adaptation research 

collective and to recognize that the Prairie Adaptation 

Research Collaborative is a valuable and much-needed 

organization in that it generates practical options to help 

Saskatchewan adapt to current and future impacts of 

climate change and fosters the development of new 

professionals in the emerging science of climate change 

impacts and adaptation. 

 

And in so doing, to cause the provincial government to 

immediately, without delay, restore the full amount of 

funding which it recently cut to the Prairie Adaptation 

Research Collaborative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Domremy, Muskoday First Nation, and Birch Hills. I so 

present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition in support of withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. 

Speaker, the existing construction industry labour relations Act, 

1992 has provided a stable environment for labour relations in 

the construction industry in our province. And the petition reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by residents of Denare Beach, 

Regina, Qu’Appelle, Saskatoon, White City, Pilot Butte, and 

Grand Coulee. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to rise in the Legislative Assembly and present a 

petition from residents of Saskatchewan who note that seniors 

living in our province, many live on fixed incomes and are 

victims of physical, emotional, or financial abuse. They, in the 

prayer that reads as follows: 

 

. . . respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan take the following action: to enact the 

Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which would provide 

Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic security 

and protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

The petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by residents of the city of 

North Battleford. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive deficits that the Sask Party’s created, and 

they recognize that debt growth is growing by the billions under 

their management. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial management since 

taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens of Humboldt, 

Saskatoon, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

again today to present a petition in support of the Saskatchewan 

film and television industry. And this petition is signed by 

residents who are concerned about this government’s failure to 

address issues critical to the film and television industry which 

is thus driving out jobs and investments from Saskatchewan. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to make changes to 

the film employment tax credit that will allow the 

Saskatchewan film industry to be more competitive with 

other provinces to reverse its decision to shut down the 

Saskatchewan Communications Network and to work with 

the industry to reverse the decline in film production. 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4577 

This petition is signed by the good residents of Regina, White 

City, Prince Albert, and Muenster. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce a 

guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Advanced 

Education and Employment has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to 

all members of this Assembly, I’d like to introduce Doug 

Richardson, a well-known, energetic citizen of this province, 

former chief of staff to John Turner. He’s made considerable 

contributions to our country, to our province, and to 

communities well beyond. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 

welcoming Mr. Richardson to his Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Nutana 

on her feet? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — With leave to introduce a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to also introduce Doug Richardson to the Assembly and 

welcome him here today. Doug is a constituent of mine. But 

also he is a person that I used to attend the University of 

Saskatchewan with and have known for a long, long period of 

time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he has served on the board of SaskTel — I believe 

he still does — and he brings a certain wisdom and business 

acumen to that board. And I think that Doug has done a good 

job on behalf of all the citizens of the province, whether it’s 

serving on the board of SaskTel, working with the University of 

Saskatchewan, or any other myriad of interests that he has. 

 

So I want to join with the minister in welcoming Doug to the 

legislature and I hope he enjoys question period. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

Canadian Navy Centennial Celebration 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

Canadian Navy made a centennial presentation today at Regina 

City Hall where Mayor Fiacco accepted a gift commemorating 

the service of two warships that bore that name of the city of 

Regina. 

 

The first, HMCS Regina, was a Flower class corvette built at 

Marine Industries Ltd. in Sorel, Quebec and commissioned into 

the Royal Canadian Navy in January of 1942. She saw service 

in the North Atlantic and in the Mediterranean. 

 

On August 8th, 1944, while rescuing survivors from the 

American merchant ship, Ezra Weston, Regina was torpedoed 

by the German U-667. She sank in 28 seconds with the tragic 

loss of 30 members of the crew. 

 

The second HMCS Regina, a Halifax class frigate, was also 

built at the MIL [Marine Industries Limited] shipyard in 

Quebec and commissioned in 1993. She has carried the name of 

the Queen city to ports around the globe. From time to time 

she’s been able to assist in promoting Saskatchewan trade. The 

main passageways in Regina carry familiar names like Albert 

Street and Victoria Avenue. When Regina is alongside in a 

foreign port, it’s not unusual to see her mascot, Gunner the 

Gopher — and I hear this is Gainer’s seagoing cousin, Mr. 

Speaker — visiting local children in hospitals and schools. 

 

In naval tradition, there is a different toast for every day. And 

while we don’t have anything to toast with here — a sailor 

would never toast with water, Mr. Speaker — Tuesday’s toast 

does seem appropriate today. To our sailors. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

New Bridge for Saskatoon 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I stand 

in the House to deliver some good news to the people of 

Saskatchewan, specifically the good people of Saskatoon. Last 

night at a meeting of Saskatoon City Council, councillors 

ratified an agreement to build the south bridge. The contract 

was awarded in a joint venture between Graham and Flatiron 

construction companies whose price came in between 30 to $40 

million lower than other proposals. The total value of the 

project is to be 224 million, which includes building the bridge, 

the freeway, and the interchanges. 

 

Mayor Don Atchison says this bridge will unite the city. The 

Circle Drive bridge project provides an urban bypass to divert 

commercial vehicles and other traffic moving in through 

Saskatoon’s downtown core, helps maximize the capacity of 

existing infrastructure by reducing the congestion on Idylwyld 

and Circle Drives. 

 

This project was made possible through the co-operation of 

municipal, provincial, and federal governments. Our Sask Party 

government committed $98 million to this very special project. 

Mr. Speaker, this is just another example of how our 

government is moving Saskatchewan forward through 

important investments in infrastructure. Our government is 



4578 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

looking towards the future for planning for growth, something 

that was inconceivable by the previous NDP [New Democratic 

Party] government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Disposition of Pension Income 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to commend the Leader of 

the Opposition, the member for Regina Douglas Park, for 

showing his personal leadership by acting to give one-half of 

his monthly MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

pension to charity. Upon his return to this legislature, the 

Leader of the Opposition began receiving a salary for his 

position, but he also continued to receive his MLA pension 

which he had been collecting for a number of years after 

leaving public office to work in the private sector. 

 

He attempted to have payments from his MLA pension stopped 

but was told this was not possible under the law. One-half of the 

money paid into the MLA pension fund comes from the 

individual member while the other half comes from taxpayers, 

so the Leader of the Opposition took the step of ensuring that 

one-half of each month’s MLA pension payment goes to 

charity. 

 

For this decision, the Leader of the Opposition should be 

commended, Mr. Speaker. I note that his actions have somehow 

been criticized by the member for Kindersley. Perhaps that 

member’s comments would carry weight if he would publicly 

call upon all of the current Sask Party members to give up their 

taxpayer-funded pensions or if he had come clean with the 

public about his run-in with the law on that Saskatchewan 

highway a few years ago or if he had publicly called upon his 

Premier to pay back the people of Saskatchewan for the 

thousands of dollars of liquor that he stole while serving in the 

Devine government. 

 

In this case I know Saskatchewan people will dismiss the 

mudslinging of the member from Kindersley . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed, but I would 

just ask members also to be mindful of the words they choose, 

whether it’s member statements or question period. I recognize 

the member from Batoche. 

 

HMCS Weyburn 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the course of the 

navy’s centennial celebrations, I expect we’ll hear various 

members honouring the many ships which have borne 

Saskatchewan’s name. Of the many ships in, if I may call it, 

Saskatchewan’s navy, only two were ever lost in combat. The 

first, HMCS Regina, has already been mentioned. The other 

was the HMCS Weyburn. 

 

Built in the Port Arthur shipbuilding yard, HMCS Weyburn was 

commissioned into the Royal Canadian Navy in November of 

1941. After service in the North Atlantic and the Gulf of Saint 

Lawrence, HMCS Weyburn was assigned to escort duty in the 

Mediterranean. On February 22nd, 1943, in calm seas at 10:17 

a.m., Weyburn struck a mine off Cape Espartel, east of 

Gibraltar. 

 

Dazed sailors were emerging from below through dark 

passageways and the searing steam from burst pipes. According 

to Lieutenant Pat Milsom: 

 

I found many of the men already had given their own 

lifebelts to supplement those of others who were injured or 

were not strong swimmers. That was just like our men, 

thinking of the other fellow first. 

 

Seven members of the crew, including the captain, Lieutenant 

Commander Thomas Golby, lost their lives. Mr. Speaker, we 

will remember them. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Health Care Provision 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the Health 

minister proudly declared that Saskatchewan people do not care 

if their health care is delivered in a private system. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s simply not true. They do care. 

 

They care about making sure that quality health care is available 

to everyone in this province regardless of how much money 

they have. They care about not going bankrupt when their child 

is severely ill. They care about not being handed an invoice 

when they walk out the doors of a hospital. They care about the 

decades of hard work by people like Tommy Douglas and Roy 

Romanow to create the strong system we have today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even if the members opposite cannot grasp the 

above principles, maybe they can understand the simple 

economics. Publicly funded health care is proven to be the most 

cost-effective model of health care delivery. Furthermore the 

Sask Party made a commitment in their 2007 election campaign 

to “providing all citizens with access to a comprehensive, 

publicly funded and publicly administered health care system.” 

 

They also promised a children’s hospital and long-term care 

facilities. Obviously we could not trust their promises then, and 

we cannot trust them now. 

 

This minister is trying to pull a fast one on Saskatchewan 

people. Mr. Speaker, he’s trying to tell them that their only 

choice is to put taxpayers’ money into the private sector. But 

they won’t be fooled, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people do 

care about this government’s slow erosion of our public health 

care system, their backdoor privatization, and their failure to 

protect the institutions like medicare that we value the most. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Double-Dipping 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

in 2008 and 2009 the NDP made speech after speech after 

speech condemning the practice of anyone collecting both a 

salary and pension from the same employer. “This is called 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4579 

double-dipping and, Mr. Speaker, it is wrong, wrong, wrong.” 

Those are the words of the member from Saskatoon Nutana, 

Mr. Speaker, on March the 3rd, 2009. The member from The 

Battlefords said, and I quote, “Taxpayers in this province don’t 

want to pay . . .” 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask the members 

to allow the member from Cannington to make his statement 

without interference. I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I quote from 

the member from The Battlefords who said: 

 

Taxpayers in this province don’t want to pay twice for the 

same service. 

 

[If you went] If any of us went to coffee row . . . [and 

asked] do you favour that someone could retire today, 

draw their pension, and get . . . back to the same job and 

then draw both pension and salary . . . the simple majority 

of people would say no, that’s double-dipping. And that’s 

not appropriate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what the NDP said about double-dipping in 

the past. But today they’re saying, now that our leader is the 

one that’s double dipping, can we ignore everything we said in 

the past? To quote the Leader of the Official Opposition, you 

bet we can. I think the NDP leader summed up his profound 

sense of entitlement best when he said, and I quote, “For me it 

works, because I think . . .” 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The members of the opposition were 

constantly involved in interfering. The Speaker got up. The 

Speaker allows the member, the Speaker allows the opportunity 

for the member to have the 15 seconds that the Speaker took. 

The member can complete his statement. Then we will go to the 

member from Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I quote from 

the Leader of the Official Opposition: “For me it works, 

because I think I’m doing what is right.” Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Forestry Industry 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, it’s reported that Eacom Timber 

has raised $145 million to acquire Domtar saw mills in Eastern 

Canada. A spokesperson for RBC Capital Investments has 

offered positive comments, stating of the company’s CEO 

[chief executive officer]: “Doman’s timing is pretty good and 

he’s widely known.” And according to the Montreal Gazette, 

Mr. Speaker, the governments of Ontario and Quebec have 

supported the deal because they want a sustainable future for 

hard hit forest product communities. 

 

The Gazette also reports that “EACOM’s only Western asset 

will be an idled sawmill in Saskatchewan.” Now to know why 

that mill is idled, Mr. Speaker, we need only ask the member 

from Kindersley. Back when Eacom was looking to invest in 

Saskatchewan and help out a hard hit forest product community 

here, he cut them out of any share of wood allocated under the 

FMA [forest management agreement]. At the time he claimed 

he had “grave concerns” about the company, saying it wasn’t 

viable and that the CEO was “a shady character.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the markets appear to have come to a different 

judgment. Market analysts have come to a different judgment as 

well, as have the governments in Ontario and Quebec. It’s now 

the judgment of the minister that’s in question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Kindersley has been caught 

making another dreadfully incorrect forecast. Combine this with 

his prediction on potash, and we believe both the member and 

our province would be better served if the member from 

Kindersley would keep his deliberations to himself. 

 

The Speaker: — Before we go to oral questions, I just want to 

acknowledge that earlier on I had asked the Clerks to stop the 

clock whenever the Speaker interjected in the statement by 

members. And I’m informed that the clock was stopped; it was 

my mistake for not realizing that. And indeed I have to 

acknowledge the member from Cannington had exceeded the 

90 seconds. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

Health Care Provision 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Health. Yesterday in the Assembly the minister 

made the astounding statement, and I quote, people could care 

less whether it was privatized, referring to medicare. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say that in the last 24 hours, members of 

the opposition have received many phone calls, many texts, 

many emails from Canadian and Saskatchewan residents from 

right across the country indicating that Saskatchewan people 

and Canadians care a great deal about medicare in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this: is his 

government so out of touch with the reality and the public of 

Saskatchewan that he believes that he can privatize medicare 

and get away with it in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I will restate what I had 

said yesterday. I was using the example, I was using the 

example of ambulance services in Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

I’ve had the opportunity to talk to many private deliverers of 

ambulance service around the province whether it’s Dave 

Dutchak in Saskatoon or Walter Dutchak in North Battleford, 

whether it’s Sally Graefer in Fort Qu’Appelle. And I can quite 

easily report that not one of those operators have had a patient 

ask is this a privately run ambulance or a publicly run 

ambulance. All they’re really worried about is making sure they 

get quick care and professional care and get to the hospital in 

time, Mr. Speaker. That was the statement I made yesterday, 



4580 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

and I’ll stand by it today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I can well understand why 

the minister would want to restate, restate his comments from 

yesterday where he said, and I quote. I want to quote from the 

minister when he said, people could care less whether it was 

privatized, referring to medicare. I want to restate for him 

clearly what he said yesterday. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the last election campaign the Premier, the 

now Premier, made it very clear to the public that he was not 

interested in privatization. What we’re seeing here today, 

whether it relates to SaskPower or medicare, we are moving 

very directly towards privatization. 

 

Can the minister tell me where he got the idea and when he had 

the courage, and why he didn’t have the courage to say this 

publicly to the people of Saskatchewan during the last election 

campaign? We all know that the previous leader Mr. 

Hermanson had the courage of his conviction to say what he 

believed. Why didn’t the minister have the courage to admit to 

the public that he would move to privatize parts of SaskPower, 

and in this case particularly medicare? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I tell you, Mr. Speaker, this 

party made a commitment in the last election campaign, Mr. 

Speaker, that under the auspices of a universal system, a 

single-payer universal public health care system, this 

government would take the necessary steps to reduce NDP wait 

times for health care. And we’re doing that, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

doing that in the province today. 

 

It wasn’t very long ago, it wasn’t very long ago, that the 

member opposite was in the cabinet of a government in 1996 

that was reported as saying in 1996, March of that year, that 

private health care may play a larger role, Mr. Speaker. The 

Minister of Health at the time in the NDP government said they 

were open to the private sector playing a larger role. And then 

there’s a quote in the article that goes something like this, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’m quoting, “Both ideas were endorsed by 

Saskatchewan Union of Nurses President Judy Junor.” 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister 

is this: at a time when the great debate in the United States is 

around public health care and they have made in the last couple 

of weeks great strides in moving towards public health care, the 

Premier talks about waiting lists. And how his plans to improve 

the waiting list situation, I think this is his fourth plan, how has 

it worked so far in his own area? In Cypress Hills region, it’s up 

by 100 per cent. Three plans from this Premier, and the waiting 

list is up 100 per cent. 

 

My question to the Minister of Health is this: at a time when the 

United States is moving towards public health care after many 

years of debate, how is it that this government gets it so wrong 

that we’re moving in the other direction towards private health 

care in this province? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to be very clear. The 

changes that we’re going to bring to reduce wait times in the 

province are part of a universal publicly funded health care 

system with a single payer, Mr. Speaker. We know that last 

week, after the member for P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote 

erroneously pointed out that wait times were increasing, wait 

times are actually falling down, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the CIHI [Canadian Institute 

of Health Information] report pointed out that wait times were 

less in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, people are 

waiting too long for surgery in the province of Saskatchewan. 

We accept that. We have inherited a bit of a bulge in the wait 

times. 

 

We’re keeping up with current demand, but we have to take 

care of this bulge, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to do it with 

additional money in the budget. We’re going to deploy the 

facilities all around the province to get it done. We’re going to 

use private partners, as has been used in the health care system 

for a long time in different areas, Mr. Speaker. We intend to 

give the people of this province quicker surgeries. The NDP 

offered them only ideology, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Support for First Nation and Métis People 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In last week’s 

budget, that government killed the Aboriginal employment 

development program. Since its establishment in 1995, nearly 

5,000 First Nations and Métis people have been hired directly. 

Over 2,000 have received work-based skills training, and more 

than 40,000 people have received cultural awareness training. 

 

To the minister: why is Aboriginal employment development 

paying the price for that government’s incompetence and 

financial mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

Aboriginal employment development program, with a modest 

budget of under $800,000, was in operation for 15 years. And 

during that time good work was done, to be sure. But in a 

decade and a half, Mr. Speaker, circumstances change. 

Economies change, and program offerings have to change as 

well or they become outdated. That’s exactly what the NDP 

allowed to happen to this program. And at the end it was old, 

tired, and ineffective, much like the NDP themselves. 

 

Can we do better, Mr. Speaker? You bet we can. We worked 

closely with the real experts in career training and job readiness, 

and that’s our colleagues in the Advanced Education and 

Employment, Labour ministry. And we’ve benefitted from 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4581 

expert advice and insight provided by First Nation and Métis 

citizens. Together we’ve created a new approach that is more 

focused, more integrated, and more comprehensive, with 

programs specifically designed to meet the needs of 

Saskatchewan’s First Nation and Métis people. And with a 

budget of nearly . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. I recognize the 

member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Partners 

in Aboriginal employment development received a letter from 

that government on budget day, telling them the Sask Party had 

unilaterally broken the third party agreements that had been 

signed. That’s 111 agreements, Mr. Speaker, signed by upwards 

of 200 community partners. They were told that “current 

Aboriginal employment development program agreements are 

no longer valid.” 

 

To the minister: what gives him and that government the right 

to tell their community partners that their Aboriginal 

employment development agreements are no longer valid? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what we’re glad 

to tell the people of Saskatchewan. It’s just too bad the member 

can only focus on what’s not in the budget rather than what’s in 

the budget. If he did, he’d see exciting new initiatives designed 

to significantly increase the participation of our province’s First 

Nation and Métis citizens in Canada’s strongest economy. 

 

Initiatives like the creation of three new northern enterprise 

regions that will increase the pace and range of economic 

development dramatically in the North, the population of which 

is 85 per cent First Nation and Métis citizens, Mr. Speaker. 

Initiatives like a 70 per cent increase in funding to the Clarence 

Campeau Development Fund, an extremely effective and 

well-organized group that provides loans, mentoring, and 

business-planning services to Métis interpreters all over the 

province, and initiatives like the creation of a brand new $3 

million economic development fund to ensure that 

Saskatchewan’s First Nation entrepreneurs can count on 

appropriate assistance to grow their business enterprises. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the only problem with the 

increases that the member is talking about opposite is that they 

don’t equal more than what they’ve already cut from this 

budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On budget day a reporter asked the minister the following 

question, “You’ve had some cuts to your ministry today.” The 

minister starts his response by stating, “We’ve had all kinds of 

exciting news.” That’s what he actually said, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Later in the interview, when pressed on the killing of AEDP 

[Aboriginal employment development program] in reference to 

the partners and potential partners of AEDP agreements, he 

said, and I quote, “These people have their own resources. 

They’re simply asking for the right insight, the right experience, 

and we’re delighted to be able to provide it.”  

 

Mr. Speaker, the insight and the experience was the Aboriginal 

employment development program. What on earth is that 

minister talking about? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I 

mentioned before, by the end of its 15-year run, the Aboriginal 

employment development program became old and tired and 

ineffective, much like the opposition themselves. And we are 

not alone in this opinion. Who else thinks so? Why, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s the leadership of Saskatchewan’s First Nation and 

Métis citizens themselves, the very people the program was 

intended to serve. They told us the program, while valuable at 

first, had become old and tired and ineffective and in need of 

replacement with something better, something more focused, 

something more integrated, and something more 

comprehensive. 

 

Clearly, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we’ve done with these 

new programs which I will call exciting. It’s time the opposition 

woke up, smelled the coffee, and realized that its 

stuck-in-the-past approach is not helping move our First 

Nations and Métis folks forward. It’s holding them back. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — And, Mr. Speaker, another thing about AEDP, 

this is a program that’s been regarded as a best practice in 

Aboriginal employment development, and it’s also leveraged 

about $1 million each year in funding from the federal 

government. 

 

The Sask Party math here escapes understanding. Cut $786,000, 

lose roughly $1 million dollars in federal funding annually, and 

then run around telling people how delighted and excited you 

are. When is that government going to start making sense? 

When are they going to move forward on First Nations and 

Métis employment development instead of doing their level 

best to move the cause of Aboriginal employment backwards in 

this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Mr. Speaker, we are blessed here, 

blessed indeed. After an entire year’s silence during which the 

member opposite found nothing related to First Nations and 

Métis citizens worthy of his commentary, we have question 

after question today. It’s a banner week. It’s a banner year, Mr. 

Speaker. We are delighted and excited with the new programs, 

millions and millions of new dollars being invested to help our 

First Nations and Métis folks move ahead with their very 

important priorities with respect to economic development. This 

is great news from the ministry, great news for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



4582 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Support for Post-Secondary Education 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, until that exchange I thought I 

knew who the weakest minister was on the opposite side, but I 

think there’s a new reigning champ over there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is on behalf of all post-secondary 

students in the province and it’s to the Minister of Advanced 

Education. Can he explain how tuition increases of at least 5 per 

cent in the province is helping university and SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology] 

students? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to provide an update to the people of the province 

who are very pleased with our track record, and that is $1.6 

billion invested over the course of three budgets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Certainly what we see is over 70,000 students. And when we 

look across other provinces, Mr. Speaker, we see reductions in 

Alberta. We see BC [British Columbia] sitting at zero. We see 

Manitoba coming in a little bit higher. We see New Brunswick 

sitting at 3 per cent. Five point one per cent increase in 

post-secondary education funding in this budget, Mr. Speaker 

— 5.1 per cent, the highest of any Canadian province that has 

yet come forward with a budget, Mr. Speaker. We’re very 

pleased with our track record, and we’re going to do our best to 

ensure that affordability and accessibility remain key themes 

that students can bank on when it comes to this government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this budget was a disappointment 

to post-secondary students from across the province because 

they will face a huge tuition increase as a result of the Sask 

Party government’s incompetence. As Chris Stoicheff of the 

Saskatchewan Student Coalition says, “Unfortunately tuition is 

set to increase five per cent and that sort of increase is 

unsustainable.” 

 

To the minister: why is he asking post-secondary students to 

pay the price for the Sask Party’s inability to manage the 

books? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we can see and we can turn 

to Kyle Addison, University of Regina student junior president, 

and in a quote, “And in the overall scheme we’re pretty happy,” 

Mr. Speaker. Certainly we’re hearing from students, faculty 

members, certainly from administrators saying they appreciate 

the priority that this province has put on post-secondary 

education. 

 

Included in that investment, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen reducing 

interest rates to prime, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen the elimination 

of vehicles as being factored into student financial assistance. 

And we’ve ensured that students have the opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, to benefit even more from the graduate retention 

program by additional investments, Mr. Speaker. Our track 

record is solid: affordability and accessibility when coupled 

with excellence and innovation. Mr. Speaker, we’re leading 

Canada in post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I know the minister likes his 

speeches on tuition and affordability, but he’s the only one, Mr. 

Speaker, because every time he addresses the issue of tuition, it 

simply means students will be paying more. Students tell me 

that accessibility to post-secondary education has a tremendous 

amount to do with affordable tuition. To add insult to injury, 

increased expenses for students aren’t only about tuition. 

Whether it’s SaskPower bills or housing costs, we’ve seen life 

become much more expensive under the Sask Party. 

 

To the minister: at a time when the Sask Party continues to 

increase the overall cost of living, why is he forcing students to 

pay more through higher tuition? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, again with $1.6 billion, Mr. 

Speaker, invested in post-secondary education with additional 

dollars to ensure that tuition remains reasonable, Mr. Speaker, 

with additional dollars so that we can move forward on student 

housing, whether we’re talking about Prince Albert, whether 

we’re talking about the University of Saskatchewan, whether 

we’re talking about a brand new initiative in Moose Jaw, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We can see that these investments, Mr. Speaker, when coupled 

with additional investments in student financial assistance, 

we’re leading the country in investments in post-secondary 

education, ensuring that affordability and accessibility coupled 

with excellence and innovation — this is the characterization of 

post-secondary education in the province of Saskatchewan. And 

we’re pleased and proud to stand with the students, the faculty 

members, the senior administrators in making sure 

post-secondary education remains a priority for this province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well for years now 

we’ve been hearing the minister going on and on about his 

so-called tuition management system. But so far, all students 

know is that this tuition management system means they’ll be 

paying more and more each and every year. 

 

To the minister: if he wants students to trust him, perhaps he 

should just tell it like it is. Will he admit today that his so-called 

tuition management system is nothing more than an euphemism 

for unsustainable tuition hikes? 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4583 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to credibility 

with students, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite might want 

to begin with the fact that they raised tuition 99 per cent at the 

University of Saskatchewan and 88 per cent at the University of 

Regina, Mr. Speaker. When it comes to credibility, they can see 

$1.6 billion, Mr. Speaker, over the course of the last two years. 

 

We’ve moved forward with student financial assistance for the 

first time since 1994, Mr. Speaker. What we see members 

opposite being unable to grasp the significance of the 

investments being made by this government, especially as they 

relate to post-secondary education to students, to faculty, to the 

administrators. Mr. Speaker, our track record is solid. We are 

leading post-secondary education investments in this country, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Federation 

of Labour, the 16 provincial unions, and five national unions 

filed a complaint with the United Nations in 2008 over the Sask 

Party ham-handed approach to labour legislation. The United 

Nations International Labour Organization has now ruled 

against the government and in favour of Saskatchewan workers. 

The Sask Party has mismanaged the labour legislation files so 

badly, Mr. Speaker, that the United Nations is now recognizing 

the government’s incompetence. 

 

To the minister: will he now recognize that the Sask Party’s 

labour legislation violates international law? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as this government came 

into office, Mr. Speaker, there was a strike on both university 

campuses. We saw more than 400 people per day being turned 

away from the Royal University Hospital, Mr. Speaker. That’s a 

sad legacy of those members opposite. 

 

What we said, Mr. Speaker, is that we would move forward 

with essential service legislation, Mr. Speaker. We would do so 

in a fair, balanced, moderate, reasonable fashion, Mr. Speaker, 

based on best practices from across the country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The people of this province support essential services, Mr. 

Speaker. And certainly what we are working to do is ensure that 

the highways remain plowed, that the hospitals remain open. 

And in a fair and balanced way, the right to strike remains, Mr. 

Speaker. This is based on the best practices from across the 

country, and we stand by this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder that 

member’s caught the attention of the United Nations with that 

answer? He’s caught the attention because he doesn’t 

understand at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this isn’t just about being horribly embarrassed on 

the international scene, this could have huge implications here 

at home. A similar ruling in BC in a BC case resulted with the 

Supreme Court of Canada ruling in favour of the union 

complainants. The government was slapped with 100 million 

worth of penalties. 

 

Bills 5 and 6 are currently being challenged before the courts, 

and the Federation of Labour has indicated its intention to use 

the United Nations decision to seek damages. To the minister: 

why didn’t he listen to the NDP when they told him there would 

be consequences if he rammed through this legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, more than 70 per cent of the 

people of Saskatchewan support essential services. More than 

75 per cent, Mr. Speaker, more than 75 per cent of the people of 

this province, Mr. Speaker, support secret ballots, the 

democratization of the workplace, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as it relates to taking advice from the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll just make reference to 1998 when a certain 

complaint was registered by the ILO [International Labour 

Organization] to the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. And 

certainly, Mr. Speaker, their track record is one that is not very 

encouraging in this area. 

 

The people of this province support essential services. The 

people are safer, Mr. Speaker. The right to strike remains, Mr. 

Speaker, and we ensure that we’re working with the best 

practices like those across the country. As one of the last 

provinces to move forward on essential services, it’s the 

abysmal record of the members opposite that certainly remains 

in question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the member now stands up 

and gives credibility to the United Nations. He now talks about 

the ILO. He should listen to them, then. Mr. Speaker, despite 

the prestigious United Nations body condemning his labour 

legislation, the minister pledged yesterday, he pledged 

yesterday to fight against working people all the way to the 

Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

Let’s be clear. The Sask Party government walked away from a 

court battle with the federal Conservatives that could have 

resulted in 800 million a year for Saskatchewan families. The 

Sask Party walked away from that battle, but they are not 

willing . . . They’re willing to fight on in their war on the 

working people of this province in spite of international 

condemnation. To the minister: what kind of sense does this 

make? Why is the Sask Party fighting with working people in 

spite of the serious rebuke from the United Nations? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 



4584 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, our track record on working 

people goes something like this: more jobs, more people, higher 

wages, and lower taxes, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan under this 

government has the lowest unemployment rate in the country 

for nine consecutive months, Mr. Speaker. Saskatoon and 

Regina, the second and third lowest unemployment among 

Canada’s major cities, and the lowest youth unemployment in 

the country. Employment is up 3,100 jobs, year over year. Out 

of the top 10 cities for economic development and business 

climate, we see five right here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

Average weekly earnings, Mr. Speaker, a record at $832 per 

average weekly earning, Mr. Speaker — another record. 

 

What we see, Mr. Speaker, more working people, more people 

in this province, lower debt, Mr. Speaker, and the people of this 

province as a result are supporting this government. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, what we see from this 

government are mismanaged finances, privatization, and going 

to war with the working people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister doesn’t get it. The Sask Party rammed 

through their labour legislation without any meaningful 

consultations. The NDP warned them repeatedly that their 

approach was wrongheaded, but that has become the pattern 

with the Sask Party. They pressed on in their incompetence. 

Now the United Nations has condemned his legislation and 

demanded that he keep them, Mr. Speaker, that he keep them 

informed of the corrective action that he is taking to fix this 

ill-conceived legislation. 

 

To the minister: will he do the right thing, consult the parties, 

and fix his failed legislation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, our record on consultation 

regarding the legislation in question, Mr. Speaker: 84 

stakeholders contacted, 20 meetings, ads in 100 papers, 40 

emails received, 30 letters received. Mr. Speaker, as a result, a 

number of amendments were moved forward, Mr. Speaker. And 

the members opposite know this, Mr. Speaker. We spend 

enough time in committee, at least they should know it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The bottom line is, Mr. Speaker, with a growing economy, with 

a growing population, with the lowest unemployment rate in the 

country, Mr. Speaker, we certainly see the track record of this 

government. We’re rolling up our sleeves, and we’re working 

on behalf of the working people of this province, and that’s 

what we’re going to continue to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? Order. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington to 

state his point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During 

members’ statements, the member from Regina Walsh Acres 

accused the Premier of theft when she said, and I quote, he stole 

liquor. Mr. Speaker, that is unequivocally false. I ask that she 

withdraw those remarks and apologize unequivocally. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In response 

to the point of order, Mr. Speaker, it is well known during that 

period of time, and we have before us a number of newspaper 

articles that in fact say just that, Mr. Speaker. It’s the headline. 

The member has admitted that it was an experience, that he lost 

his way, and in fact that they hoped he had learned from it, Mr. 

Speaker. These are facts that are well recorded, Mr. Speaker, 

and I think, Mr. Speaker, the point of order should be taken not 

well taken. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’ve listened to the point of order and 

the response, and I will take a moment to look at Hansard as 

soon as it’s available to make sure I’ve recorded accurately and 

responded accurately to the point of order. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney has asked 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the House a 

member seated behind the bar on the opposition side that should 

be familiar to many people in this House, the current Leader of 

the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan and a long-time 

member of this Assembly, Mr. Rick Swenson. And I would ask 

all members to show their appreciation for him taking the time 

to join us today here. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 1032 through 1046. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1032 through 1046 are tabled. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to order the answers to 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4585 

questions 1047 through 1052. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1047 through 1052 are ordered. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answer to 

question to 1053. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 1053 is tabled. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to order the answers to 

questions 1054 through 1091. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1054 through 1091 are ordered. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

questions 1092 through 1097. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1092 through 1097 are tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Gantefoer that the Assembly approves 

in general the budgetary policy of the government.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased today to stand and for a few minutes conclude my 

remarks prior to moving the amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday I took a great deal of time to go through 

the situation of the current budget with the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, pointing out to the people of 

Saskatchewan that in the province’s own document, their own 

2010-2011 budget financial highlights document, Mr. Speaker, 

that it shows very clearly under summary financial statements 

on a summary financial basis, Mr. Speaker — which is the 

accepted accounting principle for all governments in Canada 

except where? Except Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And why 

not in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Well because if we were 

operating under summary financial statements, Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Finance couldn’t change the accounting rules 

whenever he wanted to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So unfortunately Saskatchewan, as a result of a Finance 

minister who believes he has to be able to change the rules to 

make it look the way he wants, Mr. Speaker, we have a 

situation. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s probably higher 

than the Minister of Finance. He’s probably directed directly by 

the Premier, Mr. Speaker, not to move to nationally accepted 

financial statements on a summary basis, Mr. Speaker, so that 

the Premier can do what he wants, when he wants, how he 

wants, and try to convince the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan that he’s not only not running a deficit, but he’s 

not adding debt. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, both those things are not true, Mr. Speaker. 

Because today in the government’s own highlights of financial 

statements, Mr. Speaker, they’re showing that they have a 

$622.7 million deficit as of budget day, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. 

Speaker, that doesn’t include many, many expenditures some of 

which the Minister of Finance has already admitted he didn’t 

put in the budget and knows will be expenditures in this fiscal 

year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just to highlight a few of those. One 

would be settlements for health care contracts, Mr. Speaker, 

that aren’t in the budget. When asked, Mr. Speaker, those things 

are outside the budget. Teachers’ salaries, Mr. Speaker, teachers 

are going into bargaining in March, Mr. Speaker. In fact they’re 

at the table now. The contract would end in March, Mr. 

Speaker. Pardon me, Mr. Speaker. The contract would end 

August 31st. Pardon me. I have to be accurate on that: August 

31st, Mr. Speaker. But nonetheless, several months prior to the 

end of the fiscal year and, Mr. Speaker, no money, absolutely 

no money budgeted for teachers’ salaries, Mr. Speaker. No 

money . . . [inaudible] . . . for the health services association 

collective bargaining, no money for the Cancer Agency 

collective bargaining. No money for many government agencies 

that would come from the General Revenue Fund, Mr. Speaker. 

No money set aside. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, he put forward to the people of Saskatchewan 

a budget he knew would be wrong the day he put it before the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, to 

put a budget before the people of Saskatchewan that you expect 

them to trust and believe in, Mr. Speaker, it should contain the 

expenditures that the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

should be seeing in that fiscal year, Mr. Speaker. We shouldn’t 

have a Finance minister standing and telling us that no, my 

budget doesn’t contain these expenses I know I will have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that just doesn’t have credibility. You should 

undertake to put before the people of the province a budget you 

know to be accurate and contain the entire expenditures you 

expect in that fiscal year. Now, Mr. Speaker, we have before us 

a budget that doesn’t do that, but we also have a budget, even 

without that, that shows a $622.7 million deficit on a summary 

financial basis. And if you add the expenditures they haven’t 

put into this budget that they know should be there, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re not talking 622.7 million anymore. We’re 

talking over $1 billion, Mr. Speaker, $1 billion. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a minute now to talk about 

another key element in any budget, that of debt. Mr. Speaker, I 

go to page 62 of the budgetary documents, the budgetary 

summary supplied by the Government of Saskatchewan to the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And on budget day we 

had the government tell us, the Finance minister and the 

Premier tell us the debt wouldn’t increase. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have before me their budgetary summary, page 

62. And it shows in, Mr. Speaker, in 2009 government debt on 

the General Revenue Fund was $7.7 billion. 2010, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s $8.1 billion. Now 7.7 to 8.1, that’s an increase in any 

mathematics class I ever took. You know, you take 8.1 and 



4586 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

subtract 7.7 and it’s an increase — increase of only point four 

billion dollars or $400 million, but nonetheless an increase. 

And, Mr. Speaker, let’s just look another year. You go to 2011, 

all of a sudden it’s up to $8.8 billion. So you subtract from the 

year before, from 2010, 8.8 subtract 8.1, lo and behold, you 

have an increase of what? $700 million, Mr. Speaker. This is 

coming right from their budgetary document, page 62. It’s 

available online as well, I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, so the people of 

Saskatchewan can go look for themselves. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, through each year through 2014, the 

government is projecting increasing the debt of this province on 

a General Revenue Fund basis, increasing to a total of $11.8 

billion by 2014. Mr. Speaker, that’s an increase from 2009 of 

over $4 billion, Mr. Speaker. I want to just say that for the 

people of Saskatchewan. In their own projections and how they 

plan to manage the province of Saskatchewan, they intend to 

increase public debt — the money you and I as taxpayers must 

pay back. They intend to mortgage the futures of our children 

and our grandchildren by over $4 billion in just five years, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that’s a huge burden to put upon our 

children and grandchildren. 

 

And what does it tell me, Mr. Speaker? It tells me that we have 

a government in power identical to that of the 1980 Grant 

Devine government who spent money recklessly, that spent far 

more than they were bringing in and, Mr. Speaker, believed that 

they could accumulate debt in any way they chose and they 

could mortgage the futures of their children and our 

grandchildren and they don’t care. Well, Mr. Speaker, we saw 

this record in the 1980s. We saw this record and we saw this 

type of reckless, reckless increase in debt. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about another measure of debt 

that’s widely accepted across North America and the G8 [Group 

of Eight], Mr. Speaker, and that’s your debt to GDP [gross 

domestic product] ratio, the percentage of debt as the 

percentage of your GDP. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we go to 2009. It was 11.9 per cent. Now 

what’s the debt to GDP going to be in 2010? 14.3 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. Wow. An unbelievable over 2.5 per cent increase in 

debt to GDP ratio. Mr. Speaker, that’s incredible. That means 

they’re spending money considerably higher than the growth of 

the economy of the province of Saskatchewan. Well if a 

government undertakes an expenditure track that’s greater than 

that of the growth of the GDP in your province, Mr. Speaker, 

you’re doomed. You’re doomed to go in debt. The red ink is 

flowing unbelievably fast, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But let’s look at the outer years. In each of the years between 

2010 — today — and 2014, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to see the 

ratio of debt to GDP increase, Mr. Speaker. So in each year 

over the next four years, Mr. Speaker, of this government and 

their plan, they expect the government debt to increase faster 

than the economy of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That is 

unsustainable, Mr. Speaker. And only once in our history have I 

ever seen or ever heard in my lifetime, Mr. Speaker — and I’m 

47 years of age — where any government in this province 

undertakes such a reckless, reckless look at the future, Mr. 

Speaker. And that was the Grant Devine government in the 

1980s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So today in 2009, we’re at 11.9 per cent debt to GDP. In 2014, 

we’ll be at a rate of 16.5 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That is an entire 

5.4 per cent greater, 5.4 per cent greater, Mr. Speaker. Our debt 

to GDP will rise 5.4 per cent, Mr. Speaker. It’s not sustainable, 

Mr. Speaker. When you’re increasing your spending by 5.4 per 

cent more than what you’re doing, than what the growth of the 

economy is, Mr. Speaker, that is significant, Mr. Speaker, 

absolutely significant, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about just two other areas 

before I wrap up my comments today. One is the government’s 

move to privatization. Mr. Speaker, this government can say 

they have no intent to privatize our Crown corporations, but 

then why are all their actions in the contrary direction? Why are 

they privatizing power generation? Why are they privatizing 

units and cost-effective units in SaskTel? Why are they selling 

off good sustainable business units out of SaskTel, undermining 

the financial viability of the company, Mr. Speaker? Why are 

they doing this? Why would a government who tells the public 

of Saskatchewan, the people, the taxpayers that they have no 

intent to do so, why are they doing it, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Well I don’t know. But I don’t know how long they think they 

can fool the people of Saskatchewan when they say they have a 

balanced budget and they don’t, when they say they’re not 

increasing debt and they are, when they say they’re not selling 

off our Crown corporations and they are, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And on top of selling off profitable business units and 

privatizing portions of our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, 

they’ve stripped the entire equity from our Crowns, Mr. 

Speaker. They’ve stripped the equity from our Crowns so that 

any improvement in our Crown corporations is going to result 

in utility cost increases to the people of Saskatchewan. And 

we’re seeing it already in power. In 14 months, we’ve seen a 16 

per cent increase in urban power rates and 20 per cent for rural 

power rates, Mr. Speaker, in just 14 months. They’re stripping 

the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. They’re increasing your utility rates 

and they’re setting our Crowns up for total privatization one 

piece at a time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, why would a government say they’re not 

going to do that, then do it, Mr. Speaker? I’ll tell you why. 

Because they ideologically believe that the government, even 

through Crown corporations, should not be involved in the 

economy, Mr. Speaker. It should only be done by the private 

sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everybody knows that a strong economy has a 

mixture of both private, public, and co-operative sectors, Mr. 

Speaker, in order to have a strong, sustainable economy. Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t know why the members opposite don’t 

understand that as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to spend my last five minutes or so 

contrasting why we’re in this economic situation we’re in, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m going to say, Mr. Speaker, very clearly, we’re in 

this economic situation because we have a Premier today, a 

Premier today that doesn’t understand. He doesn’t understand 

business. He doesn’t understand accounting. He doesn’t 

understand good public policy and, Mr. Speaker, he doesn’t 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4587 

understand how to lead. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I will say he does understand how to 

cheerlead. He’s a good salesman, slick as can be. But, Mr. 

Speaker, you can do that for so long before the people of 

Saskatchewan come forward and they understand what’s going 

on in front of them. They see right through that slick salesman 

attitude, Mr. Speaker, and they understand what’s going on in 

their province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has sold people that 

. . . he put billboards up saying he reduced the debt by 40 per 

cent. Well in one day he might have done that, Mr. Speaker, but 

the very next day he started adding to the debt of the province, 

Mr. Speaker. So that particular billboard would have been 

accurate on a single day, Mr. Speaker, not beyond. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, so he’s out there saying that, Mr. Speaker. I 

hear ads today on the radio saying that he has a balanced budget 

with no deficit and that he has no increase in debt in this fiscal 

year. Mr. Speaker, his own, his own budgetary documents say 

that’s not accurate, Mr. Speaker. They say that’s inaccurate. It is 

not telling the facts to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, you have to tell 

the facts, Mr. Speaker. The people will understand, Mr. 

Speaker. They will understand that he isn’t telling the facts to 

the people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a few minutes and contrast 

what the Leader of the Opposition did when he was a member 

of the government and had to deal with a similar financial 

situation left by a previous right wing government, Mr. 

Speaker. He fought hard to balance the books, Mr. Speaker, and 

put in place a foundation in which this economy could grow. He 

was instrumental in the changes to the royalty rates that made 

the Saskatchewan economy boom, Mr. Speaker. He balanced 

the books. He made the tough decisions. He dealt with the debt 

established by the previous government, Mr. Speaker, the 

previous Conservative government which the Premier was part 

of, Mr. Speaker, as a ministerial assistant in a back room telling 

them how to do . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Delivery. Delivery boy. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Yes, he was also the delivery boy from the 

liquor stores as well, Mr. Speaker, but that’s secondary. And 

some day we’d hope he’d pay the $19,000 back to the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan, that he really owes to the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, he didn’t pay 

that $19,000 back to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

But today I want to talk primarily about the budget, Mr. 

Speaker. And the $19,000 is money owed to the people of 

Saskatchewan which would help with his own deficit right now. 

If he paid the $19,000, it would make a minor change in the 

budgetary documents, but it would help. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has a track 

record of being a steadfast leader, whether it’s in this legislature 

as a senior cabinet minister of the government being responsible 

for the economic turnaround of our province, being the Minister 

of Economic Development when we put that foundation for the 

great economy we have today in place and built it over a series 

of years, responsible for measured tax cuts, Mr. Speaker, over 

the years that helped grow the economy till in 2007, before the 

election, we reached our peak, Mr. Speaker. We had an 

economy firing on all cylinders, Mr. Speaker, on a foundation 

built by the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk for a few minutes about the 

success of the Leader of the Opposition in his private life as 

well, Mr. Speaker, as a successful farmer, a large farmer, Mr. 

Speaker. But also has been a successful executive in an 

international energy company, Mr. Speaker, working around the 

world with different governments and workers across the world, 

Mr. Speaker, in order to help improve, of course, the financial 

situation of the company that employed him, but also for the 

well-being of those workers and the people of that country, Mr. 

Speaker. And he brings that wealth of experience back to this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I personally want to thank the Leader of the 

Opposition who left a position paying several times more than 

he would make being the Leader of the Official Opposition to 

come and present for the people of this province an alternative 

to the Brad Wall government, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier’s 

government that is taking us down a road of debt and deficit, 

Mr. Speaker, the likes of which we haven’t seen since the 

1980s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition came back so that we 

could present an alternative, a solid alternative through an 

opposition led by an individual who has extensive government 

experience, Mr. Speaker, extensive economic development 

experience, extensive financial experience, who understands the 

farming community of our province, Mr. Speaker, understands 

the business community of our province, Mr. Speaker, and 

understands what it takes to make the tough decisions, Mr. 

Speaker, to keep an economy growing, to be able to provide 

services for its citizens and, most importantly, Mr. Speaker, 

understands you have to do that in a way that’s compassionate 

and caring for the citizens under . . . of whom you have the 

ability to make those decisions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when I contrast the Leader of the Opposition with the 

Premier, who in two business ventures that he undertook, Mr. 

Speaker, went bankrupt . . . Mr. Speaker, the Country Music 

Hall of Fame went bankrupt with the government money. 

Government money and, Mr. Speaker, $150,000 of government 

money. When you can’t sell country music in Swift Current, 

Saskatchewan, you’ve got a problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we contrast the Leader of the Opposition — a 

solid history of involvement in both the farming community, in 

government in this province, Mr. Speaker, and in the 

international business community, Mr. Speaker. That 

experience, Mr. Speaker, prepares him to be the leader of this 

province like none other, Mr. Speaker. And when you contrast 

it to the current Premier, Mr. Speaker, there is no comparison. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I want to consider, I want to bring 

forward to the people of the province of Saskatchewan real 

concerns about a government that, led by a Premier, that it says 

they have a balanced budget when they have, by their own 

documents, a $622.7 million deficit. A government that tells us 



4588 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

they haven’t added to the debt when their own budgetary 

documents say they are, and over the next four years debt will 

increase by $4 billion or more, Mr. Speaker, in their own 

projected spending. And a government who is going to increase 

their spending greater than the level of GDP by more than 4.5 

per cent over the next four years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That is a very, very serious concern to the members on this side 

of the House. But even more importantly, Mr. Speaker, it is a 

serious situation for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s time that 

the Premier and his government told the people of 

Saskatchewan the real story of how they’re operating this 

province, and about the programs they’re cutting, and about the 

deficit and debt that they’re accumulating, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. 

Speaker, as a result of this budget’s actions by the Premier and 

his government, I move an amendment to the budget motion: 

 

That all the words after “That the Assembly” be deleted 

and the following be added: 

 

that the government no longer has the confidence of the 

members of the Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan 

for the following reasons: presenting an inaccurate 

portrayal of the province’s debt and deficit while forcing 

Saskatchewan people to pay the price for the government’s 

financial mismanagement through hurtful cuts to important 

programs and services. 

 

And this motion is seconded by the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to enter the debate 

on the budget presented by the Sask Party government . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The motion presented by the member from 

Regina . . . Order. Order. I’d ask the members to allow the 

Speaker to bring forward the motion, the amendment to the 

budget motion moved by the member from Regina Dewdney. 

Will the members take the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to enter the debate 

on the budget presented by the Sask Party government and to 

second the amendment brought forward by the member from 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why am I not supporting the budget, the Sask 

Party budget? Well let me tell you why. It’s because of the cuts 

to the programs, and here are a few of the programs that are 

being cut, Mr. Speaker. I just want to highlight a few of them, 

and there’s many of them, but I just want to highlight a few of 

them at this time. 

 

First Nations and Métis Relations, in that department some of 

the cuts that have impacted a people that are very proud, trying 

to be a part of this province’s economics, with the education 

and trying to be true partners and trying to come to work with 

provincial and other government and other organizations to 

make sure that they are truly seen as partners and want to do 

that. And I see some of the cuts to the programs that are 

affecting First Nations and Métis are totally appalling from this 

government. The Sask Party government has lost touch with the 

Aboriginal people of this province. 

 

Northern skills training, the program, this program had an 

opportunity to help Aboriginal people, northern people, to gain 

access to jobs, some training, and access to meaningful 

employment and to take their part and paying their share of the 

taxes and taking care of their families. And they were very 

proud. It does something for people when they have a job. You 

have truly something to get up in the morning to go to, you’re 

very proud of. You’re providing for your family. And northern 

people, Aboriginal people, truly feel like that. Many people in 

our province want to wake up in the morning, have a job to go 

to. And unfortunately here’s a program that was cut affecting 

First Nations and Métis people and northern people. So I just 

find it very odd that this government brags about its connection 

to the people of our province. 

 

Yes, you know, Mr. Speaker, the people did elect a Sask Party 

government in 2007. We know that. There’s 38 members on 

that side; there’s 20 members on this side. But you know, Mr. 

Speaker, there was hope. And some people had hope when they 

seen the record profits that were in the . . . and I guess the 

surplus that was in the budget. People were very excited to see 

that. Okay, here’s a government, they’re going to take a 

direction, advice from the people. And, Mr. Speaker, the people 

felt like, hey, the NDP government left you all this money, a 

surplus of money — an inheritance if you want to call it that — 

and they were hoping that the government would do the right 

thing for all people and would take care. But unfortunately as 

we go through budget after budget after year . . . they’re going 

into their third year of mismanagement, mismanagement of the 

money, the people’s money that was meant for programs like 

northern skills training that was meant to do some good. 

 

[15:00] 

 

You know, I’m going to go into looking at First Nations-Métis 

pre-K [pre-kindergarten] education. Why would anyone want to 

cut a program there to educate people with pre-K, a pre-K 

program? I don’t understand why anyone would want to cut an 

education program, Mr. Speaker. They have no idea. 

 

Yet on one hand they want to send the message out: we 

understand; we want to work with the communities; we want to 

consult. They don’t. They don’t consult the people out there. 

They don’t do that. They make the decisions and then they go to 

them, well here’s what’s good for you. People don’t want to be 

treated like that, Mr. Speaker. They have a right to be treated 

with respect, dignity . . .  

 

An Hon. Member: — And decency. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — And decency. Right on. You know, I just 

want some of the cuts that are affecting First Nations and Métis, 

you know, I’m going to get a chance to go into some of the 

other areas, Mr. Speaker, and I will. There’s lots of room and 

lots of time to do that. 

 

You know, we’re looking at the health. Health had a budget 

increase, you know, 123 million. Well that’s good. But when 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4589 

you find out how much the nurses will take in their salary 

increases that this government negotiated, what is going to be 

left for increased spending from this government? 

 

Well Aboriginal people and northern people and members of 

this province, Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker, there’s a 

lot of people dealing with addictions. Lots of people dealing 

with addictions, Mr. Speaker, a lot of families and it’s not good. 

We need to reach out. The government needs to reach out and 

try to assist those community members. It’s unreal, the hurt 

that’s going on in some of our communities. You know, 

promoting health care. You know, Mr. Speaker, you look at 

mental health and the youth suicide. So many of our youth and 

our community members are losing their battle with depression. 

They need more help, more services to come into the 

communities. 

 

And let’s be honest here, Mr. Speaker, this government has an 

obligation to those communities to bring the services where 

those communities are needed, not to have people travel so far 

away out of their communities. It needs to be addressed. This 

government has an obligation to deal with it. We’ve been 

talking about it. We’ve been bringing up concerns. The 

members opposite . . . My colleagues have done an excellent 

job of trying to bring the concerns forward, Mr. Speaker, of the 

needs, not only in the North, not only in First Nations reserves 

and Métis communities, but all over this province. And I think 

my colleagues and myself have done an excellent job, doing the 

job we’ve been asked to do as official opposition on behalf of 

the people to send the message to that government. 

 

You know, you look at long-term care, the needs, the North. 

And I’m going to be very clear, petition after petition, day after 

day in this House to that government reminding them about the 

seniors back home — our elders. They want to be able to stay in 

their communities. They want to be with their loved ones, with 

their community members. And they want to speak their 

language. And they want to know that there’s a presence, and 

they want their family to be able to come and visit them. Well 

unfortunately they don’t have a community with a long-term 

care facility 10 minutes away, sometimes 5 minutes away from 

a community. The North doesn’t have that opportunity. We 

have to go three and four hours away from our communities. 

 

You know, there’s sometimes a waiting list in some of the other 

communities I’ve heard about in the South. And sometimes 

those places are full, and I know there’s a waiting list. But the 

people there have access, maybe sometimes 10 minutes away 

from their community, 20, until their long-term care facility 

opens up or a bed opens up in their community so they get to 

move back. But the waiting list is almost one full year for the 

North, one full year. No other community except for the North 

experiences that. That is appalling. Something needs to be done 

and addressed. 

 

And, you know, we serve petitions day after day in the House 

and we have hundreds of signatures from people back home, 

appalled. And some people have to lose, Mr. Speaker, have lost 

their loved ones. And they’ve been away from their community 

and have to bring them back home to bury them. And to watch 

the struggle that some of my community members have to deal 

with, it’s so sad to watch the compassion, but you know they 

still have hope. And I still have hope that the Sask Party 

government can do the right thing by listening to the people. 

 

But I can tell you one thing, Mr. Speaker. The people may send 

the message to the Sask Party, and you may not be the 

government in 2011. Mark my words on that one. You may not 

be. You may not win enough seats. The people may send you a 

message. You have lost touch with the voters. You have lost 

touch with the people. You have lost the support. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, I’m going through the list, and 

we’re looking at different things. We go to highways, Mr. 

Speaker. In the North, we know there’s a lot of wealth 

generated by the highways economics, and the economics that 

come out of the North help everybody in the province. And I 

realize we all have to work together. Provincial coffers, there’s 

money there. I look at the cuts. We’ve been raising petitions in 

the House, concerned about Highway 102, Highway 123 to 

Cumberland House, Highway 135 to Pelican Narrows. 

Wollaston Lake Road, they want an all-weather road, and they 

have to. But it’s going at a snail’s pace. They’re very unhappy. 

People are tired of waiting. 

 

When projects were announced under the current government, I 

don’t see anything in this budget in Highways that’s going to 

help any of the northern communities. When you’re cutting 78 

million out of it, how is that going to address some of their 

concerns? When you had all the money prior, how are you 

going to use those dollars? And maybe the Highways minister 

will say, oh no, we’re going to commit what we have to make 

sure some of the northern roads are addressed. 

 

And I’m not talking about maintenance. I’ll say this much. We 

have maintenance people out there that work on those roads, 

day in and day out, and they do an excellent job. It isn’t about 

them. They do an excellent job. They’re unionized, and they do 

a good, good job for our province . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . There you go. There you go. 

 

You know, you look at First Nation road access, the pilot 

project with the $5 million, they call it deferred. Okay, a nice 

way of choosing that word. Okay. I say cut; they say deferred. I 

guess that will have to come out yet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, we do the job we’re asked to do on 

behalf of the people back home and people that give us support. 

And they want to be able to have access to their MLAs and 

share their concerns, their hopes, their wishes, and what their 

needs are truly, you know. And we have a lot of staff, Mr. 

Speaker, that are out there in all of our offices, CAs 

[constituency assistant] and our families. And I want to thank 

my wife and my family for their support. I’d also like to thank 

my CA, Vicky, in my La Ronge office; in the Pelican office, 

Bernice. They do an excellent job dealing with peoples’ 

concerns and I just want to acknowledge them. And, you know, 

I just want to acknowledge the team that I have supporting me 

back home in the Cumberland constituency. And that team is 

growing more and more all the time, and I think will continue to 

grow when they see the Sask Party government leaving them 

way behind. And that’s wrong. 

 

You know we’re looking at housing, and housing is a huge 

issue in the North. And I know they came out with a new 

program, headstart to a home program. You know, very few 



4590 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

details. You know, they cheerlead about it. We don’t know 

exactly what it’s going to mean to us in the North, but I can tell 

you this: the people back home know they need more housing. 

And they see Sask Housing budget being cut — another shot. 

 

We in the North have a lot of Sask Housing units and we rely 

on that. We need a lot more. We have overcrowding in many of 

our communities, Mr. Speaker. The health that our young 

people, infants, our young people, our seniors, our elders are 

dealing with because of the overcrowding, it creates more 

health dollars to be spent, whether it’s provincial or federal 

dollars. You have overcrowding. If one person is sick . . . 

Sometimes we have three families living in a home that was 

designed for one family. Where do I see this government’s 

commitment to those community members back home? There is 

no commitment from that government. The Sask Party will not 

commit to that. That’s appalling, and the people see that back 

home. 

 

You look at the rest of the province, and we’ve seen affordable 

housing, not only in the North. Saskatoon, Regina, other 

communities are feeling it. It’s not just about the North. It’s all 

over. This government has an obligation. This budget doesn’t 

do enough to help those people. Because of this government’s 

mismanagement of our finances, those people are being asked 

to pay, and that is wrong, Mr. Speaker. That is wrong, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

You know, looking at some of the other areas, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to go back to Forestry, and it is an honour to be the critic 

of Forestry. You have to try and understand what some of the 

forestry industry is going through, the communities’ impact. 

And you know there’s private people in that business, lots of 

them in this province. They were looking for help and 

assistance. 

 

And then I see the government is supposed to do that. They 

know that. And again the Sask Party government turned their 

back on them. Why? Because of their mismanagement of the 

finances, that’s why. People are seeing it. You look at the 

community of Big River. They know the Sask Party turned their 

back on them. They see that; they know that. 

 

You know, they have an MLA, supposed to fight for them. I 

don’t know what the MLA representing Big River did for them, 

but I’m hearing from them they’re not happy. They’re not 

happy at all about it. 

 

You know, when you have the members and they’re supposed 

to represent their communities, their constituencies and do a 

good job, and the people elect them . . . And I understand that. 

We all get elected. Whoever gets the most votes is who 

represents those community members. But you’re supposed to 

represent all the community members. We have an obligation 

and that’s what you’re asked to do. 

 

So when I see the members not dealing with the issues, forestry 

. . . And there’s a number of those members from the Sask Party 

that have a lot of the forestry in their constituency. And the 

communities and the workers and the families and the industry 

and the private sector, you need to stand up for those 

communities. Tell your government, tell your government to 

help them. Don’t sit there and do nothing and cheerlead when 

you’re asked to. Start fighting for the people that need your 

help. 

 

We go into the forest fire management budget was cut. Another 

cut, Mr. Speaker. The North is going to feel a large impact, but 

so will some of the other communities — Prince Albert, 

Meadow Lake, you know. There’s so many different 

communities that will be impacted. Denare Beach, Buffalo 

Narrows, you know. You have communities, La Ronge, you 

know, you have so many communities that will be impacted. 

 

And I wonder, what was the thinking behind all that to come up 

with the $30 million cut to the forest fire management budget. 

Especially, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be such a dry, dry spring. 

There are so many people concerned about that. And to see cuts 

like this, you know, I’m really waiting for the minister to 

explain, Mr. Speaker, exactly who will be impacted by this $30 

million cut. Who exactly will be impacted? The people want to 

know. They have a right to know. They’re waiting. Some 

people have families. They rely on those dollars when they’re 

working. But they’re not hearing much. Why is that?  

 

You know, what’s going to happen at the end of the day, should 

we have a fire season that we have never seen anything like it, 

especially with no harvesting of the forest — thanks to that 

government, the harvesting. 

 

[15:15] 

 

So if you have that, no plan from them with the forestry sector. 

You have a task force that apparently Delbert Kirsch went on 

and we seen what happened there. We asked the member from 

Batoche, we see his task force, and nothing ever materialized 

from that. So the member from Batoche says, oh yes, you know, 

yes, we’re working on it. And he went and did a tour, as far as I 

know and that’s what I heard. And he was going to . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, government paid for it, more 

taxpayer’s dollars. You know, same community, Duck Lake, 

there you go. Good one. They’re waiting for some water. In 

case they have fires, they’re not going to have any water. 

Interesting. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, we look at this and I think the 

people in the North are really concerned. They’re tired of this 

government ignoring them, their concerns. But I know we’ll 

continue the fight and we’ll bring petitions. We’ll do all that we 

can. And as their representative, I will bring their petitions here, 

listen to their issues, their concerns. I will express those the best 

way I can. That’s what I was asked to do, and I will do that. I 

will do all I can, Mr. Speaker, to bring the concerns from back 

home, and I will do my part in here. I will continue to work on 

behalf of the people of the Cumberland constituency. And like I 

said, we have a lot of issues to deal with and there’s many 

issues. 

 

You know, you look at a budget and, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

going around trying to explain how good this budget is for the 

province. And they’re trying to sell it and it’s not going over 

very well. They know that, but they’re scrambling around, 

trying to make sure everybody understands. Put the spin on it. 

Well they’re going into their third year, and I think the people 

are starting to see the spin and they’re not buying it anymore. 

 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4591 

People are not buying it anymore, Mr. Speaker when they’re 

seeing programs affected by this government because of their 

mismanagement, their decisions. The people trusted them, gave 

them an opportunity to represent all people in this province and 

take care of our finances. You were given that responsibility 

and do the right thing for all of us. Do the right thing on behalf 

of people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I want to make comments and referring to the 

Minister for First Nations and Métis Relations, responsible for 

Northern Affairs. You know, he did an interview and he made 

some comments today. And I’ll be honest with you. Some of 

the stuff that the minister made comments to the radio station 

about some of the projects that were going to be cut, and he 

talked about exciting times and how excited he was, like I don’t 

get it. And people back home are waiting patiently for that to 

happen. And hopefully he can come and explain exactly, you 

know, his stand on that. 

 

But on that note, he talks about the enterprise regions will be 

taking care of, I believe, the trappers’ needs. And the minister 

did not try to use the enterprise regions to deal with the trappers 

to understand them. Let’s be honest here. And I really don’t 

think the minister should try to pull the fur over the trappers’ 

eyes, to be honest with you. 

 

You know, I look forward to seeing the minister attend the 

trappers’ convention April 9th and 10th in La Ronge. And you 

know, seeing him there’ll be good. And more so, you know, I 

want to hear the minister say exactly about his budget cuts. And 

here’s what I would like to hear him explain himself to the 

Trappers Association. You know, the minister’s comments that 

the monies would be better spent elsewhere as opposed to 

covering trappers’ conventions is sure to go over well with all 

the trappers there, Mr. Speaker. I just can’t wait for his response 

to them. 

 

I don’t imagine it will be much of a response. Now we go back 

to some of the northern communities, and we look at trappers 

and we look at the commercial fishers and we look at the 

different sectors working in the North, in the mining, and we 

see a lot of the revenue going into the government’s coffers. 

And northerners watch that and they understand, yes, 

economics is good. People understand that. And we’re training. 

 

But what the people don’t understand is how the Sask Party 

government continues to turn their back on them and not deal 

with some of the issues. There are many issues. We know 

there’s roads, there’s housing. We watch all the different 

programs that are being announced. Maybe there’s some new 

ones in the South, you know. And there are some programs. 

 

And you know, the autism budget that came out, I will 

commend the government for that. Very positive. There’s a 

good thing they did so I want to acknowledge that. But, you 

know, again they had to be pushed and had to do some lobbying 

and the people worked hard. And the people that lobby received 

some money to help them out in their struggles and that is a 

good thing. I think, Mr. Speaker, and I think we’ll see that more 

and more people coming to this House, lobbying that 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They’re responsible. They make the decisions but I think, Mr. 

Speaker, they don’t consult, they don’t talk to anybody, Mr. 

Speaker. They just go ahead and make the decision and then 

deal with it later. 

 

Well we’re going to try to help them. We’re going to try and 

bring people forward that will come to their Assembly, bring 

their issues and their concerns, and hopefully the government 

will hear, whether it’s through a petition, a member’s statement, 

an introduction, or meetings being set up with the different 

ministries, the different ministers, and try to make sure they 

understand the issues of Saskatchewan people. 

 

We’re going to do all we can to work with them and try to assist 

them, Mr. Speaker, because we have a job to do and I 

understand that. And I watch . . . You know, we sometimes 

have difference of opinions, but at the end of the day, Mr. 

Speaker, this House is supposed to represent all of 

Saskatchewan people. Very clearly we have our political beliefs 

and I’m glad I’m on this side of the House, very glad of that. 

You know . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

Mr. Vermette: — And I thank you. The Sask Party members 

say it makes it unanimous. I appreciate your support. Again, 

you guys, thank you very much for your support. You know, 

they like to come up with their little comments every now and 

then and I, you know, yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned to 

them in a calling out from the House I yelled out at the minister 

and the member from Kindersley. I said, what’s your prediction 

in potash? Is it going to be 3 million this time . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Or 3 billion, sorry. You know, 3 billion. 

 

And it was amazing to see the member from Kindersley. You 

know what he says? He says, no, it’s going to be between zero 

and 10 billion. Well you know what? They were off on 3 

billion; they went minus. They went minus 200-and-some 

million so I don’t know if I really see that’s even going to be in 

the ballpark. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of work to do and 

it’s going to take some seriousness. And I’ll be honest with you, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re going to do all we can on this side of the 

House and we’re going to talk to people to get rid of the Sask 

Party government in 2011. 

 

And I’ll tell you, we had a wonderful convention. A lot of 

momentum building, a lot of teamwork. And I see a team 

coming together like I’ve never seen a team coming together. 

I’ve seen the labour. I’ve seen the leadership, the past 

leadership of First Nations. I’ve seen Métis people, I’ve seen 

northern people, I’ve seen all across the province coming 

together, excited and saying, we’re going to do something. 

We’re going to do something. And I know what they’re going 

to do, and we’ll wait and see, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They’re going to get rid of that government. They’re going to 

get rid of that government that mismanages their finances, that 

doesn’t consult with First Nations and Métis and the rest of the 

people in our province — does not consult with First Nations, 

Métis, the Aboriginals, others. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to do all we can to work hard on 



4592 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

behalf of all of the Saskatchewan residents. And we’re going to 

work on behalf of all of them. We’re going to work on behalf of 

the agriculture people. We’re going to work on behalf of the 

northerners. We’re going to work on behalf of . . . Well he 

wants to laugh and say about farmers. 

 

Well let me tell you there, the member from Meadow Lake, let 

me tell you about the farmers. You cut money out of their 

budget and you say you’re in tune with them? And you cut the 

budget? Whatever. The member can say what he wants. You cut 

money from their budget, $90 million-plus from the agriculture 

budget, and he wants to say he’s in tune with them? 

 

There’s so much more that needs to be said. And I know that a 

lot of my colleagues . . . so much my colleagues want to say. 

There’s so much more to say about . . . And I guess, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m going to have a chance to meet with the trappers 

on the 9th and 10th and talk about some of the issues. And I 

mean, for the trappers, some of the fur prices are going up and 

I’m glad to see that. 

 

And some of the trappers, you know, we had our elders. They 

used the trapping to educate their young people, teach them part 

of their . . . And you know, some of the people have had three 

and four generations to learn the trapping industry. And they’ve 

taught them well. But we have some people who trap, Mr. 

Speaker, and they’ve been trapping since, I believe, ’73, some 

of them. 

 

And now they’ve come out with legislation and I don’t know 

why they figure they’re not hearing the trappers. But when you 

pass legislation that affects trappers and you don’t even consult 

with them, and you bring in regulations and rules that do not, do 

not help them. But they see that this government is not 

supporting the trapping industry, the fishing industry. There are 

so many people asking out there for help. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have listened to many of my colleagues 

talk about some of the issues, the finances of this past 

government, and we talk about the past record of my 

government and the past NDP government. And I have to be 

honest with you, you know. Our track record prior to . . . And 

the member from Wood River’s always going on about 

different things and he talks about, he talks about 16 years of 

the NDP. 

 

And I have to be honest with you. Sixteen years of the NDP and 

they did some tough work and they had a tough job to do and 

some of these members that were there had to go through that 

tough work. So I remind the member from Wood River, when 

he talks about that, he never wants to talk about the previous 

years, the Grant Devine years. He never talks about the 

Conservatives and what their government did. He doesn’t want 

to talk about that. Who incurred the debt? All he wants to go on 

is 16 years of the NDP. 

 

Well they have the job now and, you know, your track record’s 

going to come out and we see exactly what’s happening. 

They’re not doing such a great job. They’re mismanaging the 

finances. Sure they’re trying to put the spin — everybody’s 

happy. Well you guys need to understand, Mr. Speaker, the 

Sask Party must understand. Your government, you’re not in 

tune with the people, Mr. Speaker. They are not in tune. They 

are so behind, but you know, they go around trying to spin it off 

— oh your numbers, the numbers, the numbers. 

 

I think at the end of the day the people will truly start to see 

them for what they are, the broken promises that they make. 

Mr. Speaker, the broken promises that they make, all the things 

that they promise and then they say, oh we can’t keep those. 

PST [provincial sales tax], 1 per cent — oh we can’t keep that. 

No. Well you know why? Well 16 years of the NDP. 

 

Well you know what? It’s just about three years of the Sask 

Party and we see where our finances are. And I think we’re 

getting response from the media, from some of the . . . if you 

look at some of the different people responding to the budgets, 

the comments that are in the press, some of the interviews that 

are being done about their budget. You know? It’s all smoke 

and mirrors. There’s no way. It isn’t working. They aren’t 

selling it. 

 

And I think at the end of the day, and I truly believe this, there 

are areas where, when we form government . . . And we will 

form government. The NDP will form government. They will 

form government. And when they’re done with their policy 

review and they will go out to the communities, and as our 

policy review, they will talk to the community members. They 

will talk to the stakeholders, the industry, the community 

members, our elders, our First Nation leader, the people, the 

Métis, and we will talk with anyone in the province, talk about 

policy. We won’t close our doors and hide it. It will be very 

open, transparent. And we will develop some policies that the 

people of the province want and we will have a platform to go 

on. And the people will decide who they’re going to believe, 

who they’re going to trust with their finances, and who has the 

best track record. 

 

[15:30] 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I look at the leadership of both sides. 

You know, we all have leaders of the party and currently I look 

at the Leader of the Official Opposition. And I look at the 

resumés, and I look at the track record and I’ll be honest with 

you. If you look up the experience and the job, I’m very proud 

of our leader, the business side. He has sat in this House, he has 

represented us 100 per cent. You couldn’t ask for better 

representation. You can’t ask for better commitment. 

 

This man is 100 per cent committed. He’s worked unbelievable, 

tirelessly that he works. He shows that. His compassion for our 

province, for the people, I’ve seen that. The promise that he has 

given to all of Saskatchewan people as a leader to do all he can 

to assist them, to hear their concerns, and to work with them 

when they have hope, hope. He tells them, don’t lose your hope. 

Never lose your hope. Work hard. And I believe that. Work 

hard, continue to work. When people have hope, there’s a 

chance, Mr. Speaker. And he truly sees the people. He 

encourages them — don’t lose hope. Fight with us. 

 

He talks to the labour movement. He tells them the same thing. 

Work with us. We’ll fight hard. We’ve seen what the Sask Party 

does. And I can tell you, you can’t ask, Mr. Speaker, for a better 

group of MLAs on this side of the House to work for, who work 

hard and tirelessly. I’m very proud to serve with these 

individuals. I have learned a lot. You know I haven’t been here 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4593 

long, Mr. Speaker. We have lots to learn. I will do my best 

representing my community, my constituency. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I have compassion for my home and 

the community I represent, which I hope we all do. But I listen 

to some of the concerns and some of the hurt that’s going on 

back home and some of the grief I see in some of our young 

peoples’ faces. And they don’t want the government to come in 

and just fix it. They know that. The leadership knows they can’t 

ask the government, just fix it. 

 

But I say this, and I challenge that government, Mr. Speaker, 

when the people come forward and the people have issues and 

the people come up with solutions, Mr. Speaker, and they’ve 

looked at it and they’ve talked about it amongst themselves and 

they say, yes we have issues and we have concerns, and these 

are the things that are bothering and we’re having trouble with, 

whether it’s our youth, whether it’s community, I mean you can 

talk about many different issues that we’re faced with. But 

when they have those issues and they come together with 

solutions — solutions, not just issues and concerns and want to 

leave them at anyone’s door, they’re very proud — when they 

come, Mr. Speaker, with the answers and they come up with 

some solutions, I challenge that government when that happens 

to make sure they respond to them. Take some of your money, 

the people’s money, if you have any left, and please help them. 

 

Now if they won’t, if they won’t help them, Mr. Speaker, I will 

remind them. And I will go . . . [inaudible] . . . and remind 

them. In 2011 you’ll get a chance to speak. You’ll get a chance 

to do an evaluation on all of us in this House. And you pick 

somebody who you felt fought for you and tried. I remind us 

all, we’re supposed to represent our constituencies. And it 

doesn’t matter if you’re a backbencher, if you’re a critic, or if 

you’re a minister, you’re supposed to speak up for the 

community you represent. And I will encourage the 

backbenchers, when you see things that your government is 

doing that is not going to help the communities, speak up and 

say something. You have a voice and it’s a strong one. We all 

have to work together in this House to make sure the issues and 

the concerns of our people are heard. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of work to be done. We know 

that. Again, I ask and say this: education. I look at the K to 12 

[kindergarten to grade 12] education in the province, and I’m 

very concerned with what the government has done. And I 

don’t believe they consulted as they say they do. Oh everybody 

likes, you know, K to 12 system. 

 

They’ve taken away the ability for divisions to generate any 

revenue. When they isolate or there’s a situation where they 

identify that they need the help, they can’t generate any money 

to deal with that issue that has come up in their school division. 

The government took that away from them. They said, you will 

not have the ability to generate any revenue to help the situation 

or an issue or a circumstance that may arise in your school 

division. We will not allow that. We’ll tell you how much 

money you’re going to get. We’ll tell you how much money 

you’ll get, and that’s all you’re going to get. And you can ask 

us. We might let you ask us if you need more. So there’s so 

many concerns out there. 

 

You look at capital and some of the capital projects that were 

announced under that government. There are such a snail pace 

moving, it’s unreal to see. I’ve said this in the House. By the 

time they’re done Churchill High School, my grandkids will be 

graduated and out of the school. They need to get them on 

board and get the facility done, tendered, and on with building 

it. It can be a beautiful facility. It can be positive for the 

community. 

 

There was a lot of people that did a lot of letters back home, 

letters of support from industry, from organizations, letters from 

students, from staff, from the parent council, from the school 

division. A lot of people put letters forward to bring attention to 

that government about Churchill High School renovation. And 

they were pleased. And I acknowledged all the help they did. 

And their work of lobbying got the government to put the 

money forward. Make the announcement, we thought. 

 

Well here we are. We’ll be going into, what, 2011? And where 

are we? You know, where are we? We’re going to be there? In a 

short period of time, 2010 will be done. So I’m wondering, is it 

going to happen in 2010, or is it 2011 like I said? I’m just 

wondering where it’s at. But it needs to get done. It needs to get 

done. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, at this time I’ve had an opportunity to share 

some of my thoughts and the concerns that I’ve heard from 

community members. And I mean there are a lot of issues but 

they’re, like I’ve said, housing, roads, addictions, mental health, 

the commercial fishermen, the trappers. There are a lot of issues 

that have to be addressed, a lot of issues that that budget did not 

address. The Sask Party budget did not address the issues in the 

North or in a lot of our province, did not touch. Why that is? 

Well I think one thing it could be, they have lost touch with the 

communities’ members. They’re not in tune with the 

community like they want to spin it around. They are not. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of work to be done. And I 

know our party, the official opposition, I know myself will 

work hard on behalf of the community members. And like I 

said previously, this official opposition, the 20 members, will 

work hard on behalf of the Saskatchewan people. We will hold 

that government accountable for the finances, for the program 

cuts, for talking and looking at different areas that this 

government does not consult when it makes its decisions. We 

will bring up those concerns, Mr. Speaker. We will bring them 

up through petitions, member statements. Organizations, 

individuals will come here and we will make sure that their 

concerns, their issues are heard by the government. We will 

hold them accountable. 

 

Now at this point, I think I know other members want to get in 

on the debate, so at this time, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ll end on 

that note. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, the Minister Responsible for Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

to participate in the debate on the 2010-11 budget and in 

particular to support our government’s motion and oppose the 

NDP’s amendment. 

 



4594 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

Before I get into the substantive comments, Mr. Speaker, what 

I’d like to do is pay a special thanks to the people of Saskatoon 

Greystone. These are attentive and engaged citizens, Mr. 

Speaker, that I have the honour of representing in this 

Assembly, in their Assembly. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, in 

addition to the people of Saskatoon Greystone, I would also like 

to extend a special thanks to my family. Most immediately and 

directly to my wife, Martha, for her tireless efforts that enable 

me to be here on a daily level, Mr. Speaker, and do my best on 

behalf of the people of Saskatoon Greystone. And she is a great 

asset in that work. 

 

I would also like to . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Indeed. I 

would also like to thank my daughter, Jacqueline. She’s now 10 

and playing soccer and violin and dancing. She’s increasingly 

busy, Mr. Speaker, and what’s becoming apparent is I’m not 

there as often as I should be, Mr. Speaker. And I appreciate her 

patience and her joie de vivre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to my wife and daughter, I’d like to 

pay a special thanks to my mom and dad, my sister, my 

grandparents. Bill Norris is just returned back from the hospital, 

87 years old and doing quite well in his recovery, Mr. Speaker. 

And my grandmother standing beside him, as she has for many 

decades, making sure that he’s able to carry on and having a 

high quality of life. 

 

Over the course of the last year, Mr. Speaker, I have also had 

the occasion to pay tribute to my grandmother, Blanche Coté, 

who’s no longer with us and for that, a person who has been 

missed tremendously and continues to be. 

 

To my colleagues on this side of the House, a special thanks. 

We are a close knit family. We work tirelessly together, and my 

appreciation to each and every one of them is only coupled with 

my appreciation for our team back in Saskatoon Greystone and 

the team both at the constituency office. Kalle is there and 

Lesley’s there. Kalle’s on maternity leave. As well as the team 

here: Kathy’s involved, Linda, Jenn, Lindell, Laura, and Mary, 

chief of staff. These people help to ensure that I’m as well 

positioned as possible. And certainly I know their burdens are 

heavy when dealing with the present company, Mr. Speaker . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Indeed, with their MLA. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more directly, for the people of this province we 

want to make sure — within the Ministry of Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour, just as more broadly 

across government — that we’re rolling up our sleeves and 

working diligently every day to ensure that the interests of the 

people of this province, the interests of this province are being 

acted upon and secured, and together that we’re helping to 

move this province forward. 

 

I think this speech offers a unique opportunity on an annual 

basis to highlight some of the key program priorities, some of 

the broad objectives, if you will, for the next fiscal year, as well 

as some important new initiatives to be undertaken within the 

Ministry of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

And again, not done in isolation, but done in a coordinated, 

coherent fashion to ensure that we’re maximizing coherence, 

cohesion and co-operation right across government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Thanks to the determined work of our Minister of Finance — a 

remarkable colleague who has been tireless in his efforts — this 

budget is balanced. It’s responsible, and it’s forward looking. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to highlight some key comments to 

reinforce that. The Greater Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce 

has said: 

 

Saskatchewan is quite unique in its ongoing commitment 

to [balanced budgets and] debt reduction. This 

commitment is remarkable and should be celebrated by 

every citizen concerned about future generations. 

 

That from the Greater Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce. 

 

More broadly, Mr. Speaker, The Globe and Mail on March 25th 

wrote: 

 

Amid the ruin that has devastated most governments’ 

balance sheets, Saskatchewan stands as a beacon of light, 

tabling another balanced budget yesterday. This province 

has a tradition of fiscal rectitude that crosses party lines, 

but what is encouraging about this budget is that the 

government has taken a pre-emptive stab at spending cuts, 

although times . . . are relatively good. Other jurisdictions 

could stand to learn from its example. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, and so as we see this budget in its characterization 

in being balanced, responsible, and forward looking, we can see 

that we’ve made difficult decisions, ones that focused on 

sustaining our growth and sharing the benefits of this growth 

with the people of our province. And we do so in a fashion that 

characterizes, Mr. Speaker, characterizes the prairie population, 

the people of this province, that is, characterizes the people of 

this province with values like prudence and discipline, with a 

focus on the future and appreciation of young people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, significant steps have been taken to focus 

government investments to help people and to help ensure that 

our progress, the progress of Saskatchewan, is sustained. Our 

budget is balanced. It’s fiscally responsible. And we’ve ensured 

that these measures, these measures which are so vital in order 

for the province to address challenges that lie ahead, we’ve 

helped to ensure that these are in place to sustain the progress 

and forward momentum that we’ve seen in Saskatchewan since 

the 2007 election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A number of independent outside analysts are clear. 

Saskatchewan will emerge from the global economic recovery 

as a fiscal leader right across Canada. The province has already 

distinguished itself as an economic leader this past year. And 

the members present will be familiar with a number of statistics, 

Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan has the lowest unemployment rate 

at 4.3 per cent. This is running at nine consecutive months to 

have the lowest employment rate in the province . Employment 

is up year over year, 3,100 jobs, Mr. Speaker; average weekly 

earnings, $832, Mr. Speaker, year over year. This is the second 

highest earnings growth in Canada, the third highest earnings 

across the country, and a record, Mr. Speaker. Certainly the 

statistics go on. 

 

What we can say is, as we look most importantly at population 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4595 

growth, the members opposite oversaw an era where tens of 

thousands of people left this province, Mr. Speaker. Since the 

2007 election, we’ve been able to see almost 30,000 people 

either return to or come to Saskatchewan for the first time. And 

certainly there will be some announcements to reflect the 

success that we’ve had even in this fiscal year, especially 

regarding immigration. 

 

This is a significant story, Mr. Speaker, these indicators, each 

one highlighting the forward momentum that Saskatchewan has 

under our Premier and this government, all of this done in the 

midst of a global recession. We know that we’re not immune 

from those forces, Mr. Speaker, but that we have weathered 

these forces as well as any could expect. Because we’re not 

immune, Mr. Speaker, it’s one of the key reasons that this 

budget remains so forward-looking. 

 

It makes key investments in health care and in education and in 

advanced education and in other areas to support those in need. 

Some of the guiding principles, some of the guiding principles, 

Mr. Speaker, that we have taken in deliberating through the 

ministry, Mr. Speaker, these include . . . The government’s goal 

is clear. Let’s maintain the province’s economic momentum and 

ensure the people of this province are sharing in the benefits 

that accrue as a result. 

 

As the ministry prepared its budget, we were guided by the 

following principles: invest carefully; second, ensure that the 

people of this province are getting real value for every precious 

dollar from our services and programs as well as those being 

offered by third parties; determine how service delivery can be 

undertaken more effectively, more efficiently, and certainly, 

Mr. Speaker, with new innovation. 

 

As well we’ve said, let’s identify our core programs and 

services. Mr. Speaker, we added to this, invest strategically and 

enhance innovation to support the ministry’s primary goals, and 

of course the future of this government and the future of the 

province. As a result, the Ministry of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour has been able to maintain funding of 

our core programs. The ministry’s budget totals $846.1 million, 

Mr. Speaker, an increase of $7.7 million. 

 

Regarding Saskatchewan’s economic momentum, we made 

realistic and practical decisions on how best to facilitate 

Saskatchewan’s continued economic growth. We will achieve 

this by continuing to support a highly skilled and educated 

workforce and by fostering safe, fair, and productive 

workplaces. 

 

I’ve spoken publicly for some time about the province’s talent 

challenge. Mr. Speaker, that is, we know that we need more 

people with the skills training, the education, the personal and 

professional development to ensure that we’re able to maximize 

the opportunities that present themselves today and into the 

future. 

 

What’s important is, as we look to the future over the course of 

the next five to seven years, we know that Saskatchewan will 

require an estimated 80,000 skilled workers in order to keep up 

with labour market demands. This, Mr. Speaker, is a real 

challenge but it’s also a real opportunity. 

 

Of course to move forward, Mr. Speaker, we know that 

importantly we need to invest in Saskatchewan, and the key to 

addressing this opportunity is our substantial investment in 

post-secondary education within Saskatchewan. This was 

affirmed last year with a significant injection of capital through 

the knowledge infrastructure program, and it is encouraging to 

see these much-needed projects under way at our universities, at 

our technical institutes including SIAST, at our regional 

colleges where we’ve committed a record amount of capital. 

 

By the end of the two-year knowledge infrastructure program, 

the province will have contributed more than $55 million. And, 

Mr. Speaker, this is not done in isolation. This is done in 

partnership with an initiative from the federal government, an 

initiative that is greatly appreciated within the province of 

Saskatchewan because it allows us to help address the 

infrastructure deficit in our post-secondary system that we 

inherited from the members opposite. 

 

In this budget we’ve made another strong statement about the 

vital role of post-secondary education and the vital role that 

post-secondary plays in the life of today’s Saskatchewan and 

for tomorrow. Universities, technical institutes, and regional 

colleges will receive an additional $26.8 million in operating 

funds, an overall increase of 5.1 per cent. This is the highest of 

any Canadian provincial budget offered so far this fiscal year, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

On top of the support we already provide through the graduate 

retention program and a robust array of other services, we are 

introducing several additional enhancements to the 

Saskatchewan student loan program. These enhancements come 

as a result of valuable dialogue with students and other 

stakeholders over the course of the last two years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re reducing rates on repayable loans to prime. 

We’re allowing full-time students to earn as much as they 

choose during their period of study without affecting their loan 

eligibility. And, as we heard especially from young parents, 

ownership of vehicles by students is allowed without affecting 

the level of financial assistance that they’ll now be able to 

drawn upon. It is noteworthy that two-thirds of every provincial 

dollar given to students is already non-repayable. Essentially 

this is a de facto grant. 

 

As a result of this budget, average tuition fees will, for 

university students and others, will be kept reasonable as we 

strive to ensure that affordability and accessibility, as well as 

excellence and innovation and inclusion, these are the defining 

themes of post-secondary education in contemporary 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I’m quite pleased that the government, through this budget, has 

already surpassed our promise — another promise — to 

increase operating funds to post-secondary institutions by $125 

million in four years. We have provided an additional . . . 

We’ve provided an additional 176.3 million in just three. 

Another promise kept, Mr. Speaker, out of more than 100. And 

we know there’s more work to do, but another promise kept. 

 

With this budget the government also meets its platform 

commitment for 120 medical residency seats. And certainly, 

Mr. Speaker, we hear from across the province, there’s more 



4596 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

work to do done here. As we see the progress on the Academic 

Health Sciences building, as we see construction under way, 

Mr. Speaker, as we see these new seats, it stands in stark 

contrast to a College of Medicine that rested on probation under 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As well, our belief in excellence and innovation will be 

underscored through support through some exciting initiatives 

within the research realm. And certainly even today, I’ve 

spoken with an official at Canadian Light Source synchrotron 

who expressed how pleased he was that the Canadian Light 

Source synchrotron in Saskatoon at the U of S will receive 

operating funds, the first million, as a four-year commitment 

which will total over 11 million. Needless to say, the ministry is 

pleased that we’ve been able to provide a strong foundation for 

post-secondary education. 

 

But the ministry serves the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. And the feedback we’ve received from students, from 

professors, from lecturers, from university administrators, and 

college presidents, we certainly know, while there’s more work 

to do, they’re pleased that this government has put such a 

priority on post-secondary education. 

 

I’d like to draw on a very specific theme that some of the 

members opposite have raised, and rightfully so, Mr. Speaker, 

and that is regarding investments in First Nations and Métis 

peoples and communities, Mr. Speaker. Last year, last 

February, the Canadian ministers of Education and Advanced 

Education met. We met here, in Saskatchewan, to address 

post-secondary education and K to 12 for First Nations, Métis, 

and Inuit people, the first time in Canadian history that a 

summit was held to find ways to eliminate the gap that exists in 

educational outcomes. 

 

This month we’ve been able to follow up on that. And we’ve 

been able to help host through the Public Policy Forum, in 

co-operation with the Johnson-Shoyama school, a second 

summit regarding the future of Aboriginal post-secondary 

education in Saskatchewan. I spoke there about the ethical 

imperative of closing and eliminating the education and training 

gap between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal Canadians, a 

theme that, while at a recent CMEC [Council of Ministers of 

Education, Canada] meeting, I drew to attention again, Mr. 

Speaker, ensuring it was the first item that was listed on the 

press release that was issued at the end of that. 

 

We all know that education is a path to prosperity. And that’s 

why this budget recognizes the strong partnerships between the 

post-secondary sector, as well as industry and other initiatives 

like the multi-party training plan, which we launched an 

additional version of — and certainly I want to give credit to 

members opposite; there have been earlier phases — but this 

most current phase was launched in La Ronge, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member opposite made some reference about the North. 

This ceremony that had students, that had faculty members, that 

had industry representatives and government representatives 

certainly demonstrates a very tangible and collaborative 

commitment to ensuring that we are eliminating that 

educational gap. 

 

I also want to highlight our record on the Northern Career Quest 

partnership. This is an ASEP [Aboriginal skills and 

employment partnership] initiative, and that means we have 

federal dollars and provincial dollars and private sector dollars 

coming in. It’s the largest of its kind in Canada. It’s $33 

million, and it’s offering assistance and support and training to 

more than 1,000 northerners, Mr. Speaker. It’s focused on 

making sure that that training allows individuals to enter into 

the sector of mining, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The 2010-11 budget provides $38.8 million in direct funds 

specifically for First Nations and Métis post-secondary 

educational and training opportunities, Mr. Speaker. This 

represents a 5.1 per cent increase over last year’s budget and 

reflects our ongoing commitment to all post-secondary 

institutions to support First Nations and Métis students across 

this province. 

 

The ministry will also provide an estimated $125 million 

through indirect support so that First Nations and Métis people 

have the skills and knowledge and education to participate fully 

in, benefit completely in, and contribute to in new and 

innovative ways within our economy and of course across our 

communities. 

 

The total package in this budget within the Ministry of 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour is up over $160 

million for our First Nations and Métis people because we 

know that this population represents a vital element in our 

strategy to help Saskatchewan meet its full potential. 

 

Our overall commitment to employment and job skills training 

remains as strong as ever, with investments up over $100 

million. And I want to be frank, Mr. Speaker: some of our 

programs have been reduced. Some of our support has been 

eliminated. Some of these programs are going to change shape. 

We’ve taken these decisions because these programs were not 

meeting the needs of learners nor workers nor employers in an 

evolving Saskatchewan labour market. We’re focusing on real 

results. This said, we continue to provide significant support to 

our apprenticeship training programs, including a 10 per cent 

increase this year, Mr. Speaker, in this budget. 

 

Now I want to read back, Mr. Speaker, from a rather raucous 

day, November 26th, 2009, when the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview was asking a number of questions of me in this 

Chamber as we sat in committee. And I made reference to more 

than $17 million that we were investing at that time; it’s now 

gone up by 10 per cent. And what did the member from 

Fairview say? “You’re wasting money.” Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Fairview ought to be ashamed because dollars for 

apprenticeship training never wasted, always maximized, 

because we want to make sure more of our young people have 

the skills training they require to have fulfilling careers, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I just want to make sure for the record that everyone 

understands what the member from Fairview has offered in 

November, Mr. Speaker. In the year that ended June 30th, 2009, 

just as a reference, Mr. Speaker, more than 5,000 apprenticeship 

positions have been created, a 32 per cent increase over the 

previous 12-month period. As we invest in our people here, 

we’ll also undertake action to ensure that we remove barriers to 

labour mobility. 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4597 

[16:00] 

 

This budget positions Saskatchewan to effectively meet the 

labour market needs of the province, and is responsive to key 

sectors of our economy as we work to meet our talent 

challenge, Mr. Speaker, that is investing in Saskatchewan in 

post-secondary education, in skills training, personal and 

professional development, allowing people across 

Saskatchewan to meet their full potential, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also have a second element, and that is we want to make 

sure our expat community from across Canada and around the 

world knows it’s a great time to come home. And certainly as 

the population continues to increase, we know anecdotally 

indeed they are. And they’re delighted to see that this 

government is rolling up its sleeves and working as hard and as 

diligently as we can to be fiscally prudent and at the same time 

attentive to the needs of this province. 

 

A third component of helping to meet our talent challenge, Mr. 

Speaker, relates to inviting newcomers from across the country 

and around the world. It relates to an immigration strategy that 

we’ve recently launched. Our immigration strategy continues to 

play a vital and pivotal role in meeting our labour market 

demands while enhancing our communities. Mr. Speaker, our 

goal is to have more diverse and dynamic and cosmopolitan 

communities stretching right across this province. And we’re 

well on our way as newcomers are now living in more than 160 

Saskatchewan communities. 

 

This budget reflects our continuing commitment to attract and 

retain newcomers for our growing economy and our 

increasingly diverse communities. Our target numbers remain 

on track. We will enhance our efforts to recruit and attract 

immigrant entrepreneurs and to recruit international students. 

We’re also going to make sure that we put increasing emphasis 

on the family class category as we will strive to provide 

additional settlement services that effectively meet the needs of 

our new neighbours. 

 

In concert with my counterparts across the country, we have 

also adopted a pan-Canadian approach so that foreign 

qualifications are recognized in a fair and more consistent and 

certainly a more timely manner. There’s a lot of work to do 

here, Mr. Speaker, and this work is just getting under way 

thanks to this pan-Canadian framework that’s been agreed to by 

all provinces. 

 

We’re convinced this framework will speed up, that is, 

accelerate the integration of newcomers whose skills match the 

needs of Saskatchewan’s labour market and our employers. And 

we also know that newcomers are helping to create more jobs, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would like to just address one additional issue, Mr. Speaker, 

on this theme of making sure that we have more diverse, 

dynamic, and cosmopolitan communities. That is on March 

26th, in a rather unfortunate statement, the member from 

Regina Walsh Acres rose from her seat and made the following 

allegation: the Saskatchewan Party government has cancelled 

funding for the Status of Women’s office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to correct this empirical inaccuracy. In fact 

I find it to be a rather cynical ploy. What I can say, Mr. 

Speaker, is the dollars are actually going up for the Status of 

Women’s office in this budget, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve found a 

way to help and ensure that even more dollars are going to be 

channelled into programming for women right across this 

province. There’s certainly a lot more to do in this area, Mr. 

Speaker, but I will say it is a shameful statement that the 

member from Regina Walsh Acres offered earlier this month. 

This is vital as we continue to build more diverse, dynamic, and 

cosmopolitan communities and a Saskatchewan that’s more 

inclusive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so as we continue to meet our talent challenge, that is, 

making sure we’re investing in post-secondary education, skills 

training, personal and professional development, ensuring that 

individuals across our province are better able to meet their full 

potential, especially in an increasingly competitive global 

economy . . . And secondly, we’re inviting our expats from 

across the country and around the world back to Saskatchewan. 

And we’re seeing real success there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then we also focus on ensuring that newcomers from across 

Canada and around the world are coming to Saskatchewan and 

doing so in record numbers, Mr. Speaker. We also want to 

make sure that that notion of equality, that notion of fairness, 

that notion of inclusion resonates right across our province. 

That’s a shared responsibility, and certainly we want to make 

sure we’re doing our part, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To this, Mr. Speaker, we also want to make sure that we’re 

rolling up our sleeves and supporting a growing economy that 

focuses on healthier and safer workplaces. We want to make 

sure that, through enforcement and education, workplace safety 

is an increasing priority. And I think we have a track record that 

demonstrates the progress that we’re making, while there’s 

certainly more to do. In the ’08-09 fiscal year, there were issued 

775 stop work orders. That’s a 269 per cent increase over the 

’06-07 period, the period when the members opposite were in 

office. We have certainly . . . We offer this as an indicator of 

our commitment to occupational health and safety. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, in ’08-09 the ministry conducted more 

than 3,800 inspections of workplaces, a 6 per cent increase from 

the last year of the NDP’s record. And we’re certainly 

committed to rigorous enforcement when it comes to 

occupational health and safety; our campaigns are focusing on 

education, awareness, and enforcement. 

 

We’re also making sure that workplaces are safe for young 

workers. If you can believe it, Mr. Speaker, when we came into 

office, after 16 years of the NDP, there was no minimum age of 

employment in Saskatchewan. We were one of the last 

provinces not to have that taken care of. Mr. Speaker, what 

we’ve been able to do is ensure that there is a minimum age of 

employment. And we’ve been able to ensure now that for our 

young workers, those that we want to ensure succeed in their 

studies, we now have work-based training available through a 

certificate. We’ve also put conditions on them — no more than 

16 hours per week, no working late at night or early in the 

morning on school days, and we need to make sure their 

families are engaged, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These are some of the key initiatives that we think are going to 



4598 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

help move the province forward. Mr. Speaker, as we see an 

increasingly inclusive, vibrant Saskatchewan, one that has 

increasing investments in post-secondary education, increasing 

investments in training, one that demands greater accountability 

and real results as it relates to taxpayer dollars, we think this is 

the right balance to move Saskatchewan forward. And that’s 

why I’m absolutely delighted to be supporting this government 

and our Premier, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is a pleasure to enter into this very important debate. And I 

think it’s interesting to follow the member from Greystone as 

I’ve listened intently to his words about the future of what’s 

happening here in Saskatchewan. And of course it’s not quite 

the same picture I see in Centre; it’s very grim indeed. And 

some of these things that I’ll talk about in terms of the budget 

and how vague it is and some of the questions . . . I will 

definitely be voting for the amendment and voting against the 

budget because I think there’s some serious, serious flaws in it. 

 

I do want to say before I start into my formal remarks, 

particularly as the critic of Social Services, there’s some real 

issues that I think that we need to pay attention to. And I know 

my colleagues on this side have done an incredible job raising 

some of those issues, particularly around the First Nations 

University and how we need to make sure it’s supported and 

that it gets the funding it needs to move forward. 

 

There’s been a lot of work done, and I just have to say to the 

students, thank you for the leadership they have shown because 

this is their legacy. This is their future and it’s also their 

children’s future. And we need everyone in this province to step 

up to the plate — including our 13 Conservative MPs [Member 

of Parliament] who seem to be holding back, who don’t seem to 

be pushing the federal government to step up to the plate. That 

needs to happen and we need all hands on deck for that. 

 

I also want to take a moment to talk about the SCN 

[Saskatchewan Communications Network] fiasco that’s 

unfolding before our very eyes, and it’s one that I think, really it 

just illustrates . . . it’s the metaphor for this budget about how 

we cannot trust this budget, how we cannot trust this 

government. On one hand they say, we’re all for young people; 

we’re all for innovation. We hear that all the time. Innovation is 

the key to the future. And yet they take away something that so 

many young people take heart in, in their future, and yank it 

back. We know there’s going to be expenses to it, but it is 

amazing to see the momentum behind that move and around the 

SCN and saving the SCN. 

 

And I just want to read into the record a letter I received from 

Leanne, someone who I know and who really believes firmly 

. . . She’s an independent producer, but she is so eloquent in 

terms of what she believes needs to be done to save SCN and 

the reasons why. And I’ll quote, and this is the quote: 

 

SCN served to nurture the industry in many ways. For one, 

it was a jumping-off point for many emerging producers 

who could more easily get a foot in the door. For all 

producers, SCN played a little-known yet key role as a 

trigger for financing many other sources. This means that 

if SCN gave your program an initial and often a small 

investment, you then became eligible for larger national 

funds. Without SCN’s initial investment, you had no 

access to these other and in many cases necessary funds. 

The funding process in Canadian film and TV production 

is so delicate and intricate that, without SCN, independent 

Saskatchewan productions will face a nearly 

insurmountable task of pulling together the necessary 

funding for their projects. 

 

She goes on, I quote: 

 

More than all of this, the most distressing issue is that 

young filmmakers like myself will soon be faced with no 

other option than to leave the place we call home. It’s a 

sad truth that all the graduate retention initiatives in the 

world can’t sustain a population of emerging filmmakers 

that have no industry left in which to work. I fear we will 

face a mass exodus of young talent if we don’t convince 

the government that there are viable and mutually 

beneficial solutions to maintain a profitable industry that 

can move forward in a technologically innovative way. 

 

And I just think Leanne was so eloquent in putting together this 

note to many of us, and I think the minister probably received 

the same. And I just want to put it on the record because I know 

that I’ve seen so many young people really hope for a future 

here in Saskatchewan, and they see this as their way to tell the 

Saskatchewan story that they’re so proud of and yet couple that, 

as the Minister from Advanced Ed likes to say, couple it with 

innovation. And yet this really speaks to being let down and yet 

another issue of trust. 

 

And I also want to raise for a moment, just quickly, and I just 

want to echo my colleague from Cumberland, his issue around 

the forest fire. Are we truly prepared? And clearly if there’s 

ever an issue for northerners, it’s this one around forest fires. 

And to be cutting money out and saying and being . . . The 

gamble last year, the gamble last year was on potash and the 

price of potash. It seems, from the Ministry of Environment, the 

gamble this year is there be very few fires. And as the member 

from Cumberland says, it’s kind of dry out there. This may not 

be the year to be doing this. And for southerners, it’s a huge 

issue. 

 

And yet again, it speaks to the trust of this government when 

last year they blew it right out of the water with their potash 

predictions. And they make light of it in the House now and 

they think — oh well, hey, aw shucks — anybody can make 

that mistake. No truly, no, not anyone can. Only the Sask 

Party’s capable of that size of mistake. And looking at the forest 

fire, how they’re preparing for it, causes me some worry. 

 

The other worry is a little bit long, more long-range than 

environment. And that’s around the capacity for the new 

environmental assessment regulations. It’s been very quiet. The 

minister takes a lot of pride in consulting through out-sourcing 

essentially through Clifton, the assessment, the consultations 

around environmental assessment and in talking to people in 

different ways. But I have yet to see anything in terms of the 

public at large being engaged. 

 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4599 

But clearly, you know, the key thing around environment is 

making sure of clean water, clean land, and clean air. It’s pretty 

straightforward. But if you don’t have the capacity, if you are 

stripping away the capacity internally to do that, then you have 

some real issues in terms of the long run. It may work well in a 

short-term budget where they’re up against the wall right now. 

But to launch a new program, such an intensive, major program, 

such a major program and then not provide the capacity, that’s 

outrageous. That’s outrageous to be moving it forward, to be 

moving it forward and taking away on the other hand. 

 

And the other issues, I’ll go to health really quickly. The 

chiropractors, people who depend on that — we’ve seen the 

petitions come forward. I just want to be on record saying this is 

going to come back, come back and bite this government. No 

wonder many people don’t trust this government. When you 

have over 30,000 people responding through petitions so 

quickly — so quickly — no wonder they have some concerns. 

And of course yesterday when we heard the plans, terms of the 

waiting lists and taking it into a new realm in terms of 

privatization, we have some real concerns about that. 

 

[16:15] 

 

One area that I also want to talk about, just highlight very 

quickly, is the issue around justice. And we saw that this budget 

talks about gangs and increasing support to help with that issue. 

And I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a big issue for 

people who live in Saskatoon Centre. I mean, it’s a big issue 

right across this province. In fact it’s one that western 

Canadians wrestle with as well. We just have to look at 

Vancouver, but we see that in our cities here, in our 

communities right across the province. 

 

And I have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was surveyed because 

I went to a conference about a year and a half ago, in January of 

2008. It was a conference dealing with gangs and the gang 

initiative. And I had a follow-up survey just a few weeks ago 

and the person said, so what have you heard in the last year and 

a half? And I really had to tell the person, I haven’t heard 

anything. I had to google it actually, to see if there were 

anything happening. I just haven’t heard what’s been happening 

from this government. Now maybe they’ve been quietly 

working away, but I think they need to let people know what’s 

going on. And I will be looking forward to hearing more about 

the money they’ve set aside, particularly around gangs. That’s a 

huge issue. 

 

And I have to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was shocked, just 

shocked and dismayed last November when we heard about the 

demise of the domestic abuse outreach program. When one of 

the clients called me and said, this is what’s happening, and 

what can you do as my MLA? And so we started the process 

and we were able to expose that, and we were able to expose the 

fact the government hadn’t consulted with the local community 

groups about how the delivery of that program would be. It was 

just a simple cut. In fact it was actually a dropped ball between 

Justice and Social Services. No one knew until we actually 

asked the question in this House. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is it any wonder why people don’t 

trust this government, any wonder why? You look, you look at 

the different areas we’re talking about. And I’m just scratching 

the surface. There are real concerns. People are being let down. 

And on one hand this government is saying, trust us, trust us. 

And then you just have to look and see how people have been 

let down. Whether you’re a chiropractic patient, whether you’re 

a client of the domestic outreach program, whether you’re a 

northerner worried about the fire season that’s coming up, you 

have some real, real concerns. So that’s some of the things that 

we look around. 

 

But I have to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are three key 

areas that really we’ll be paying very close attention to in Social 

Services. And right off the bat, well there’ll be housing, there’ll 

be working around the children’s issues, and of course the 

poverty rates that we see going up. 

 

And I have to look and I take a look at this news release dated 

March 24th, 2010 and it talks about government investing in 

housing, children, and families. And it goes on and on about the 

. . . I’ll talk a little bit about housing in a minute. It’s interesting. 

Three paragraphs talking about housing. 

 

But nowhere in this news release, nowhere in this news release 

— and it’s the third budget of this government — not one word 

about reconvening the all-party committee on children who 

have been exploited through the sex trade. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

this was one of the key promises of the Sask Party in the last 

election. It was. Where is it now? It’s not even being 

mentioned. So clearly it’s being dropped. 

 

Now I have to say to the Minister of Environment, she at least 

said she was breaking a promise around climate change. Will 

the Minister of Social Services come forward and say, listen 

we’re not going to do that? We’re breaking that promise. 

Because that was a key promise. That was one that I hear about 

in my communities that I represent in Saskatoon Centre. And 

there’s not been one word about that. And when I look at how 

much they’re spending, how much they’re spending on the 

child welfare review — $831,000 — I hope it’s well spent. 

 

But one key part, one key part this minister has to realize is 

around children who are exploited through the sex trade. And 

I’ve said this in the House before that, you know, there are two 

words that are not mentioned in that review and that was the 

Internet or gangs. Clearly in the 10 years that have intervened 

since that all-party committee was convened, things have 

changed. 

 

And now we’re having a situation where clearly the government 

is breaking a promise. Again an example of trust, an example of 

trust because this government likes to say, we’ve kept all our 

promises; we’ve kept all our promises. Well we can come with 

many examples of significant promises, significant promises, 

and in this one to the children who are exploited on our streets, 

in our communities. And unfortunately they’re being exploited 

in their own homes through the Internet. 

 

We need to get a handle on this. And I am disappointed that this 

government has not taken the opportunity yet to do anything 

about it and this is their third budget. And clearly, it’s a gap — 

it’s a gap — and so I have some real serious problems about 

that. 

 

And I have some real serious problems . . . And I’ll just quickly 



4600 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

go through the book here. We’ll have questions. And right off 

the bat, we see there’s 57 less employees in Social Services. We 

don’t know where they were lost. Were they cut? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Was it the caseload? 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Yes. Was it caseload? Who knows what’s 

happened with these 57 less employees? 

 

And if you look over on page 131, here are some startling 

numbers. We know the assistance, the Saskatchewan assistance 

program is going to get a boost of $23 million. We know, and 

that’s needed there, likewise with TEA [transitional 

employment allowance]. But we see SIP, SIP, the 

Saskatchewan Income Plan. This plan that the government is so 

proud of is losing $3.1 million — that’s over 10 per cent. Why 

is that? Why is SIP losing that much money? We’ll have 

questions about that. 

 

Child care subsidies, child care parent subsidies going from 17 

million down to 14.7 million — a 2.5 million cut. And we also 

see in the disabilities community-based organizations, a cut of 

$8 million. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will have some questions about 

what does this all mean. What does this all mean? And as well 

when we look at the housing, the housing budget . . . Now I 

know and the minister and we’ll get into this in estimates, but if 

you look at it straight up, last year it was 28.5 million and now 

it’s 11 million. Where did the $17 million go? And so I have 

some real strong questions about that. 

 

I’ve some real strong questions about that because clearly this 

minister, if one thing she’s known for, she’s not known for 

keeping more than one ball up in the air because she can’t keep 

track of all the things that are happening in her portfolio. But 

one thing she is really good is massaging the numbers and the 

words. For example, she’ll often talk about . . . Last year she 

talked about how there were 1,100 housing projects under way 

and now there’s down to 900. And we know that’s not quite 

accurate. She’s talking about units and part of that issue is the 

400 beds college quarters. There’s actually 120 units. 

 

But the other one, and I was so disappointed to see it cut, was 

the Lighthouse project in Saskatoon. At first it was 120 units, 

then went to 65, and now it’s right off the books and it’s been 

cut. So we have some real questions about that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, so I want to move into housing because 

this is one that really there are some real questions about. 

 

I’ve been able to bring in and talk about questions around high 

rents. And we’ve seen this rental market failure now going into 

its third year and people coming in and talking about how the 

rents are going up 20, 40, and we even had somebody talk about 

virtually 100 per cent rent increase for a bachelor suite in 

Saskatoon, going from 425 to $800. And I think it’s about time 

that we took a serious look at what can we do to stop that kind 

of gouging. And plain and simple, it is gouging. When you have 

that kind of increase, it’s beyond a reasonable increase to 

provide for maintenance and upkeep. This is gouging. 

 

And so we have some serious questions about that. And this is 

the opportunity. It’s been three years and I think that we all 

have to take a moment and say, along the housing continuum, 

we’ve seen some real strengths. But when it comes to 

affordable rental for seniors and young people and students, it’s 

just not working. And we need to do something about that. 

 

And we see the minister often talk about rental supplements. 

And she will often bring that up, and I think that’s an interesting 

idea. But the problem with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they were 

not supposed to be a permanent solution. They were only 

supposed to be temporary until people resolved the issues. It 

was not a permanent one. And that particular program last year, 

it cost $10 million. What we could be doing with $10 million is 

amazing for affordable housing. 

 

And we see the waiting lists go up. And in fact I’ve got the 

results now in terms of what Sask Housing has on its books and 

what the waiting lists are. And we see over the past year that we 

still have over 1,800 people on waiting lists and whether it’s 

social housing, affordable housing, or senior housing. 

 

But I want to talk about senior housing here. We still have 

Moose Jaw going up. For seniors, their wait times last 

September were 2.4 months. Now it’s seven months. Here’s 

Swift Current. Swift Current was a real challenge last fall, with 

7.5 months. Now it’s 10 months, over 10 months. And overall 

the waiting list for seniors continues to grow. It was three 

months last September and now it’s knocking on three and a 

half months. And there’s still over 700 seniors on that waiting 

list and not much is happening with that. 

 

And we can talk about the social housing, where we see the 

waiting lists still hovering around 644, 645. But it’s grown from 

2.9 months to 5.2 months, almost a half a year for people to 

wait to get into social housing. And of course Swift Current, 8.3 

months to get in. And so there are some big numbers here, some 

real concerns. And we see, in affordable housing, Swift Current 

hitting 7.7 months. 

 

So we have some real issues and we have some real questions. 

And I do have some real questions about this head first 

program. Not an awful lot. Actually it’s interesting; there’s 

more words in the press release than in the actual books, which 

make me think that it was kind of an afterthought. They really 

didn’t . . . They found out that yet again they were heading into 

a budget with nothing about housing and they better get 

something in about housing. Because one of the books doesn’t 

even refer to it; the other one has just a couple of lines. And the 

most you can find out about the head first program is actually 

on the press release and it talks about a minimum 1,000 houses 

over five years. And I think this is going to be very interesting 

is if they actually set some benchmarks and how we’re going to 

move forward with this. 

 

But again it doesn’t meet the whole housing continuum. We’ve 

said this on this side time and time again. There needs to be a 

full, complete, comprehensive housing strategy that talks about 

rent, that talks about home ownership, that talks about seniors, 

talks about students, the whole package. We need to see the 

whole package, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not this piecemeal 

approach that this minister, this government, this Premier, is 

known for — known for photo op strategy. Where can they get 

the most photo ops? 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4601 

And clearly if this example, your Headstart on a Home, I’ll 

celebrate when the 1,000th family moves in. I have to see this 

to believe it. We’ve seen too many times where this 

government, this minister is not straightforward in her 

announcements, where she mixes her units and beds and 

different things like that and really it’s hard to keep her 

information straight. 

 

And so we have some real issues around housing because, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, this is one that goes right to the heart of what 

many families are facing in this province today in terms of 

affordability, and housing is the very first thing. And 

particularly seniors, where we see this government doing so 

little for seniors. As I said, the minister will talk about rental 

supplements;. Seniors don’t qualify. We see the SIP program, 

yet it’s being cut by 2.5 million. How does that work? But 

they’ll get up and they’ll talk about SIP but they won’t talk 

about the cut today. And so we have some real, real concerns 

with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But the real concerns, the real concerns I have, and we present 

petitions time and time again and one of the most important 

petitions we present — and I know the Anti-Poverty Coalition 

in Saskatoon is gathering as many names on this — is how can 

we eliminate poverty in Saskatchewan. And we know that this 

is a challenge. We see the use of food banks going up and that 

is a fact, and it’s been going up ever since this government 

came into power. And we’ve seen cuts, cuts in child care, the 

subsidies I’ve just talked about here. We’ve talked about cuts in 

terms of education and training. And we’ve talked about cuts 

for health supports, particularly for vulnerable populations, and 

whether that’s domestic abuse outreach or it’s chiropractic 

service. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know this minister took a lot of 

pride on December 31st, 2008, talking about how the social 

assistance rates were going down in this province. And you 

have the Minister of Labour talking about how the employment 

numbers are going up. But clearly this is not the case. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Over the last 15 months, the number of people who are on the 

caseloads for Saskatchewan Social Services has climbed. In 

November of ’08 . . . And I’ll read these numbers into the 

record and these numbers come from written questions that the 

minister has answered. November of ’08, it was the lowest 

point, the lowest point that it’s been in Saskatchewan — 23,678 

caseloads for Saskatchewan Social Services. It’s climbed now 

to February ’10, 2010 to 26,773. That’s an increase of over 

3,000 cases, many more people . . . We don’t know how many 

people, but these are the caseloads. That’s a climb of 13 per 

cent. 

 

And the other one that the minister likes to talk about, 

particularly the news release of December 2008, was when she 

was talking about TEA. TEA did hit its lowest point in 2008 

November, when it was 2,200 . . . I’ll say it again, 2,266. But 

then it climbed to 3,084 in February 2010, a climb of 818. 

That’s a climb of 36 per cent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we saw the minister in supplementary 

estimates last year defending how they had cut the budget 

because they assumed everything was going to keep going 

down. And we said, that’s not the numbers we see. And the 

graph, Mr. Speaker, is very dramatic, is very stark as we see the 

numbers continue to climb. And we don’t see a plan by this 

government, what they’re going to do about poverty in 

Saskatchewan. There is absolutely no plan, no strategy. 

 

So how can you say, how can we say to people, trust this 

government? You cannot say that. Many people are living just a 

paycheque away from falling into the poverty trap — just a 

paycheque away. And we know, we know that the income gap 

between the rich and the poor is widening, and we don’t see 

anything that this government is doing other than band-aids. 

 

There’s no overall strategy, and a refusal to work with people in 

the community to develop a strategy. And the first one would 

be to develop some benchmarks so we could measure this in a 

way that we could all agree and have some meaning. We see 

some other strategies, and I know and we’ve heard the ministers 

and members of the other side: we’re not afraid of benchmarks, 

we’re not afraid of benchmarks. Well they sure are because they 

don’t talk about the benchmarks of poverty. 

 

They don’t talk about the benchmarks of poverty. And they 

don’t talk about the benchmarks of homelessness and they don’t 

talk about the benchmarks of food banks, of hunger in our 

communities. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that’s 

shameful. And that’s the reason why people don’t trust this 

government and don’t trust this Premier because of this kind of 

budget. This kind of work is dishonest because it doesn’t 

represent what’s really happening in Saskatchewan. Because 

you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are judged by how we how 

we treat the most vulnerable in our society, not the richest. And 

this is what this government does, this is what this government 

does. 

 

So simply, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be voting for the 

amendment. I think it’s the only reasonable thing that you can 

do in light of things that we’ve seen from this government over 

the past while. And I’ll be voting against the main motion. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Recognize the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I am pleased to rise in the Assembly and speak in 

support of the budget that was tabled by the Finance minister of 

the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Before I get into my comments, I want to recognize and thank a 

number of people. First of all, Mr. Speaker, the staff in my 

office here in Regina, Mr. Speaker: to Darin and Melissa and 

Marg, Heather and Bob for all that they do in ensuring that I am 

prepared as well as I can be and informed. And I greatly 

appreciate their support in what they do in their daily jobs here 

in the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank obviously the staff of the 

ministry. This was obviously my first time through the 

budgetary process as a member of the cabinet, and they 

provided a great deal of support and information as we moved 

forward in writing this budget. 



4602 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, to my constituency assistant Marcie Swedburg 

who has been doing a great job for the people of Weyburn-Big 

Muddy for over 10 years now, Mr. Speaker. She has served the 

constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy in that capacity for a great 

many years, and she does a great job each and every day for the 

constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy. Mr. Speaker, I can’t tell 

you how many times that I’m talking on the phone or meeting 

people throughout the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency when 

people mention how they have contacted our office in Weyburn 

and have received help from Marcie, from my constituency 

assistant, and there’s a great many times when people 

compliment the hard work that Marcie does each and every day. 

And so I want to thank her. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to, certainly want to thank my wife 

Amanda who is, Mr. Speaker, is obviously my biggest 

supporter. Certainly I wouldn’t be here without her, Mr. 

Speaker. Amanda is, I think in my obviously biased opinion, 

Mr. Speaker, she is the most talented and creative person that I 

think I have ever met. And I thank her very much for her love 

and her support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to certainly thank the constituents of 

Weyburn-Big Muddy, who have been very supportive of me, in 

not only being MLA now into my . . . has been my second 

election, but my first full term. And certainly since being 

appointed to the cabinet, they’ve been very, certainly very 

supportive as I take on new duties and am away from the 

constituency a great deal more than I used to be prior to cabinet 

appointment. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank my colleagues in the 

cabinet and in caucus for their support and the great work, I 

think, that we have all done together in putting this budget 

together, Mr. Speaker. There was a great deal of input and 

advice and counsel from members of the caucus from all parts 

of the province when it came to, not only the budget as a whole, 

but also when it came to looking at the budget going forward 

for Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. And so I want to thank 

my colleagues very much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just before I get to the actual budget, I do want to 

make a few just short comments about the Weyburn-Big Muddy 

constituency. And I in fact, I want to on the floor of the 

Assembly, I want to mention a couple of special events that are 

coming up and a couple of special people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

First of all, we have a number of special anniversaries in the 

constituency. There have been certainly many centennials over 

the last year. I know the community of Radville, which is just 

outside of the constituency, celebrated their 100th being an 

incorporated entity. The RM [rural municipality] of Weyburn 

was also 100. So, Mr. Speaker, this year, the RM of 

Brokenshell, which just lies to the west of the city of Weyburn, 

is celebrating their 100th anniversary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Also in the city of Weyburn, Souris School, which is a 

landmark in our community — it’s located on South Hill — it 

turns 100 years old, Mr. Speaker, as a school. The actual 

building will be 100 years old and it has been used as a school 

since its beginnings. So on May, I believe it’s May 21st, the 

citizens of Weyburn and the teachers and students and former 

teachers and students are going to be celebrating a very 

important anniversary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s also the 100th anniversary of the Weyburn 

power building, Mr. Speaker. This was the original building 

that was used to generate power in the city of Weyburn. And it 

was 50 years ago this year that the Soo Line museum actually 

moved into the old power building. So the building is 100 years 

old and the museum is 50 years old. And I want to encourage 

everybody who may, the many people that may be watching, 

Mr. Speaker, or certainly my colleagues on both side of the 

House, if they get a chance to stop and take a look around at the 

Soo Line Museum, Mr. Speaker. It has great displays on the old 

Souris Valley Hospital, certainly a number of displays about the 

community and the surrounding area. There’s even an 

eight-legged calf that is on display, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But one of the things that is most interesting about the Soo Line 

Museum in Weyburn is the Charlie Wilson silver collection, 

Mr. Speaker. And I want to encourage anybody who hasn’t seen 

it, it is the largest privately held collection of silver in the 

world. It contains 3,333 pieces of silver that was collected by 

Charlie Wilson. The silver ranges from all the way back to the 

1750s up until the 1970s. And it is something to behold when 

you see two floors in a large building full of silver that this 

gentlemen who resided in the Weyburn area for almost his 

entire life, I believe he was a bachelor farmer, and he travelled 

the countryside going to auction sales and estate sales, and he 

had an eye for silver, and so he collected it all. And upon his 

death about a decade ago, he left it to the museum. And so I 

would encourage all members and all residents of this province 

to go look at the silver collection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one final comment. I want to recognize somebody 

that has certainly helped to put Weyburn, Saskatchewan on the 

international map, Mr. Speaker, and that is Graham DeLaet. Mr. 

Speaker, Graham DeLaet is a product of Weyburn. He attended 

school in Weyburn and he learned, certainly learned a number 

of sports, but he excelled at a fairly early age at golf. Mr. 

Speaker, he’s the first citizen of Saskatchewan to ever get their 

PGA [Professional Golfers’ Association] tour card, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

He was very successful on the Canadian tour this last year. He 

was player of the year. He led the Order of Merit, and this past 

fall he qualified for the PGA tour, so he’s now an official 

member of the tour. In his first tournament, Mr. Speaker, the 

Sony Open in Honolulu, he finished 25th, and in his second 

event, the Bob Hope Classic, he tied for 18th, Mr. Speaker. 

Graham is certainly well on his way to having a very successful 

career 

 

And I can tell the members that just in the last two weeks he has 

signed a sponsorship deal with Transitions Optical. And he’ll be 

the official PGA player to represent that company on the tour. 

And we’re certainly all very proud of Graham and what he’s 

done. And so I would just want to mention that for the record, 

Mr. Speaker. So congratulations to Graham. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m please to obviously support this budget that 

was produced by the cabinet and the caucus members and 

tabled by the Finance minister. Mr. Speaker, we as a team have 

worked very hard to produce a budget that is balanced, forward 

looking, and responsible, Mr. Speaker. As has been mentioned 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4603 

by the Finance minister, it’s a budget that is balanced. It will 

produce a small surplus over the year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re going to see no increase in the size of government debt, 

Mr. Speaker, remaining at $4.15 billion, which is a 40 per cent 

reduction from when this government took office very shortly 

ago. And, Mr. Speaker, the Growth and Financial Security Fund 

at the end of the year will have a balance remaining, over half a 

billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, over $510 million in the balance, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s a budget that does a number of things. It reduces the size of 

government, reduces the footprint of government. We’ve heard 

many times how the size of government has rapidly exceeded 

the growth of the population of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

Much of the growth in the population just happens to have 

occurred in the last couple of years since this party has formed 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is a budget that will maintain important capital spending, Mr. 

Speaker. It will see infrastructure spending in this province of 

over $600 million in this year. And, Mr. Speaker, when you put 

that in the context of this government, this government has put 

in place a spending program for capital of nearly $3 billion in 

three years of government, Mr. Speaker. And that is something 

that I know when I’m in my constituency, and whether it be the 

assistance that we’ve provided to municipalities in terms of a 

number of capital projects that they have been putting in place 

. . . We heard from the member from Saskatoon Northwest that 

talked about a bridge that’s very important to the economy of 

not only Saskatoon, but Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look around my constituency, and I’ll talk about 

that in a few minutes, of what that has meant for the 

Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 

see that it’s going to, this budget will allow for some highway 

improvements in the Weyburn area, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

certainly one thing that I’ve heard a lot about from my 

constituents. In fact I had a constituent that sent me an email 

last summer, and he was very pleased to finally see construction 

all across the province. He was actually saying that he was 

finally happy to be inconvenienced by construction instead of 

potholes and traffic that’s backed up because areas where you 

have to slow down because the road was in such bad shape, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased. I think the Highways minister is 

doing a very fine job in this province, Mr. Speaker. One of the 

projects that we’re going to see in our constituency is there’s 

going to be around the village of McTaggart, which is just on 

the west side of the city of Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, that’s been 

an area where I’ve heard for long before . . . I’ve had relatives 

that lived in McTaggart in years past, and I’ve heard for many 

years that from Regina all the way to Estevan, it was probably 

the only community on Highway 6 and 39 that didn’t have 

proper turning lanes going into the community. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I remember in fact my first debate in 

Weyburn as a candidate in 2006 against Mr. Karwacki for the 

Liberals and a very nice gentlemen for the NDP, Graham 

Mickleborough, who, you know, I certainly have a great deal of 

time for. Graham and I certainly remained friendly through the 

election and since the election. In fact I think he was promised a 

little bit more than the NDP could deliver when he was signed 

up as a candidate, but that’s another story, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I remember in that campaign, Mr. Mickleborough was 

going on the party line of Mr. Calvert saying that they were 

going to twin the highway. They were going to twin the 

highway all the way from Regina to Estevan. And I recall, Mr. 

Speaker, I recall a constituent that stood up at the microphone 

after Mr. Mickleborough said that. And he said, well that’s fine 

to say, but you can’t keep up with the highways that we already 

have in the province. How are you going to build anymore 

highways when you can’t repair the ones we already have? And 

another constituent had made the comment that the turning 

lanes was an issue. 

 

So I’m pleased to see that we’re going to, in this budget, finally 

build proper turning lanes at the community of McTaggart. It’s 

certainly something that those citizens, and I think anybody 

that’s ever driven on the very busy highway between Estevan, 

Weyburn, and Regina, certainly see that that’s very important, 

particularly for safety, Mr. Speaker, residents of McTaggart that 

are turning in and out of the community. And I’m pleased to see 

that happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on the Highways minister, Mr. Speaker. 

He came down to an event last week in the constituency. And 

he’s such a great Highways minister, Mr. Speaker, that he was 

going to look to see the condition of the highways, Mr. Speaker. 

And instead of turning at Francis to come to Weyburn, he drove 

clear on to Stoughton. But I know it was not because he missed 

his turn. I know it was because he wanted to check the 

highway’s conditions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since I’ve told a couple of members that story, I’m 

hearing that’s not the first time that’s happened with him. Mr. 

Speaker, I think we’ll have to get him a G, S, one of those 

satellite things for his car, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — GPS [global positioning system]. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — And yes, I know. The member is helping 

me from Moose Jaw. I know it’s a GPS, to the member. 

 

But, you know, it’s funny though, Mr. Speaker. You put him in 

a golf cart and he knows exactly where to go. You put him in a 

car and he doesn’t seem to know which way to go, Mr. Speaker, 

and I look forward to hearing his response to that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased in this budget, the agriculture 

budget. Mr. Speaker, we are fully funding the farm stabilization 

programs in this province, Mr. Speaker, something that wasn’t 

always the case, Mr. Speaker, when the members opposite were 

in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I attended an event in my constituency with the 

Agriculture minister, the municipal minister, with the Highways 

minister, myself, and my seatmate, the Minister of Corrections. 

We were in Willow Bunch at an RM ratepayers’ dinner, Mr. 

Speaker, last week. And, Mr. Speaker, my constituents, for 

members’ information, the community of Willow Bunch and 

that area was actually split by the highway, and so part of the 



4604 Saskatchewan Hansard March 30, 2010 

community in that area is represented by myself and part is by 

my seatmate. And we had the opportunity to spend the evening 

in Willow Bunch at the ratepayers’ meeting. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture did a great job in his speech. He’s 

certainly a well-respected member of this cabinet, and I would 

say probably the most popular Agriculture minister that we’ve 

had in this province in a long, long time, Mr. Speaker. It’s been 

a great, great many years, probably since before I could even 

spell the word agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we’ve done a number of things like the wildlife damage 

compensation program, expanded crop insurance to include 

some new crops, yield cushioning, Mr. Speaker, when it comes 

to limiting the impact of consecutive poor growing seasons.  

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re moving AgriStability to Melville instead 

being administered out of province, Mr. Speaker. The members 

opposite, I’ve heard other members opposite that, you know, 

don’t see that as a really big deal. But, Mr. Speaker, when you 

talk to producers, that’s a big deal that we’re bringing the 

administration back to this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look at the past number of years, whether it was 

drought issues in the Southwest that crept along the south part 

of the province into my constituency, whether it was cattle 

programs that the Agriculture minister has put in place, it’s 

certainly . . . There’s no reason why anybody wouldn’t see why 

this Agriculture minister has been so well received across the 

farm community in this province and across rural 

Saskatchewan. And I’m pleased to be his colleague, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look at my constituency . . . I think it was a 

number of months ago when the members of the other main 

party in this province sent a mailer out to all the households in 

my constituency and many others, Mr. Speaker. I know there’s 

been a billboard that’s been just outside of Weyburn over the 

last month or so, Mr. Speaker, and I’m not sure exactly what it 

says, but it’s doom and gloom or the sky is falling or something 

like that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know when I look at that and I talk to my constituents 

and I look at the investments that this government is doing 

around the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency, Mr. Speaker, 

water upgrades for the community of Pangman, Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, a recreational project when it comes to the 

swimming pool at Bengough. Mr. Speaker, there is a report on 

the radio today about the work that’s under way at the Crescent 

Point Place in Weyburn. It used to be the old coliseum. The 

front lobby, for those who know it, is actually . . . I understand 

they’ve torn down, demolished the old lobby part. They’re 

going to be building on to that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The courthouse is receiving some upgrades right now that we’re 

in the middle of. Both in the public and the separate school 

system within the city of Weyburn are both in the middle, at 

different phases of capital projects. There’s a new daycare that’s 

being built in the community, a new group home, Mr. Speaker. 

This is over the last number of years under this government, 

three budgets. Not just in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, it’s not only the government investment, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

what the private sector is doing. You know, we have two new 

hotels that have been built in the city of Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, 

a brand new Ramada Hotel, and a Canalta. Mr. Speaker, 

Canalta is the company across Western Canada that actually 

builds the Ramada hotels and a number of other commercial 

chains. They’ve actually decided to brand their first Canalta 

hotel in the city of Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. Both are about a 

hundred room hotels, beautiful hotels. I believe a third one is, 

they’re going to be breaking ground soon. Mr. Speaker, there’s 

many residential developments going on right now, a 

commercial development. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when my constituents, when they’re talking to me 

and they see these doom and gloom billboards and mailouts, 

they really ask, you know, it really comes down to, what 

province are the members opposite living in? When you look at 

the amount of development that is taking place in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s really hard to see where they’re coming from. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to, before my time ends here, I want to get 

to Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport ministry. Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve done a number of things, in this budget, and in this 

budget year, a number of announcements. 

 

One is the Capital Commission, Mr. Speaker. That was a 

campaign commitment that we would have in this province a 

provincial Capital Commission. Mr. Speaker, it’s going to, it’s 

really a beginning point in this, in this process, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re going to, and people will see as they look at the budget, 

we actually have a new vote for the Capital Commission. And 

we’re going to make sure that all of the assets of the capital — 

whether that be Wascana Centre Authority, the Conexus Arts 

Centre, Government House, the Archives, Mr. Speaker, this 

legislative precinct — we want to make sure that those assets 

that are funded by government, partly or in whole, Mr. Speaker, 

that we put them all under one umbrella so that we can start to 

make sure that we are bringing all of these partners together and 

really showcasing the provincial capital, making sure that we’re 

showcasing these assets that we have together. So more work is 

going to be done on that. But, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that we 

finally have been able to move forward in making that 

announcement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a very exciting announcement coming up 

in the next couple of weeks. It’s a new program, it’s going to be 

called community vitality, Mr. Speaker. It’s $9 million over 

three years, Mr. Speaker, and it’s going to enhance the culture 

and the cultural facilities and recreational facilities around the 

province. It’s going to volunteerism, work towards 

volunteerism, increasing community involvement and 

volunteerism, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to engage 

Aboriginal and youth leaders across the province, Mr. Speaker. 

We are going to have a full announcement in the coming weeks, 

but it was included in the budget. And so I want to talk about it 

tonight, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things in forming a balanced, 

forward-looking, and responsible budget obviously, Mr. 

Speaker, we had to look at our budget to see where we were 

able to make reductions, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased that one of 

the areas that we’ve been able to keep whole in our budget is 

the funding to our third party organizations that we fund in this 

province, whether that be the Saskatchewan Arts Board or the 



March 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4605 

Western Development Museum or our urban parks, our partners 

at Tourism Saskatchewan, SaskFilm, Wanuskewin Heritage 

Park, the Science Centre, the Saskatchewan Heritage 

Foundation, the Conexus Arts Centre, the Archives Board, 

Government House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those are areas that we were able to, while we were looking for 

reductions in our budget, those were areas that we were able to 

keep their budgets whole from what they were last year, Mr. 

Speaker. And I look forward to working with all those 

organizations over the coming year to ensure that their 

important programs continue going forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, certainly we were not alone in finding reductions 

in our budget. Mr. Speaker, one of the areas that we have 

reduced is parks capital. I think when people look around the 

provincial park system they will see significant amount of 

investment, Mr. Speaker. And to put it into context, in the first 

three budgets of this government, the Saskatchewan Party 

government, we’ve invested $24.2 million in capital in our 

provincial parks. The last three budgets of the NDP government 

was just around $12 million, so we have doubled the amount of 

funding going to provincial park capital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people will see that in a variety of areas. One of 

the biggest areas is the fact that we’re bringing on 1,000 more 

electrified campsites across the provincial park system. Mr. 

Speaker, we are certainly well on our way to achieving the 

thousand by the time the next election rolls around. 

 

One of the other areas, Mr. Speaker, is regional park funding. 

This government made a commitment that we would fund 

regional parks to $2.4 million over four years at 600,000 a year. 

Mr. Speaker, in our first budget it was 600,000. Last year it was 

$1 million. This budget it’s going to be a little over $500,000, 

so that brings us to $2.1 million over our first four years. To 

compare where the members opposite were over the last three 

budgets of their government, they funded regional parks to the 

tune of $425,000 compared to our $2.1 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So certainly we have done much more. In fact for many years 

the members opposite, the funding that they would give to the 

regional parks was $75,000, which allowed the association to 

run an office, Mr. Speaker, to hire one staff person and keep the 

lights on in an office. This is our investment, Mr. Speaker, in 

regional parks, is allowing those regional parks to match dollar 

for dollar investment. $2.1 million over the last three years has 

meant a $4.2 million investment into the regional park system 

across this province, Mr. Speaker. And that’s something that we 

are very proud of on this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I certainly have a number of other areas that I 

want to talk about, Mr. Speaker. One of the areas is certainly 

that has had a lot of attention is the film industry, Mr. Speaker, 

and I want to set the record straight. On the film and television 

industry, we have made sure that SaskFilm’s budget remains 

the same. Their budget is still in place. The film employment 

tax credit is still in place, Mr. Speaker. It’s competitive with 

other provinces. We’ll have more discussions on that in the 

future, Mr. Speaker. The sound stage is still in place and it is 

used by the film and television industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Certainly when we look across the provinces, four other 

provinces had a public broadcaster in Canada. One is owned 

today in Alberta, is owned by CTV [Canadian Television 

Network Ltd.]. So the public broadcaster, Mr. Speaker, is not 

across the country and certainly not only owned by the 

provincial government across the piece, Mr. Speaker. And I 

look forward to having discussions with the industry as we go 

forward and move to make that industry as competitive as 

possible while knowing full well, Mr. Speaker, that those 

individuals that are in that industry, the producers and the 

production companies, are running a business, Mr. Speaker. 

And they will have business decisions that they need to make, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to certainly say that I will not be 

supporting the amendment put forward. I’ll be supporting the 

budget. Mr. Speaker, it’s a good budget. It’s a balanced, a 

forward-looking, and responsible budget. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

where else you’d want to live in this country. The highest 

population ever in this province right now, Mr. Speaker, the 

lowest unemployment rate in Canada, Mr. Speaker. The best 

job creation record, certainly a far better record than the 

members opposite. And I support this budget. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This House is now in recess until 7 

p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4573 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4573 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4573 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4573 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4573 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4577 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4577 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4584 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4574 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4574 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4574 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4574 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4574 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4574 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4575 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4575 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4575 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4575 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4576 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4576 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4576 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4576 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Canadian Navy Centennial Celebration 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4577 

 New Bridge for Saskatoon 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4577 

 Disposition of Pension Income 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4578 

 HMCS Weyburn 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4578 

 Health Care Provision 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4578 

 Double-Dipping 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4578 

 Forestry Industry 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4579 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Health Care Provision 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4579 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4579 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4580 

 Support for First Nation and Métis People 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4580 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 4580 

 Support for Post-Secondary Education 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4582 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4582 

 Labour Legislation 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4583 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4583 

POINT OF ORDER 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4584 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4584 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4584 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4584 

 



 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4585 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4588 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4593 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4598 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4601 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


