




















































Hansard: April 12, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 42B  MONDAY, APRIL 12, 2010, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4731 

 April 12, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 127 — The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

The Speaker: — Being now 7 p.m., debate will resume on Bill 

No. 127. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was just getting 

started in my long speech, but my colleagues have encouraged 

me to adjourn debate. So I will do so. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Eastview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 127. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to accept the adjournment? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 118 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Bjornerud that Bill No. 118 — The 

Milk Control Repeal Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and it’s my pleasure 

tonight to rise and speak to Bill 118, An Act to repeal The Milk 

Control Act, 1992. And it’s kind of interesting as I’m doing the 

research and talking to a few people about the whole dairy 

industry and the whole industry. It’s not just dairy industry but 

the processing industry, right from, I guess, I go from livestock 

right through to processing and bottling milk products and then 

the delivery to stores where most of us wind up getting our 

milk. 

 

And I kind of . . . It was an interesting reflection to think back 

to my early time on the farm when we knew where the milk 

came from because we milked the cows. And I’ve got to tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, that top milk was just awesome, especially if 

you could shake that up and pour it into your glass and drink 

that. It made 10 per cent or whatever they call it now seem like 

skim milk. And maybe that set the process for some of us 

gaining a little bit of meat on the bones. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Milk Control Board has a long history in 

Saskatchewan, and it did a good job helping to find the right 

balance between consumers on the one hand, consumers of 

bottled milk and cream and, you know, cheese products, that 

sort of thing. It protected consumers. But it also did a very 

important thing in protecting dairy farmers and looking after . . . 

making sure there was things like an appropriate quota, an 

appropriate opportunity to deliver their raw milk products, and 

to make sure that the safety of the herd and then the safety of 

the milk products was managed appropriately. And I have to 

say that it was a very effective operation for a great many years, 

and it served very well. 

 

Times in some ways are changing, and in some ways I have to 

wonder what the rush is or what the need to repeal the Milk 

Control Board, The Milk Control Act. What’s the urgency to 

repeal it, and what are we are replacing it with? And I’ve read 

the Act. What’s missing is some sense of need to change the 

board — if I can describe it that way — of The Milk Control 

Act. 

 

From my understanding in the consultation that we’ve done 

with people in the industry — and it’s a limited consultation, 

but I believe it’s a broader consultation than was done by the 

government — my understanding from our consultations were 

simply that very few people were consulted. That’s point one: 

very few people in the industry were consulted, very few of the 

actors. And secondarily that The Milk Control Act had been 

serving very well for a huge number of years. It’s only as late as 

2008 that the current board came in and the questions about The 

Milk Control Act started to seriously arise in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I don’t know if this is a function of gathering the control 

of The Milk Control Act into government, you know, so shortly 

after the change of government, or if there’s some other reasons 

for the consternation or the concerns within that industry at this 

point. 

 

But the questions are still there, and I guess we’ve tried through 

a number of speeches . . . I’ve read some of the remarks of 

colleagues that have spoken earlier. They’ve come at this 

question, each of us from our own unique perspectives, but 

we’ve tried to come at the question and we’re not much closer 

to an answer. I’m suspicious that we may have to go into 

committee before we’ll ever get any of the answers for that, but 

we’re not ready for that. We’re not ready for that. What we 

need to get on the record is our expressions of concern. We 

want to provide the opportunities for concerned people in the 

whole milk industry, if I can describe it that way. Individuals 

and companies can certainly let their feelings be known, and 

that would be a good thing. 

 

Other provinces have certainly moved towards a marketing 

board, which is what I think this is about, is moving from the 

Milk Control Board to a marketing board. But we’re not sure 

that that’s entirely what’s behind this change in Saskatchewan. 

We’re not sure that if they do go that way, if the government 

chooses to go that way with the replacement Act, that it’s going 

to in any way strengthen the consumer protection or the 

protection for dairy farmers. We’re not sure that it’s going to 

enhance the whole milk industry in Saskatchewan.  

 

And that’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, because we’ve got . . . 

certainly we’ve got lots of land. We’ve got people that can look 

after the herds. We’ve got the arable land to produce whatever 

the crop is that we want to feed the herd with. I was going to 



4732 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

start going into specific crops, but there’s no point in that 

because one farmer might want more corn, another might want 

more barley, another might want alfalfa — who knows? The 

needs vary, and it depends on what’s more locally available, I 

suppose. 

 

But we’ve certainly got the land. We’ve got the people. We’ve 

got in many cases most of the facilities. Indeed until recently 

we were producers of milk and milk products. It used to be that 

there was a dairy in every city of any size. 

 

In fact at one point my father and uncle are proud of telling the 

story that they were about to take over a dairy in Leader, 

Saskatchewan when they were young men. And that’s a couple 

or three years ago, maybe significantly more than that ago. Both 

of them are . . . the numbers that mark their birthdays are 

getting quite large, and I’m very proud of both my father and 

my uncle for that. 

 

But having gone from a time of where every farm family had a 

cow, or virtually every farm family had a cow and milked it and 

produced for themselves. And virtually every town had a dairy, 

and they produced the milk and milk products for that town and 

maybe some of the smaller villages around. And things got 

looked after that way. Through consolidations, I mean, it just 

grew and grew and grew. 

 

And I can remember thinking that for example the Swift 

Current dairy was going to last forever. And while it’s been 

many years since Swift Current had a dairy, I for sure knew that 

Saskatoon and Regina were going to have the co-op dairies in 

both of them, and of course they’re gone. They’re gone. What’s 

left is a colostrum collection facility in Saskatoon, and that’s 

literally the milk product operation that’s left in Saskatchewan. 

 

I’ve talked a bit earlier about the need for consultation. And I 

have to say, Mr. Speaker, that the people we talked to didn’t, 

weren’t aware of others in the industry or themselves being 

asked by government or government officials about the need for 

this change in The Milk Control Act, this need for repeal.  

 

And it’s almost like, you know, the recent budget where we saw 

the chiropractors being delisted with no consultation, 

chiropractors being taken right out of coverage to save 10 or 

$12 million in a year out of that pocket. But of course in the 

other pocket, the government’s going to spend many millions 

more. 

 

So we’re not sure if The Milk Control Act repeal is being done 

with even less consultation than for instance the chiropractors 

elimination from their coverage. And I tie the two together only 

by way of an example respecting consultation and the crying 

need for meaningful consultation, meaningful engagement of, 

you know, in the instance of chiropractors, of course with all 

people that have a view on it, people who use chiropractors and 

chiropractors themselves, the whole medical community. 

 

In the case of The Milk Control Act, we need the consultation to 

take place between the . . . right from the dairy herd owners, the 

producers, right through — follow the levels right up to and 

including consumers. And we should all be given an 

opportunity to first of all be told what it is that the repeal of The 

Milk Control Act of 1992 is going to . . . how that’s going to 

enhance life in Saskatchewan, how it’s going to help a dairy 

producer or how it’s going to help a consumer or how it’s going 

to help any of us in any way. That should be fairly easy to 

define. In the absence of that, well then I think any 

administration, any government administration deserves to hear 

of the concerns. 

 

So we’re trying to raise the concerns around this whole repeal 

of The Milk Control Act. And we know that it’s a fairly 

all-encompassing Act. We know that in part of the Act it says 

that the new operation, whatever it will be, will get some of the 

assets of the old Milk Control Board, but any other assets just 

simply revert to the Crown. 

 

I’m not sure how that is going to work or who’s going to gain. 

Or is this another grab like . . . We heard on the news tonight 

about SaskTel now having to borrow money because the 

government chose to take all of its retained earnings from last 

year and next year into the General Revenue Fund and in a bid 

to pretend that they’re keeping taxes low. And we’re just not 

sure how much of this Act or the SaskTel situation is a shell 

game.  

 

We’re just not sure who’s going to benefit and who’s not, and 

it’s really a matter of openness, transparency. It’s a matter of 

trust. It’s a matter of being able to get the answers, at least get 

an answer as to why a Bill is being proposed, to get an answer 

as to why, in my earlier example, why is SaskTel being stripped 

of its retained earnings for two years when the last time that 

happened was when Grant Devine was premier. And we all 

know what happened then, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we know there’s more to this Act than simply the repeal of 

The Milk Control Act. We know there’s more to it than that. We 

think that part of it is the introduction of a marketing board 

under The Agri-Food Act, but again it begs the question, why? 

What’s the gain here? How does this improve anything in the 

entire industry? How does it make milk products any safer for 

consumers? How does it make them priced any better? How 

does it put a dollar more or less into the pockets of the herd 

owner, the producer? How does it bring the opportunity for 

more dairy herds into Saskatchewan so we could expand what 

should be a growing and important industry in the province? 

This doesn’t answer any of those questions, and we really 

should be focused on the economic development, that is, bring 

more dairy herds in, bring more dairy farmers to play. When I 

say to play, I mean into the industry and in Saskatchewan where 

we can produce the raw milk. 

 

[19:15] 

 

And that seems to me that there would be some additional jobs. 

And that should be what a government is all about, is the job 

creation and trying to help us get a better finished result, a 

better end result. And certainly with milk, I mean there’s not 

much secret to milk. Cows walk around. Cows will eat and 

drink and they will produce milk. And they do require some 

care. I don’t mean to downplay the herd management or the 

importance of routine in the daily milking, the importance of 

sanitation, or all of that. Safety issues — don’t mean to 

downplay that. But cows are pretty darn reliable when it comes 

to . . . you put some input in the front end, and you’ll get milk 

and fertilizer I guess. 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4733 

We need some accountability and transparency. When I talked 

about the transferring of assets and liabilities and contracts and 

personal property that’s being transferred to the new marketing 

board, we need to be more certain, Mr. Speaker, that it’s pretty 

clear that what gets transferred to the Crown and what goes to 

the new marketing board entity, and it should be logical and 

explainable and reasonable what happens. But I’m not sure . . . 

certainly not in the Bill or the explanatory notes is any of that to 

be found. And that’s why we just are very concerned with 

what’s going on in Bill 118, An Act to repeal The Milk Control 

Act, 1992. 

 

The transparency just isn’t always there. We’ve seen that from 

the government when chiropractors had a contract negotiated 

with the government. Contract fully negotiated, the 

chiropractors signed it, and then they sat on it, the government 

sat on it for two full months leading to the budget before they 

told chiropractors, oh we were just kidding. All those months of 

negotiations, it was just . . . We were just kidding. We had no 

intention of ever signing a new contract with you. And it was 

just disingenuous. It was disingenuous at best, and it should 

never have come to that. The negotiations should not have even 

started, but at some point early on when the government knew 

that it was going to delist, de-insure chiropractic coverage, they 

should have just put an end to the charade and told the 

chiropractors what was going on. 

 

Our concern, our concern is that, Mr. Speaker, with respect to 

the transfer of assets and liabilities under this Bill 118, the 

repeal of The Milk Control Act, those assets and liabilities are 

being transferred to the new entity, and the government is going 

to keep the rest, whatever the rest means. And we’re just not 

sure what the rest is. We’re just not certain what the rest is, just 

how valuable that is or how justified it is for that grab to take 

place. 

 

Transparency is not a strength of the government. That’s what 

we’re seeing. It has not been a strength, and I think that the 

people in milk industry deserve better. I think that dairy 

producers deserve better. I certainly know that my constituents 

and the people of Saskatchewan deserve better. They deserve 

much more transparency than there is. They deserve more 

integrity when it comes to making decisions. 

 

Certainly governing is about making decisions. I know that. I’m 

not trying to pretend that when you’re a government you can be 

all things to all people. Governing, by its very nature, is about 

making decisions, and they aren’t all popular. That’s a given. I 

know that. I was part of a government that after 16 years there 

was more than enough people that thought we perhaps hadn’t 

governed as well as we could have, and they passed their 

judgement. And that’s a fair judgement that I accept. I’m just 

grateful that I can be part of the whole governance operation by 

serving in opposition in this instance. 

 

Governing is not about simply making the popular choice, but it 

is about consulting with the people, in this case consulting with 

people in the dairy industry, consulting with consumers, 

consulting with people at all levels of the milk industry, if I can 

describe it that way. But it’s about being straight with what 

your intentions are and why you’re doing something. I haven’t 

heard anything about this being an economic development tool 

or this creating a single job. Now I hope it does. I hope that’s 

what’s behind it and the government just forgot to tell us that, 

but I’m skeptical. I’m really, really doubtful. 

 

Sometimes I think I was born too far north. I sometimes think 

I’m from Missouri, you know, the Show-me State. Show me is 

their motto — show me. And so I sometimes feel like that 

would be my second home because sometimes I feel like I’m 

overly skeptical. But the track record of the government is not a 

good one. It’s not a good one on transparency. It’s not a good 

one on saying what it is they’re about. And it’s not a good one 

on Bill 118, An Act to repeal The Milk Control Act of 1992 

because we still are uncertain what that’s about. 

 

You know, I opened talking about milking cows and, you know, 

how the whole milk industry has changed, Mr. Speaker, over 

the years. But it’s interesting. I think we’ve gone arguably too 

far into the removal of the production facilities, the dairy 

facilities, if I can describe it that way, because in the last few 

years there’s been a fairly revolutionary notion that started 

somewhere in the states. I’m not sure exactly where, but they 

urge that as we try and look after our planet, that we get 

involved in a 100-mile Diet. And in its simplest form, it means 

that virtually all of the things that we need can be found within 

100 miles of where we live. 

 

So within that 100-mile radius you can find all of the meat you 

need. You can find all of the vegetables you need. I still am 

struggling with how I can find all of the oranges and bananas 

that I need within 100 miles of Regina. But I back up a couple 

of sentences. With very few exceptions, you can get virtually 

everything within 100 miles. And I’m not sure that we’re doing 

anything to try and meet this new coming reality with the repeal 

of The Milk Control Act of 1992. 

 

I know that we’ve done some consulting. We’ve done some 

discussing. We’ve asked some questions of some of the players 

in the industry, not all of them. I won’t pretend that we’ve, in a 

short period of time, had the ability to talk to all of the players. 

We do encourage anyone that has thoughts on that to contact us. 

We’ll try and reflect that in our speeches, in our expressions of 

joy with legislation or our expressions of concern with 

legislation. And we try to reflect it all. 

 

If the calls came in saying, oh you know, forget it, The Milk 

Control Act, repeal of The Milk Control Act, 1992 is a great 

thing, I mean if that was clearly the perception of people in the 

dairy industry, that would be what we would be reflecting here 

in our speeches. But that’s not, it’s just not the reality, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s not what we’re hearing. 

 

Now any time there’s changes in legislation like this, there’s 

questions surrounding those changes. I’ve tried to point out 

what some of those questions are, but by no means am I trying 

to pretend that that’s the total list of what those questions are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what more I could say about this 

particular Bill. We take it very seriously. We’re trying to 

express some concerns. And I’m hoping that the minister and/or 

his officials are at least paying attention to the speeches because 

I hope that some of the questions that I’ve raised tonight and 

that some of my colleagues have raised in previous speeches on 

this particular Bill, I hope that the minister will be prepared to 

answer some of these questions, all of the questions, when we 



4734 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

get into the committee dealing with Bill 118. 

 

It would be, it would be a delight to hear in that committee that 

this repeal is going to lead to thousands more jobs in 

Saskatchewan — or even 100, you know, a couple hundred; 

100 more jobs, even a handful — just to know the direction that 

the repeal of The Milk Control Act is going to do. We clearly 

have recently a growing population. We clearly, to sustain that, 

need more jobs. And where better to get some jobs than in an 

area where we enjoy some real honest advantages? We’ve got, 

you know, acres and acres and acres and acres, sections of 

grassland. We’ve got a cattle industry that’s in big trouble, to 

put it mildly. I was talking with a former cattle producer over 

the weekend who suggested to me that, as soon as cattle prices 

strengthen, we’re going to see an even bigger exodus of people 

producing livestock for beef. Well that will open up even more 

rangeland for dairy cattle or more land where we can produce 

barley and corn and whatever we want to feed the dairy herd. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opportunities are there. We’ve got, I guess I’m 

clearly saying we’ve got some areas where we’re in some 

difficulty in the farming sector. And it’s, I mean, having grown 

up on a farm, I know it goes up and it goes down. And some 

years you wonder why you’d ever dream of doing anything 

other then farm or ranch or be a dairy producer. That’s some 

years. But there’s an awful lot of years in between where, you 

know, exactly why . . . You wonder what you’re doing because 

the grasshoppers come or the drought comes or, you know, the 

market’s down or the government does something you don’t 

like. And that’s just the reality of farming in Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve made my comments on Bill 118, An Act 

to repeal The Milk Control Act, 1992. And my understanding is 

that we’ve gotten on the record our concerns — our concerns 

with the lack of consultation that’s been done throughout the 

industry, our concerns with the lack of transparency by the Sask 

Party government, our concerns with what this Bill is 

purporting to do and what it is just silent on. We’ve got lots of 

concerns. We’ve got lots of questions. We hope that some of 

the answers are acceptable. We hope that some of the answers 

are in fact positive for Saskatchewan’s economy, for 

Saskatchewan’s dairy producers, for the people of 

Saskatchewan. To get at some of those answers, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re prepared to let this piece of . . . this Bill go to committee. 

I thank you for your time. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Agriculture that Bill No. 118, The 

Milk Control Repeal Act be now read a second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

[19:30] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — To the Economy Committee, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Committee on 

the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 101 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 101 — The 

Credit Union Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to join in the debate, the discussion around Bill No. 

101, An Act to Amend the Credit Union Act, 1998. And this is 

an interesting piece of legislation before us. On one hand, it 

seems relatively straightforward, but there are some questions I 

have and some points that I want to make. 

 

I know many of us, if not all of us, have been visited by 

delegates from the credit union system to make their points 

about how they see their role within our communities. And they 

have such an important role, a vital role in the health and 

well-being of our communities. Really the history of the credit 

unions, the co-operative movement in Saskatchewan, is one that 

we can all be very, very proud of. And they have shown real 

leadership, thoughtful leadership in how to make our 

communities as strong as they can be. They’ve taken the 

opportunity to show real leadership, both in financial 

management, in helping families, individuals, corporations, 

small businesses, public sector institutions such as schools and 

health care co-ops, as strong as they can be. 

 

But they’ve also realized that they have a bigger responsibility, 

a much bigger social responsibility, and they’ve gladly taken to 

that. I can tell you about in our own community, TCU Place and 

Credit Union place are just examples. But they do so much 

more than that, and whether it’s supporting local community 

organizations, big and small, they’re there. And so it is with an 

interest that I stand today and add a few comments about this 

amendment to The Credit Union Act, 1998. 

 

And I do want to take a moment to just recognize my colleague, 

the member from Regina Lakeview, who gave an outstanding 

speech back in November about this. And I’ve been reviewing 

this, and I may make some comments . . . [inaudible] . . . 

actually cite him. Because we know we’ve been through quite a 

time in terms of the economic storms. You know, people say 

it’s a downturn, but they know it’s been much more than that. 

Fortunately in Canada because of how we feel our regulations, 

our financial regulations are so, so important, we’ve been able 

to handle the economic crisis the world has seen in a much 

more resilient manner. And clearly the credit union movement, 

the credit union leaders have really shown us how to prepare for 

that. And it’s a good-news story on so many fronts. 

 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4735 

But they are looking and they keep a watchful eye on how they 

can do their job better, how can they serve their members better. 

Their members of course are our neighbours, and so when they 

serve them well, we’re all being served well because that’s our 

community. 

 

So I want to just take a few moments and talk a bit about the 

Bill itself, some of the things. And I won’t go quite as 

thoroughly through it as the member from Regina Lakeview, 

and I feel in many ways I should review or just read his speech 

into the House because he was so thorough. And of course with 

his background, it really is much appreciated, and I know when 

we do get into committee that we will have lots of questions 

based on some of the concerns that he brings to the table. 

Clearly he’s well-read on the issue and has some thoughts, and 

so I hope that I can do that with at least some points to consider. 

 

You know, it was interesting today, Mr. Speaker, on my way to 

the legislature this morning I stopped in at the office where our 

condo is administered, and I had to talk to the people about 

some caretaking stuff. And I saw the sign on the door, no cash 

will be accepted. No cash will be accepted. I thought, well 

that’s okay, you know. I don’t know, you know, when the last 

time I actually got a paycheque in cash. It’s all been, now it’s 

electronically deposited. So all these things are done in such a 

different world. 

 

Well there was a couple in the office, senior citizens, and the 

gentleman was making a comment about how at one point 

everything was in cash. In fact you would not accept a cheque. 

And I remember, in fact, I remember a couple of unions — 

Equity, the actors’ union, would not accept paycheques. They 

would only accept cash. And so this is the point the gentleman 

was making about how we certainly are in a different time 

because now we don’t even think about cash. We think that we 

have some pocket cash, but we certainly don’t want to have a 

lot of cash in our wallets or our purses. And we certainly 

wouldn’t expect to pay our rent in cash, and we certainly 

wouldn’t expect to get our paycheque, our monthly paycheque 

in a cash envelope. 

 

But at one time that was clearly the way, and it’s clearly the 

way within the memory span of people who are with us. And 

every once in a while, you see signs like that and you know the 

financial systems are changing. And of course they are 

changing, and we have to keep up with it. 

 

And I think that speaks directly to the third section, section 2 

that’s being amended when it talks about adding the following 

clauses after clause (i): 

 

„capacity‟ means, in sections 11 and 102, the ability: 

 

to understand information relevant to making a 

decision; and 

 

to appreciate the reasonably foreseeable consequences 

of making or not making a decision. 

 

I think that’s an interesting piece to have in the legislation. In 

many ways it’s really having a lot of foresight, but it’s kind of 

an unusual thing to talk about capacity. We often talk about 

organizations, do they have the capacity or do they not have the 

capacity to make the decisions that they’re asked to make? And 

especially when you have credit unions who are dealing with 

the kind of assets, they have millions and millions of dollars, 

and certainly they cannot be making bad decisions. 

 

In fact we’ve seen a situation in just this past year, the 

government’s budget from last year when they were out by $2 

billion. And we wondered about the capacity of that 

government to make decisions. And so I’m wondering, when I 

saw this, I saw, oh maybe this is something we should be 

looking at here in this House, in terms of the government who is 

taking a look about talking about capacity because we can see 

. . . Can they appreciate the reasonably foreseeable 

consequences of making or not making a decision? And we 

look and we see this government, this Premier making some of 

the decisions they’ve put out there, but do they have the 

capacity, the real capacity that we’re asking credit unions, their 

board of directors to have? So I thought that was very 

interesting. I thought that was a piece that we can all appreciate 

an awful lot. 

 

I see that they’ve taken a lot of amendments and flipped it from 

being the president of the board of directors or president of the 

credit union over to being the chairperson, modernizing it a bit 

more, talking about how that performs the functions of the 

board, not so much president. And so that’s very good to see. I 

think that’s an important change. 

 

Now I won’t go through these all necessarily because, as I said, 

we do plan on doing that in committee, talk about the ones that 

are very relevant to making sure our credit unions are run in an 

appropriate, a solid manner that their membership expects and 

can expect now and into the future. So I won’t go through all of 

these, but I do want to remark on some. 

 

I thought there was an interesting one here about electronic 

voting. That’s section 5, I believe it is, where they’re amending 

section 13. And this will be interesting because it talks about 

adding the following after clause (c) in section 13(2): 

 

“(c.1) subject to the regulations, if the credit union 

proposes to permit electronic voting by directors or 

members, the procedures applicable to that voting; and”. 

 

So clearly they’re now talking about electronic voting. That’s a 

new thing, and I suppose it’s a good thing. 

 

Clearly the gentleman that I heard this morning talking about 

cash only, this would be a very new world for him to talk about 

electronic voting for the person who’s looking after his cash. 

But times do change, and I think that it would be interesting to 

see what the regulations are for that. Now I’m not sure what’s 

causing this. I’m always interested in the idea around voting 

because we see a circumstance in our . . . How we engage the 

public in our own voting. At the provincial level, we’re still at 

the 60-some per cent; 60s, we’re in the 60s. I know the federal 

are higher, but still we’re seeing a disengagement by the public 

when it comes to being engaged in those kind of civic 

responsibilities of voting. 

 

Now here’s a case. I don’t know what the voting turnout is for 

the credit unions, and I would like to have that question posed 

during the committee meetings, hearings on this. Because I’m 



4736 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

curious to know if their money’s involved, do they get more 

engaged? And clearly they might because you can make a direct 

line. Here’s your money. You’ve got it deposited. You may 

want to vote for the director who’s going to be your steward, 

who’s looking after your money. I have to say that that applies 

federally, provincially, and civically as well. It’s their money. 

It’s their tax money, so are they actually involved too? So if this 

helps there, maybe we should all be taking a look at this a little 

more. I am curious to see how that plays out. 

 

And as well, it does say “by directors or members,” so it may be 

implying that some of the voting at the board level will be done 

by electronic voting, as opposed to proxies maybe. I’m not sure. 

So there’s a lot of questions about that, but I do think it’s a new 

age. I do think we need to hear more about this. I’m not 

fundamentally opposed to this. I think I’m very interested in 

hearing more about it because I think, people, if you have the 

opportunity to vote and it’s your organization, it’s your 

company — we call it a credit union though, a co-op, 

fundamentally different than many other corporations — but 

it’s yours and so you probably want to take advantage of this. 

That’s very important. 

 

I am also glad to see, Mr. Speaker, section 30, an amendment to 

that talking about: 

 

“(8) No person who obtains a basic member list, or any 

supplemental list, shall use a basic member list, or any 

supplemental list, for any purpose not mentioned in clause 

(6)(c)”. 

 

Now I don’t know what clause 6(c) is. I’m hoping when we get 

into committee we’ll have some questions about that too. 

 

I know that privacy is a huge issue. And we’ve heard questions 

today about privacy and those challenges, to use lists in the 

appropriate way for the reason they were developed and not 

more than that. And hopefully they don’t have an opt-in, 

opt-out clause that you have to opt out if there’s a special deal 

or a special advertisement, a special list to get in. Members can 

opt in; they’re not opting out. 

 

We saw the fiasco a couple of years ago with a cable company 

who felt you should have to opt out as opposed to opt in, and 

that was not a great move. But we think that this is appropriate. 

So we’re worried about that. We want to see more about that. 

But it’s good to see the privacy part is there because I think 

people have confidence and will know that their credit unions 

are doing the best job that they can do. 

 

So we continue on, and the next section I want to talk about is 

new section 44. The old one is repealed and the following is 

substituted. And this is section 8, but referring to section 44 and 

its restrictions on services in and coercive-tied selling. Now it’s 

not language I use every day, tied selling, so I do find this very 

interesting. I went right to it. 

 

And I know that when we’ve been visited by our neighbours to 

talk about the credit union movement and how we should be 

doing more, really I think this is where some of their issues 

really come to land. And really in many ways we may be 

talking about insurance here. But again it doesn’t talk about 

what it is specifically. So we can only guess because what it 

says in the Bill, it says, and I quote: 

 

44(1) A credit union shall not provide financial or other 

products or services that are: 

 

(a) prohibited by this Act or the regulations; or 

 

(b) restricted by its articles. 

 

Now what’s interesting about this, Mr. Speaker, is in a lot of 

ways it just makes a lot of sense. If they’re prohibited against 

providing these things, then of course that’s pretty straight up. 

And I do want to thank my colleague from Regina Lakeview 

who pointed this out. 

 

[19:45] 

 

So it talks about “shall not provide financial or other products.” 

I understand the term other products is a new addition. It wasn’t 

in the old Bill. So we’ve got this introduced, other products. 

What do you mean by other products? They may mean 

insurance. And we’re not fundamentally opposed to that, but we 

want to know. This is not probably the best way. This should be 

a little bit more clearer. So we’ll have questions about that. 

 

And then the next section “prohibited by this Act or the 

regulations,” again seems relatively straightforward. So we’re 

talking about this Act but, Mr. Speaker, we’re not talking about 

the regulations because we know it’s cabinet who sets the 

regulations. It’s not the House here. It’s not the MLAs [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly]. It’s not the Legislative Assembly. 

It’s cabinet. And so when you have other products being 

prohibited by the regulations, it means that there can be some 

other products that are not prohibited by the regulations. And so 

what are those other products that are not being prohibited by 

the regulations? It’s kind of an odd way of looking at it, but I 

think it’s the way that we have to look at it.  

 

And we have to say, so what are you really saying here? What 

are you really saying here? And I think that this is not 

straightforward. And we’ll have questions about that because 

clearly the legislation, best legislation, is legislation that is 

straightforward, and you know what you’re getting. To say 

other regulations or services are provided or prohibited by this 

Act or the regulations, and what you really mean to say is that 

there are some products or services that will be allowed by the 

regulations but we’ll find out about them down the road in a 

few months, that’s where we get into trouble. That’s where we 

get unintended consequences. And I do think this could’ve been 

a little more straightforward. So I do have some questions about 

that, and I think that clearly that will have to be fleshed out 

more in committee because we just don’t know what that really 

means, and so that’s a big question mark. 

 

Section 102 and some of the other sections are pretty 

straightforward. They talk about who can be and who meets the 

requirements as a director, and that’s relatively straightforward. 

And I think that we don’t have major concerns . . . I don’t have 

major concerns about that. I can’t speak for my colleagues who 

probably will jump to the floor right away, but I can tell you 

that it seems to make some sense. 

 

And I hope, I do hope though that there has been some 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4737 

consultation on this because we know that this government does 

not have a great track record of consultation, and then after the 

fact we find out oh we didn’t know about that, we didn’t know 

about that. And so this, we are going a bit that there has been 

. . . but we don’t have a lot of trust in this government that they 

do the appropriate consultation, so we’ll have to find out more 

about that. 

 

Again, when we get into section 440, that’s section 16 of the 

legislation, it talks again . . . And I understand this is the part 

that really gets to the nuts and bolts when you get to the 

regulations are set by cabinet. And again there are big question 

marks about what is all of this because we see bits and pieces 

here, but we don’t really get the full explanation. 

 

And again when we talk about electronic voting by directors 

and members, do they mean, do they mean the day-to-day 

business, that we will at some point see electronic meetings, 

that the voting somehow . . . I know you’re dealing with some 

significant amounts of money. And we want to make sure all 

directors . . . Because the fact of the matter is Saskatchewan by 

its geography is such a huge province, but we want to ensure 

that there’s representation from across the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve reviewed quickly the work of this Bill, 

but I do want to say and have a few points and by way of 

finishing up I do want to make mention of the work. And I 

think it’s only fitting, you know, when we all receive these 

documents from the Saskatchewan credit unions. And I believe 

that we all do . . . that clearly we want to put on record how 

much we do support the credit unions and how, when we see 

this kind of legislation, it’s very important that when they do 

this kind of work that we take a minute and reflect on that. 

Because I do think, and just even by the title, growing 

communities through innovation, social responsibility, financial 

strength, really speaks to the heart of the matter of what credit 

unions are about. 

 

As I said earlier, social responsibility. And I can see that in my 

own riding, Saskatoon Centre, the heart in many ways of 

Saskatoon if not the province’s financial community. And yet 

the credit unions play such a large role, particularly downtown 

but also on 20th Street, helping out in so many different ways 

with the struggles that that particular community, the core 

communities of Saskatoon face. I think that they do believe in 

their social responsibility, and I do want to take a moment and 

thank them. 

 

I do want to take a moment and thank the credit unions for their 

innovation. I think it’s interesting. When we talk about their 

electronic voting, when we think about the first debit machine 

in North America, I understand, was down here on south Albert 

at a credit union. So here you have it: maybe it’s not unusual for 

a credit union system to be thinking about electronic voting 

when they were thinking decades ago about electronic debit 

machines. It only comes with the nature of the kind of work that 

they’ve had to do right across Canada. 

 

But we see in Saskatchewan challenges we faced. And I talked 

a bit about the recent economic turmoil the world has faced, but 

the credit union system in Saskatchewan, Canada was able to 

withstand it. But they grew up in a time of the ’20s and ’30s — 

the ’30s particularly — where the economic challenges were 

absolutely, absolutely huge, and they had no way other than to 

make it happen if our communities were to survive and flourish. 

And they did flourish, and the credit unions can take an awful 

lot of credit for that. 

 

I just want to take a moment here, you know. And I was just 

looking at the credit union system, and they compare it to the 

Canadian credit union system. Of course Saskatchewan has 66. 

It’s amazing. They have 316 locations, but they’re serving 282 

communities here in Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the stats that I found very interesting though was the 

number of members that the credit union system has in 

Saskatchewan — over 500,000, some 525,000 members in 

Saskatchewan. Where you look at the members across Canada, 

is some 5 million. So you have well over, well over half of 

Saskatchewan residents are members of credit unions, and well 

over 10 per cent of credit union members in Canada live in 

Saskatchewan. And that’s really phenomenal because you think 

about how we have about 3 per cent of the population, and often 

it’s three or three point something, 3.5 per cent. But we’re, you 

know, batting way above our average there when we’re having 

10 per cent of the credit union members of Canada live in 

Saskatchewan. That’s huge. That’s very significant. 

 

And so I just think that that’s a wonderful thing, and it really 

talks about how it’s so important that the credit unions, what 

kind of work they’ve . . . clearly they’ve been appreciated here 

in this province. They do very, very good work and they have a 

high level of integrity. And people know when they deal with 

the credit union system that they’re going to be okay, and we 

know that. 

 

And I can go through the other parts of this booklet. I’m not 

sure whether I will, but I can tell you that they really want to 

. . . There are a couple of points actually I do want to make as I 

look through this, Mr. Speaker. I am impressed by this book. 

And one that I do think I just want to just glance as I was 

looking through, I did mean to talk a little bit about this because 

they did talk about three points. 

 

One was about the insurance delivery. It sounds like this might 

provide the vehicle, this legislation might provide the vehicle 

for it, and we’ll find out in committee if that’s the case. That’s 

very important that it’s done well. We hope that we can get 

some clarity around that. 

 

The other one — and this is, as a teacher I think this is very 

important that if there are some ways that this government can 

help out — I see that they talked a lot about financial literacy. 

And for me in my role as Social Services critic and as a 

representative of the folks of Saskatoon Centre, financial 

literacy is so hugely important, and I think that this is 

something that we should be thinking about. And we’ll raise 

this more. 

 

But we’ve seen, and they’ve talked about over the last 10 years 

there’s been some huge changes in the financial market. Now 

I’ve talked about the senior who came in and said, everything 

used to be in cash. But now what we’ve seen, and this is really 

true, and if you look at my riding, you will see the increased 

growth of high-cost, high-risk providers such as payday loans, 

money marts, and cheque cashing machines. That’s huge. We 



4738 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

need to have some way so that this does not become the norm. 

And unfortunately it seems to be becoming the norm, and I 

wish there was something we could do. And I think the credit 

unions here are really bringing this topic to the table and talk 

about how can we make it safer for young people particularly, 

or those who are in vulnerable predicaments, so they have the 

financial literacy to serve themselves well. This is very 

important. 

 

And the other one of course, as we all know, the easy access to 

credit. And as we were growing up and as we were going 

through our earlier years, it wasn’t easy to get a credit card, but 

we now know it’s fairly easy and straightforward to get credit 

cards. And in fact there are people, young people are being 

encouraged to get credit cards to establish their credit rating. 

And it seems like quite a gamble though, Mr. Speaker, but that 

is the way to get your credit rating — through a high-risk 

system such as a credit card system. There should be a better 

way. And also we are concerned about the growing rate of 

bankruptcy. So I do want to point that out. 

 

I think this is very important, that even though it may not be 

directly related to this, but you know, what’s interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, is right in this Bill it talks about capacity. This Bill has 

the word capacity in talking about the board of directors, the 

directors to have the ability to make appropriate decisions. We 

should make sure that everyone coming out of high schools 

equally have capacity to make appropriate decisions when it 

comes to the financial services. Mr. Speaker, that’s critical, and 

I think that’s so important. 

 

I do want to take a little bit and just say some of the great things 

that the credit unions are doing in their commitment to 

communities. And we know that they make a huge difference in 

the 282 communities that they are in. And you understand, I 

understand that their contributions and sponsorships now 

exceed over $6 million. That’s 6.86 million annually. And then 

you take their employees who contribute leadership expertise 

and volunteer time to their communities, and they estimate it to 

be more than 30,000 hours annually. And if you were to take 

that at minimum wage, that would be a significant, significant 

amount of money. And you know, I mean, really when 

two-thirds of this is direct contributions in kind, donations is 

also significant, about a quarter. It’s really a big, big help. 

 

Now some of their highlights, they’ve done local sport teams, 

that type of thing. And of course when we think — and how can 

we miss this; how can we not talk about this? — the credit 

unions and how they’ve helped support the Saskatchewan 

Roughriders. That’s so important. Very important. 

 

But also to the Red Cross, International Red Cross, hugely 

significant. Yes, and it’s important because we think about this. 

You know, we think about the earthquake in China, the 

Myanmar cyclone. And I bet, no doubt, they were there in Haiti. 

And it just goes on and on. So this is so important. 

 

And we also know that they’re involved with the First Nations. 

And I think this is truly an important issue because as we talk 

about capacity but also the ability to raise funds to do the kind 

of things that need to be done, credit unions have the resources, 

have the horses on the ground to make a difference. And they 

can do that. And so we think this is very important. And of 

course in agriculture, they’re there all the time, whether it’s the 

Western Canadian Agribition, the Western Canadian Crop 

Production Show, or the Farm Progress Show. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on, but I think this is very 

important. You know, they do things right across the board — 

education, sport, involved in high school sports. And you can 

just imagine it. When they’re in 282 communities, this is huge. 

So I do want to thank the credit unions for providing this 

information. But it’s much more than that. It helps us 

understand some of the things that come before us. 

 

And I think that when they’re talking about capacity, I have to 

take my hat off to them and say thanks for thinking about that 

because it’s right up from the 14-year-old. And now we see a 

government that has changed labour legislation so you have 

younger people working all the time, getting paycheques — 

paycheques. They’re probably not getting paid in cash, I bet. 

These kids who are 15- and 16-year-olds are getting paid. Do 

they have the capacity to know what to do with their money? 

 

They do get what used to be a living wage. We haven’t heard 

about the minimum wage and we’re waiting about that. I think 

it’s important to start hearing more about that because they have 

the right to make a decent wage, but they need the capacity as 

well to know what to do with that minimum wage. I think that’s 

what’s important. 

 

And I think when they talk about financial literacy, these kids 

who are coming up, if they have the occupational health and 

safety training, they have the labour standards training, but do 

they have the financial literacy training to deal with the money? 

Because I think that’s important. And it all starts there because 

we’re looking at younger people, younger people to work, and 

we know that it just doesn’t come that easily. 

 

And so in fact I’m reminded of Ian and Sylvia’s song “Summer 

Wages” and how you can lose all your money. Those days we 

hope are long gone because not only do you lose your summer 

wages; you lose the girl. And hopefully you haven’t run up your 

credit card. Hopefully you haven’t run up your credit card the 

same time you have to move home from Vancouver. Because 

we don’t want to see that happening; we don’t want to see that 

happening. And so when they talk about capacity, that’s huge. 

 

I’m looking forward to seeing this more in committee. We have 

questions about the membership lists. We have a question about 

this electronic voting. As I said, the credit union system has 

been a real innovator and we’ve appreciated that. We’ve 

appreciated the good things. They’ve been able to think outside 

the boxes because, quite frankly, the banks haven’t been able to 

do that — the banks with their management in Eastern Canada 

— and we know that the banks many times have not been there 

for the people of Saskatchewan where the credit unions have 

been. And so if this helps the credit unions to be there more for 

us, that’s very, very important that we get behind that. And if 

this is what they’re looking for, then we’ll go further with it. 

But we need to know that for sure. 

 

And as I said, I have some questions. And we know when we 

get into the committee that I’ll have some questions about that 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4739 

one section, new section 44 when it talks about other products 

or services that are prohibited by this Act or the regulations. 

Flip it around, it sounds like you’re talking about some new 

products or services that are allowed by regulations because 

really that’s what you’re saying. And so it sounds like an opt-in, 

opt-out type of issue. 

 

So now, Mr. Speaker, in just a few minutes I’ll be taking my 

seat here. But I do think that I do want to say that there is an 

awful lot in here, an awful lot in here. When we have section 

440, that we know will be the enabling legislation for the 

regulations down the road, that we have some questions. And 

we want to know what those regulations . . . As much as we can 

know, because this is why you have regulations. You have 

cabinet who will be there to make decisions, but we want to 

know what the parameters are. It’s just not a free hand. It’s just 

not a free hand. 

 

Now I want to just take a moment. I know my colleague from 

Lakeview was just so thorough. He went through an awful lot. 

He talked about the different parts of the credit union system — 

whether it’s CUETS [Credit Union Electronic Transaction 

Services] or Celero or Co-operators or Concentra — all of these 

are key, key parts. CUPS [Credit Union Payment Services]. All 

of those are there to make sure that the services that are 

provided to the membership is strong and healthy and complete. 

They don’t want to have too many holes in their services 

because they see themselves as being so important to their 

communities. 

 

So I think that with that, I think that we’re well on our way to 

having this moved on. As I said, the restrictions on services and 

coercive tied selling will be something of discussion. But 

having said that, Mr. Speaker, I think I’m finished my remarks 

and I would like to move on Bill No. 101, An Act to amend The 

Credit Union Act, 1998 — sorry, yes, also known as The Credit 

Union Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) — move that to 

committee. 

 

The Speaker: — I take it the Assembly is ready for the 

question? The question before the Assembly is a motion by the 

Minister of Justice that Bill No. 101, The Credit Union 

Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) be now read a second time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I designate that Bill No. 101, The Credit 

Union Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) be referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

 

Bill No. 122 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 122 — The 

Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009 be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege 

to weigh in and debate here tonight this evening with respect to 

Bill 122, The Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, Mr. 

Speaker. It is a Bill that focuses in on the environment, of 

course an issue, a challenge that goes beyond our borders, goes 

beyond our jurisdictions, and may be one of the greatest 

challenges if not the greatest challenge of our century and of 

our lifetime, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we’re speaking about our environment, we’re talking 

about our watershed, our natural environment, the land which is 

so fertile here in Saskatchewan and produces a livelihood to so 

many agricultural producers. Or speaking about our animals and 

our habitat as it relates to hunting and fishing, Mr. Speaker, and 

trapping, something that is very fundamental and core to 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we’re speaking about our air, 

something that here in Saskatchewan maybe we’ve taken for 

granted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we’ve been privileged and we are privileged to live in the 

land and with the environment that we have here in 

Saskatchewan. But we have to be aware of the decisions we’re 

making right now and how they connect to decisions being 

made at other jurisdictional levels, at other levels of 

government within not only our neighbouring jurisdictions but 

in a global context, Mr. Speaker. And we need to make sure that 

as Saskatchewan always has, Mr. Speaker, that we step up to 

the plate and punch well above our weight, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I wish we could say that we’re doing that with this piece of 

legislation, but that’s simply not the case, Mr. Speaker. We 

simply aren’t stepping up in the kind of manner that 

Saskatchewan has in years past on the issues that have meant a 

lot, not only to our province, but to other jurisdictions. And it’s 

a shame, Mr. Speaker, that we’re following on a file and on 

issues that are so fundamental and core to our well-being, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have the knowledge within our expert community, within 

our scientific community, within industry, to address the issues 

and challenges of climate change, Mr. Speaker, and the Sask 

Party is simply choosing not to, Mr. Speaker, simply choosing 

not to. And it’s not . . . You know, it certainly reflects that we 

see legislation here today that was likely derived without 

consultation, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve seen in education, as we’ve 

seen in health care, as we’ve seen in labour, as we’ve seen in 

the film industry and matter after matter, Mr. Speaker. But we 

see a government that’s not willing to consult, and it’s to the 

detriment, Mr. Speaker, of the people of Saskatchewan in 

deriving laws that don’t meet the challenges of our times, don’t 

meet the needs of our people and of our environment. 

 

And this is a huge shame, something that we challenge the Sask 



4740 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

Party to step up. And they can laugh it up and yuk it up all they 

want, Mr. Speaker, but we’re talking about something pretty 

critical here, Mr. Speaker, maybe nothing more critical — that 

being our environment. 

 

Fundamental to this discussion, Mr. Speaker, is the Sask Party’s 

lack of credibility on this file, complete and utter lack of 

credibility on environmental matters, Mr. Speaker. We see it by 

the fact we see a government that has remained stagnant and 

static and offered no leadership for the past two and a half years 

that they’ve been in office, Mr. Speaker, and we see it in the 

legislation that’s here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There was once, and not long ago, the Sask Party had promised 

to stabilize greenhouse gas emissions by 2010, Mr. Speaker. 

That was their promise. Let’s check, Mr. Speaker. It’s 2010 and 

that simply hasn’t happened, and in fact, Mr. Speaker, we 

haven’t even seen a plan in place that’s going to be able to 

make a meaningful difference on this front, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see a government that when in opposition and when they 

ran in the election, Mr. Speaker, and they took their election 

document to the people of Saskatchewan to offer up the 

commitments that they would follow through with, they were 

supposed to follow through with, we’ve seen that broken 

promise after broken promise after broken promise, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s a broken trust, Mr. Speaker, that the Sask 

Party is now dealing with and that residents from across 

Saskatchewan are recognizing when they equate that the broken 

promises of the Sask Party manifest themselves with a broken 

trust with Saskatchewan people, with Saskatchewan 

institutions, with municipalities, and with organizations that 

keep Saskatchewan moving forward, Mr. Speaker. And we see 

in that a broken, broken trust. 

 

Specifically we see the broken promise at it relates to the 

greenhouse gas emission targets. At point the Sask Party said 

that they were committed to the NDP [New Democratic Party] 

plan, Mr. Speaker. The plan that we had put forward, that we 

put in place, Mr. Speaker, they said that they were committed to 

it, Mr. Speaker. They come into office, they’ve been elected on 

that promise, on that commitment, and they rip it up and break 

it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They rip it up just like they did a chiropractic agreement with 

chiropractors in this province. They ripped it up, Mr. Speaker, 

just like they did with municipalities and revenue sharing and 

they ripped up that agreement and broke that promise, Mr. 

Speaker. They ripped it up, Mr. Speaker, just like they did with 

the promises and commitment that they made to rural 

Saskatchewan as it relates to health care, Mr. Speaker, 

something that’s of profound challenge for many, many 

communities across Saskatchewan, many, many families across 

Saskatchewan. And they’ve ripped up this promise and this 

commitment in the very same manner, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a 

problem. 

 

We see a Premier who spends a lot of his time, Mr. Speaker, 

outside our borders, and we know that he spends huge money, 

huge money, taxpayers’ money, on making sure that he can get 

good press in the United States, Mr. Speaker. We think many of 

those dollars could be focused here in Saskatchewan on the 

priorities of Saskatchewan people, but nevertheless he spends 

much time in the United States, Mr. Speaker, getting the press 

that he’s paid for down there in the United States, Mr. Speaker. 

And in doing so, we have revelations come out when he’s 

interviewed. 

 

Such is the fact that the Premier’s intent to be down in United 

States at a time where the world is being faced with the 

challenge of climate change, the global warming, the issues and 

challenges that come with, Mr. Speaker, and we see our Premier 

going on to the international stage and suggesting that we 

should “rag the puck,” Mr. Speaker, and of course that meaning 

take our time on this, basically delay any meaningful action, 

Mr. Speaker. And we scold the Premier for that, Mr. Speaker, 

and we scold the Sask Party for ragging the puck on an issue 

and a matter that’s maybe the most important issue to all levels 

of government and all jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now here today they’re making yet another promise to protect 

the environment and I guess the question would be, why should 

we believe them now? Why should we believe them now, Mr. 

Speaker? You know, we’ve seen plan after plan as it relates to 

. . . We’re . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Sorry, the health care 

minister or the Environment minister is heckling here right 

now, Mr. Speaker, and talking about the ragging-the-puck 

agenda of the Premier and the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:15] 

 

And we’re disappointed, and I think that Saskatchewan people 

are disappointed, and I know that in communities across 

Saskatchewan, they’re disappointed. They’re disappointed that 

the health care minister, or the Health minister, is ragging the 

puck on issues of doctor shortages and of nursing needs and of 

surgical wait times, Mr. Speaker. They’re disappointed that the 

Labour minister, Mr. Speaker, the part-time Minister of Labour 

is ragging the puck, Mr. Speaker, on bringing into compliance, 

in bringing into compliance with conventions of the United 

Nations, Mr. Speaker, the ILO [International Labour 

Organization], a minister who is willing to sit here and be in 

contravention of rulings at the United Nations. And that’s what 

our part-time Minister of Labour is willing and is comfortable, 

Mr. Speaker, to do so. 

 

These are issues, Mr. Speaker, that go well beyond our borders, 

Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And, you know, the 

Minister of Labour is disappointed here because I guess I 

referred to him as the part-time Minister of Labour, Mr. 

Speaker. I think . . . I believe . . . Is that the concern, Minister? I 

believe that’s the concern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we would wish he’d even put a part of his time, Mr. 

Speaker, because it’s not even . . . You couldn’t even call it half 

time or quarter time, Mr. Speaker, because he’s putting such 

limited interest into making sure that the labour laws of our 

province are balanced and in compliance with United Nations 

conventions, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a black eye for this 

province, Mr. Speaker, to be in contravention. And I urge that 

minister to put more time into his ministerial portfolios to make 

sure that he can address that circumstance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But back to the matter at hand, Mr. Speaker, that being Bill 122, 

The Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, 

and what we see here is another plan. Another plan. And the 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4741 

question is, why should we trust them now? It seems to ring 

hollow, empty rhetoric at this point in time, Mr. Speaker. We 

see a government that isn’t willing to consult when they put 

forward legislation. 

 

And really, what we know when a government puts forward 

legislation and hasn’t consulted is that they’ve derived policy in 

a vacuum based on political and partisan beliefs, Mr. Speaker, 

and that they haven’t engaged the stakeholders within our 

province for whom they should and within our global 

community on this matter, Mr. Speaker, for which they should. 

 

We have environmental experts within this province and 

beyond our borders who should have been engaged on this in 

this process, Mr. Speaker. We have industry leaders in business 

who are ready to step up to the table on this front, Mr. Speaker. 

And we don’t see it, Mr. Speaker. It’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, to 

see what we have going on under this government with an 

abandonment of leadership or any sort of movement or progress 

on the file as it relates to the environment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s the same kind of broken trust that Saskatchewan 

people have come to know under the Sask Party government as 

it relates to health care, Mr. Speaker, or as it relates to financial 

management, Mr. Speaker. They’ve come to expect one thing 

from this government, Mr. Speaker, and that be that promises 

not be fulfilled. And that’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, because it 

should be the opposite of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Any government, whether or not we debate about the actual 

direction they’re going, should be able to commit to a plan and 

then fulfill that, Mr. Speaker. Debate it in this House and move 

forward with their agenda. 

 

We have specific aspects of this Bill that are going to require 

further discussion, consultation, and dialogue. We see some 

penalties that have been increased for various activities; we see 

this as likely a positive exercise. However we need to make 

sure that this is going to bring about the objective that’s desired, 

Mr. Speaker. Because when you’re putting together legislation, 

it’s all about the intended consequences but also the unintended 

consequences, Mr. Speaker. And we have no confidence in this 

government that doesn’t consult on any piece of legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, that they’ve done the due diligence on this file, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The government’s proposal to increase penalties for violations 

of the Act are positive at first blush, Mr. Speaker. Allowing 

courts to impose financial penalties and requirements that 

offenders repair or restore environmental damage are also seen 

as something, I think, that might be a positive step, Mr. 

Speaker. But the devil’s in the details in these sorts of changes, 

Mr. Speaker. And we need to make sure we fully understand 

what these changes are, Mr. Speaker, and that they are going to 

be put forward in an equitable . . . and applied in a fair and 

equitable fashion, Mr. Speaker — something that this 

government has proven itself irresponsible with on many fronts, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that being said, the real role of government is to prevent 

environmentally harmful activity, Mr. Speaker. And it would 

appear that the Sask Party’s approach, Mr. Speaker, is more 

about penalties and, sort of after the fact, redress, Mr. Speaker. 

And we certainly think that that might have some consequence 

in bringing about and eliciting the kind of behaviours and best 

practices that we need to make sure that our environment is put 

forward as a priority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in many ways we see this legislation as simply putting 

forward mechanisms and structures to respond to damage after 

the fact, Mr. Speaker, and that certainly isn’t proactive in any 

manner. Certainly it’s not putting the environment as a priority 

and making sure that we’re leading on this file. 

 

Further, we look at some of the issues as it relates to the class 

environmental assessments, Mr. Speaker. And I know that 

we’ve looked to a February 2009 report prepared for this 

government by Clifton and Associates that recommends that the 

government facilitate class assessments of projects deemed to 

be similar. The government appears to have accepted this 

recommendation, Mr. Speaker. And there may be some merit in 

this idea, Mr. Speaker, but there’s a very real danger in the fact 

that the government’s taking an overly broad approach, Mr. 

Speaker, that won’t in the end fulfill or achieve the kind of 

objectives and goals that we need to achieve, Mr. Speaker. And 

it’s not simply a matter of judging this at the end of the game 

and saying who won or lost, Mr. Speaker. We all lose, Mr. 

Speaker, if we don’t get this one right, Mr. Speaker, if we don’t 

get the environment right and if we don’t get this file right at 

this point in time. 

 

This very piece speaks to another potential concern with this 

legislation, with the class environmental assessments, and that 

could arise from the government’s duty to consult, Mr. Speaker, 

as described by the Supreme Court of Canada, Mr. Speaker, the 

duty to consult and accommodate First Nations people, Mr. 

Speaker. And similar to projects approved through a class 

assessment process, many of them could fall on traditional land, 

Mr. Speaker, of several different First Nations. 

 

And we simply don’t have the confidence in this government 

that has rejected any opportunity to engage in meaningful duty 

to consult to date, Mr. Speaker, that things are going to be 

different with this legislation. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

concerned that we might be going in the opposite direction and 

that the people of the province will be shortchanged with a 

hastened process that disregards the duty to consult and that 

disregards environmental impacts that are absolutely essential 

for us to be aware of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then further . . . and I’m not going to get into this aspect 

here specifically, Mr. Speaker, but it is an area we’re going to 

be spending huge time focusing in on and that’s the fact that 

this legislation in fact brings about the issue or the movement 

towards privatization of environmental assessment, Mr. 

Speaker. And this is something that is a concern, Mr. Speaker. 

We believe that we need to make sure that government plays 

the core and vital role that government should, Mr. Speaker, in 

the oversight and ensuring that our environment is protected. 

It’s a very important role of government. I believe the broad, 

broad cross-section of Saskatchewan people — in fact I’m 

certain of that — support that, Mr. Speaker, that government 

plays a very, very vital and important role on that front, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we have the issue that’s raised within this legislation, that’s 



4742 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

being the harmonization of environmental assessments with 

Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, with the federal government, and to the 

greatest extent possible. And I know the Sask Party always likes 

to downplay this, saying that they’re trying to eliminate overlap 

and duplication with federal departments like Fisheries and 

Oceans. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, that right there sounds 

very reasonable on the surface, but there is certainly room for a 

federal role in environmental assessment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is particularly the case when you have a provincial 

government such as this one here today, Mr. Speaker, the Sask 

Party that is more interested in cheerleading — substanceless 

rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, ragging the puck — then in taking any 

sort of environmental leadership that the people of 

Saskatchewan, the businesses of Saskatchewan, the producers 

of Saskatchewan expect this government to take, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we see failure to deliver on meaningful environmental 

action, Mr. Speaker, and we simply see more rhetoric from this 

government. We see very broad legislation from a government 

that lacks complete credibility on the environment, Mr. 

Speaker. No credibility does the Sask Party have on the 

environment, just the same kind of shattered trust that they have 

within health care, Mr. Speaker, within financial management, 

within the challenges as it relates to cost of living, Mr. Speaker. 

We see a broken trust and it stems from broken promises, Mr. 

Speaker, and this is very problematic for advancing meaningful 

legislation and meaningful change on an issue that’s vital to the 

well-being of Saskatchewan people and our neighbours within 

our globe. 

 

Right now we see broad legislation. Mr. Speaker, the devil’s, as 

you know, the devil would be in the details on legislation like 

this. We look forward to being able to drill down in committee, 

Mr. Speaker, to find out what the detail of this legislation 

actually is. We need to spend significantly more time, Mr. 

Speaker, with the many, many expert stakeholders within 

environment, Mr. Speaker, within industry within this province, 

within our business leaders, Mr. Speaker, making sure that they 

have full awareness of the implications of this legislation and 

that in fact it’s going to achieve the objectives that we all need 

to meet, Mr. Speaker, and making sure that we move forward in 

an environmentally sustainable fashion. 

 

I don’t have much promise or hope with the Sask Party, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve seen a string of broken promises. We see 

failures to act on this front, Mr. Speaker. That being said, the 

opposition New Democrats are going to do what we can at the 

committee level, Mr. Speaker, to push to consult and to make 

this legislation understood and to make sure that it’s as strong 

as it can be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At this point in time I would . . . I know there’s many, many 

more speakers that would like to weigh in to this debate, Mr. 

Speaker, from this side of the Assembly that are doing much 

consultations, the diligent consultation that needs to go on, Mr. 

Speaker, and I should say should go on as legislation is being 

derived, Mr. Speaker. We know that doesn’t happen under the 

Sask Party, so many of our members are engaged in that kind of 

consultation right now, Mr. Speaker. Many more speakers 

would like to weigh in on debate. At this point in time I will 

adjourn debate for Bill No. 122, An Act to amend The 

Environmental Assessment Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 122. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 121 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 121 — The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 

indeed my pleasure to get up this evening to speak to Bill 121, 

An Act respecting the Management and Protection of the 

Environment, repealing The Clean Air Act, The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act, 2002, The Litter Control Act 

and The State of the Environment Report Act and making 

consequential amendments to certain Acts. It’s a short title, 

obviously an important piece of legislation for a number of 

reasons — some 57 pages in the Bill itself. 

 

And I think it speaks to a couple of issues. And one is that 

certainly the largest challenge that we’ll face in the next century 

is where to find energy to meet the demand of upwards of 9 

billion people, 6.9 currently living in the world, projected to 

about 9 billion by 2050, and meeting the demand of the energy 

required for those people is a huge, a huge challenge for the 

world. And as part of that challenge is finding energy 

throughout the world to meet the demand because so much of 

the energy that we use is coal — there’s a new coal plant built 

in China every week — uranium, fossil fuels of all different 

kinds, and they all have an impact on the environment. 

 

And truthfully if you look at things like polygen or 

opportunities with burning waste from crops and forestry, all of 

it has a huge potential to impact the environment. And so 

another great challenge of governments everywhere will be to 

balance growing need, demand for energy, and the protection of 

the environment. But it’s my fundamental belief that you are 

indeed elected by the people to fulfill the responsibility of 

protecting the environment, not elected to give away the 

responsibility to somebody else or to run away from your 

responsibility to protect the environment, not to get elected and 

ask somebody else to fulfill the duties that the people of 

Saskatchewan place upon you to protect the environment. 

 

[20:30] 

 

And the reason I’m emphasizing protect the environment is 

quite simple. A lot of what this Bill does is give away 

responsibility to protect the environment to outside agencies. 

But what happens is, because private corporations answer to 

their shareholders, they have concerns about the environment. 

But ultimately they’re not responsible for the environment; that 

should be the government’s job. And so in this case, what the 

government’s attempting to do, what they’re attempting to do is 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4743 

give away their responsibility to protect the environment and 

replace it with a series of changes that will have them reacting 

to environmental damage. 

 

So there’ll be an agency put in place that will not necessarily 

protect the environment, but levy some sort of fines or impose 

some sort of sanctions after the fact. And so I think it’s 

exceedingly frustrating that you have a government in 

Saskatchewan, the Sask Party, who were elected by the people 

to fulfill certain duties, and I think fundamental to those is 

protecting the environment. And they’re walking away from 

that responsibility in this case. 

 

And I think the people are frustrated by that, and everybody I 

talk to certainly is with respect to this issue, and for a number of 

reasons. Because up until now they’ve only paid lip service to 

environmental issues. Certainly they have no credibility when it 

comes to protecting the environment or doing anything 

remotely related to the environment. This government promised 

to stabilize greenhouse gas emissions by 2010. That was in their 

platform, in their election platform. It went the way of the dodo, 

along with the promise to open the mill. This is a government 

that promised to implement the NDP’s greenhouse gas emission 

reductions and within a short period of time admitted that they 

wouldn’t be able to meet those targets either. 

 

Additionally this is the Sask Party government led by a Premier 

who says that he wants to “rag the puck” on environmental 

issues. So what he’s choosing to do is instead of showing the 

courage that it takes to move on environmental issues — to 

meet, to stabilize the greenhouse gas emissions that they 

promised in their platform, to implement greenhouse gas 

emission reductions that the NDP had set — they walked away 

from that. And so he believes his job is to “rag the puck,” and to 

delay and delay making a decision, or put it off so far in the 

future that they’ll never be able to be held accountable for it. 

And so I’m not sure that anybody should believe what they say 

on environmental issues, especially ones as important as these. 

 

Now certainly it would be helpful to know what the 

environmental code will look like, the proposing legislation 

here that has no code built into it. And so you’re supposed to 

infer, I suppose, from this document itself what the code is 

going to look like once it’s introduced. But I don’t think that’s 

good enough. I think that we need to be able to scrutinize what 

the environmental code will look like. Certainly it can’t be that 

difficult a task to bring forward legislation that’s complete and 

so that people can measure it before it gets passed. They’re 

asking us to pass The Environmental Management and 

Protection Act without knowing what the minimum standards 

will be. 

 

When in opposition, they were fond of shouting that targets 

should be set on every issue. We should set targets. I’m not sure 

the Premier would agree with the targets on wait-lists, 

considering in his own riding they’ve nearly doubled, but they 

shouted for targets consistently. But with the introduction of 

this legislation, again we don’t know what the minimum targets 

will be and what the minimum standards will be. We don’t 

know who’s going to write the standards. Will it be the 

government ministry? Will it be industry? Who’s going to write 

the standards? Important questions certainly. 

 

Now another question is going to be, who will they consult to 

develop the standards? Will it be environmental groups and 

industry? Will you get them all in the same room and sort of 

come to some joint conclusion about what they should be? Will 

they invite only one subset to participate and to formulate what 

the standards should be? 

 

They also claim that they’ll be setting baseline emission 

requirements for major industrial emitters as part of a so-called 

air management system. Now I would argue that this is more 

than a little ironic coming from a government that introduced 

climate change legislation that contains absolutely no reference 

to when greenhouse gases would stabilize, no baseline year 

against which reductions can be measured, and no greenhouse 

gas reduction targets in the Bill itself. 

 

And so you’ve got a government that wants to create an 

environmental management protection Act with again no 

minimum standards evident, no environmental code, and 

attempt to set baseline emission requirements for major 

industrial emitters. Who would qualify as a major industrial 

emitter? And who decides what body? Who makes up the 

body? Who decides what the body looks like? All important 

questions, I think, that should be answered, that are unclear 

certainly in this legislation. 

 

Now if you talk to the folks in industry about their 

responsibility for the damage that they cause to the 

environment, certainly in a modern economy they would agree 

that for any damage they cause there should be some 

remediation of some kind. If you look at coal mining that’s 

done in southern Saskatchewan now, they’ll strip the soil off the 

top, they’ll mine the coal, extract it, and then put the soil back 

on so that you can farm the land after. And so they understand 

that they have a responsibility in this case because they benefit 

financially from industrial activity that disturbs the environment 

in some way. 

 

And so certainly you need to consult with industry. You need to 

find solutions that are manageable. And certainly that was a 

practice that was . . . That was a principle that was practised by 

the former government, the NDP government. And just one 

example that I can provide on that front is legislation that was 

enacted to ensure that mining companies take responsibility for 

the cost of decommissioning and environmental reclamation. 

And that’s certainly sort of what I was just discussing. 

 

We also implemented a program for orphan wells as it relates to 

oil extraction. And the oil companies that I chat with on a 

weekly basis are proud of the program. And they want to 

contribute in that way, but they would acknowledge that they 

are not ultimately responsible for the environment in 

Saskatchewan. That is the job of elected people. That’s the job 

of a government. 

 

And I believe it’s totally unacceptable that a government would 

try to hand off the responsibility to protect the environment. 

The role of government, I believe, is to prevent environmental 

degradation where possible — not provide a judgment after the 

fact, not to only hand off the responsibility to a private 

enterprise and try to remediate damage that’s been done. It’s 

certainly the responsibility of elected people to manage the 

environment. And with this Bill, it’s an admission of failure. 



4744 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

It’s an admission that they’re not interested in doing that, in 

spite of the title. 

 

Additionally their own study would suggest that a Clifton report 

that was commissioned says, “Saskatchewan doesn’t have the 

current staff capacity or capability to monitor and regulate the 

current industry and oversee the social licence.” 

 

So certainly that implies that there is no capacity within the 

ministry for management, for oversight, for testing. They are 

short hydrogeologists, water quality and air quality specialists, 

toxicologists, epidemiologists, risk assessment specialists. They 

don’t have that capacity. They don’t have the people to do the 

job. And so you will see that instead of being responsible for 

that part of the economy, which is everything related to the 

environment, they’re not going to have that as part of their 

budget. They’re going to move away from that so it’s not a part 

of ongoing expenditures of government. And so I find that 

interesting. 

 

Now if you want to talk about some other interesting pieces of 

Bill 121, it’s again simply consultation because again this 

government fails miserably on consultation on every front. And 

I could go into it for a good long time with reference to their 

inability to consult. Certainly Bills 5, 6, and 80 failed to consult. 

Workers in Saskatoon and organizations in Saskatoon that aid 

victims of domestic abuse — certainly failed to consult with 

them before they cut their funding. Municipalities on the 1 per 

cent of PST [provincial sales tax] — this is an exhaustive list, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

They failed to consult properly when they came up with their 

potash numbers. In fact the Minister of Energy and Resources 

believed that not only would they take in $2 billion, as was their 

projection last budget, that it would be $3 billion. And so what 

kind of credibility could he possibly have when they don’t take 

in the $3 billion that he projected and boasted in this Assembly? 

They didn’t take in the 2 billion that was projected by the 

Finance minister. They didn’t even take in the 10-year average. 

 

In fact we have a situation in Saskatchewan now where we’re 

actually paying resource companies to take resources out of the 

province — absolutely unheard of. And so obviously it was a 

massive failure to consult properly on potash numbers. 

 

Duty to consult. They fail to fulfill that obligation in every 

piece of legislation that comes forward. They fail to consult in 

forestry in Big River and other places. 

 

We spoke with many First Nations and Métis groups when the 

Bronson Forest pony Bill was introduced. First Nation students, 

they failed to consult with them before they yanked funding 

away from their institutions. Failed to provide leadership on 

that file and enabled the federal government to yank away their 

financial commitment, and it’s still not replaced. They failed to 

consult with educational assistants and boards of education. 

They failed to consult with chiropractors. And as you can see, 

Mr. Speaker, certainly an exhaustive list of a total and complete 

failure to consult. 

 

[20:45] 

 

Now it’s an exhaustive list, exhausting list, but it’s not an 

all-inclusive list. Certainly you could go down the list of Bills 

that have been presented here today, and I would guess that 

there’s a failure to consult on virtually everyone of them. And 

so we certainly have a good number of questions in relation to 

Bill 121 that we’ll ask. I know that a number of my colleagues 

would like to speak further to this Bill, so I move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 121. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 132 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 132 — The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, an 

interesting Bill No. 132, An Act to amend the Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just some opening comments that I’d like to make 

about this Bill. Mr. Speaker, a little lack of clarity on this Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the amendments that are here because 

this Bill speaks to amending or repealing a schedule of listing 

designated lands. It talks about that there will be a new strategic 

approach to evaluate and manage ecological, social, and 

economic values on Crown land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it does not . . . the amendments are not clear as to 

exactly what the repealing of the schedule, what impact that’ll 

have on designated lands and, Mr. Speaker, further, that all of 

this is now put into regulations. And, Mr. Speaker, what is of 

concern is how this would play out. We have here again another 

example, Mr. Speaker, of what has become quite common to 

this government, and that is the lack of overall consultation with 

groups in the province who have a keen interest about wildlife 

protection and protection of land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you talk about being able to change, as 

significant at what on first look might be here, to change lands 

that would require legislative change to be brought back to the 

legislature, now being dealt with by regulations, it is significant 

if that is in fact what is being prescribed here, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, there are a lot of people contacting us and saying that 

they were not consulted regarding these changes, that they were 

simply told after the fact with legislation that’s being presented. 

And it is, Mr. Speaker, quite surprising that . . . Well it 

shouldn’t . . . It’s really not surprising that this government has 

taken it upon itself. And this has become a trademark of this 

government to not consult the people of this province when 

they bring forward legislation. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the whole concept that you would want to 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4745 

designate lands or make changes just simply by regulations and 

in cabinet, or whether that even goes as far as to selling the 

land, is almost undemocratic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, especially 

when a lot of work has been done around this area in terms of 

the biologists and scientists in the area who have designated the 

lands that we have here, designated that land to be on a 

designated list or that it is critical land. What new criteria? We 

have no indication here of what criteria would be used by 

cabinet. It is again sort of a cloak-and-dagger operation behind 

closed doors dealing with issues that are very dear to the hearts 

of people of our province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only is the designation of lands being 

changed. And in terms of what we have in the explanatory notes 

given out to us where it speaks that: 

 

This amendment repeals the Schedule listing designated 

lands. The province is positioned to adopt a new strategic 

approach to evaluate and manage ecological . . . 

 

as I read earlier. 

 

Again this new approach includes assessing ecological 

attributes of all Crown lands. So our questions, I guess some of 

my questions would be, does this include the Sand Hills? Will 

we now be looking again at the Sand Hills and to see what 

should be done? Many people have done a lot of work around 

this area and it would be very surprising — and in fact I would 

say in some quarters people would be saying it would be 

alarming — that this would all again be put in the hands of 

those folks over there to simply decide this behind closed doors. 

 

So when you couple all the changes, when you put all these 

together — that in fact now the land may be designated simply 

by regulation, by Executive Council, and then in fact 

determinations made to sell that land — this is in fact very 

disturbing. 

 

I think what is probably the most though is that the number of 

groups and parties that have indicated to us the lack of 

consultation around this. And this is very, to me, critical, that 

we have proper consultation on something that is so important 

as our designated land. Some of the treasures that we have in 

this province that we consider very dear to us, people who have 

worked their entire lives, dedicated their entire lives to 

managing the ecology, now see this potentially being torn apart 

and all, everything on the table, with these amendments. The 

lack of clarity, the lack of consultation regarding this is cause 

for great concern. 

 

Now we have had a good, I guess, good examples of this. And 

earlier the member from Rosemont mentioned that the party 

opposite, particularly some of the members there, have now 

even drawn the attention of the United Nations for their 

approach in legislation. We have seen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

have seen times where these folks have had to redo their 

legislation themselves because it was simply making no sense 

whatsoever, where they were putting through legislation. 

 

Now they’ve been told . . . Now we’ve gained, on a number of 

occasions actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve gained 

recognition internationally, whether it be by fundraisers or other 

things, bringing those kind of recognitions to our province. And 

the latest one being the determination by the ILO from the 

United Nations on some labour, piece of labour legislation, 

where the United Nations is now telling this government that 

they in fact have to consult and go back to the drawing board. 

Because one of the very basic tenets of democracy which 

people all across the world obviously understand, people who 

sit at the ILO, experts in the field, people who countries look 

towards to give good decisions, people who are promoted, 

designated to these positions all around the world are now 

telling this government that they have to go back to the drawing 

board on pieces of labour legislation. 

 

And they simply do not learn anything, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

just sort of . . . over and over again. It was first of all, just 

simply as I mention here, having to redo certain Bills because 

they didn’t know what they were doing. They simply just didn’t 

know what they were doing. They don’t understand what they 

were doing, and they put those forward. And now they have 

caught the attention of the international community. 

 

And that’s a way to make your mark with the international 

community, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by saying that now they are 

saying that they should have consulted. A very basic democratic 

procedure, something that we take for granted, the United 

Nations is now saying to that government, you didn’t consult 

and you should start over again. Understand — they have to tell 

them — understand that you should talk to the people who this 

impacts on. And that’s what we hear about these designated 

lands: people are contacting us and saying, they didn’t do that 

again. And I say, well I’m not surprised. Maybe you can find 

somebody on our side that . . . [inaudible] . . . be surprised they 

haven’t done this yet. 

 

But it’s become a sad . . . and it’s become a trademark of that 

government, that they do not consult. And I guess for some part 

I would say, well that’s good they don’t consult. They’re not 

going to last long over there because when you don’t consult, 

you know what would happen. And I shouldn’t really warn 

them about that. You know, perhaps a little bit of international 

embarrassment isn’t enough, isn’t enough to do that. And to 

stand up in a speech and to say, I think you should listen to the 

United Nations is . . . They might just laugh it off, and laugh it 

off they can. 

 

And again as I say, perhaps we’ve passed the point of 

attempting to embarrass them in here talking about that or even 

warning them that they should be concerned about that because 

it is so plain. It is the thing that we all strive for in a democratic 

society, in democratic governments, the basis of what our 

institutions are built on is the consultation, is voting, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. All of those things are part of our democracy.  

 

And it is those folks over there who profess when they talk 

about . . . they profess as they did in the . . . that they’re 

concerned about the environment. They profess that they’re 

concerned about the environment. And over and over again we 

see that they are not, that they are not concerned about the 

environment, that they simply retreat and retreat, and they plan 

how they will retreat from the environment and allow this. And 

I think this is a further step of, in terms of the way the 

designation is being done, pulling things back from where it can 

be debated in the legislature here, debated in society, and 

pulling back from there, making these decisions behind closed 



4746 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

doors. 

 

So what you get with that minister is kind of a mindset that we 

will do what we want. We don’t have to listen to the 

international courts. We can just in a flippant way perhaps we 

can laugh about it or laugh it off and say we don’t recognize 

that. But I think that this is shameful. This is shameful for our 

province that we have a government that would take this kind of 

approach and close a deaf ear. And I’m wondering when they 

laugh about that, I’m wondering when those things . . . If they 

would, if they would be so brave to . . . At least if they want to 

back that, if they want to back their labour legislation or this 

legislation, perhaps this will even get to the international court 

as well. 

 

Maybe what they should do is actually say what they mean. 

Because what they do is just like in here, is hide behind closed 

doors. Now we maybe can hide behind some regulations and 

take that into Executive Council, make all our decisions there, 

and the people won’t know anything about that. 

 

But why don’t they, if they believe what they’ve done is right, 

why don’t they say, why don’t they come forward and say, we 

believe that the United Nations is wrong. We believe that they 

don’t know what they’re doing, and we believe we consulted. 

And we don’t care about the international community telling us 

that you did not consult, that you should go back, you should be 

ashamed of what you’ve done there, and redo this and talk to 

the people that this impacts on. 

 

But they won’t. They don’t have . . . They will go ahead and do 

that behind closed doors. They will slide legislation under and 

try and get it by people. And they’ve been caught. They’ve been 

caught. And they should be embarrassed and they should not be 

smiling. And what they should do is if they believe that what 

they have done is right, is stand up and write to the ILO. If I 

was them, I would write a letter back to them. And I would say, 

you’re wrong in your decision, if they believe that. If they 

would, if they would do . . . If they believe . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. I’ve asked the 

member to constrain himself and address his comments to the 

Bill before us please. 

 

[21:00] 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think one of my 

colleagues, he speaks to credibility. And I think the point I was 

making was the same point here. There’s no consultation. 

We’re again hearing here from people, the same as we heard in 

labour Bills, that there was no consultation. 

 

And I’m simply saying, and perhaps I shouldn’t be warning 

people here of the government across, that they are on a path of 

self-destruction. That’s what they’re on. They’re on a path of 

self-destruction because they would be going behind closed 

doors and making decisions, and they want to do it all by 

regulations and orders in council. 

 

But now they’ve come to the United Nations and . . . who have 

told them and probably would look at this and say the same 

thing in Bill 132 — you do not consult. They didn’t consult. 

Because that’s what we hear back in phone calls. And so I’m 

simply trying to make the point that perhaps they don’t have to 

listen to us. Perhaps they should listen to the international 

community. But obviously they would sit there smugly and 

simply laugh it all off because it’s a joke to them. 

 

So I would challenge them, if they think it’s a joke, that why 

don’t they step forward and say, we think it’s a joke? We think 

your rulings are a joke. We think we don’t have to, under Bill 

132, we don’t have to consult about there either. You can have 

your phone calls from all the people from the federations or 

whatever the concern with the wildlife Act because we know 

we can do this. Because we got elected and so we can do 

anything we want. And slowly they drift off and they say, 

because it’s not important. Because they think, well, people 

will, they will support us. They will support us because, you 

know, when the Premier says he can go to war with unions, 

then the people will support us on that. 

 

But they don’t have, they don’t have the backbone to then say, 

when they’ve been embarrassed in an international community, 

to say, we stand behind those Bills. No they don’t. They sit 

back there and it doesn’t all matter, just like most of these Bills 

don’t matter. And that’s why they’ve had in their drafting, have 

had to withdraw Bills and they’ve had to redo them again, 

because there’s a lack of understanding of what they’re doing. 

It’s a total lack of understanding what they’re doing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the things that we hear mostly about Bill 132 

is the concern that people have that we are redoing and going 

back and looking at this, which lands we’re designating. And 

what does that mean, they ask us? And why is it that people at 

this point in time should be asking us what it means when the 

lands that we’re talking about are being taken off a list that it 

should be clear that they were put on? And why are we going to 

now do the sale of lands or attempt to say which lands are being 

designated strictly by regulations? And there is no explanation 

for that. 

 

And I think the points I make regarding the consultation are 

simply around that, is that again we have here people bringing 

forward to us concerns of why were we not consulted. Not just 

individual people in the province but organizations who are not 

happy with what is happening here. And they ask are the Sand 

Hills, are the Sand Hills one of the considerations that will be 

taken into . . . that they’ll be looking at? And who will be 

looking at this? 

 

Because one of the other things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’re 

getting into are trust issues. And one of the things that you can 

tell by a government that’s lost its way and not only a Premier 

that has lost his way, but they start . . . There are trust issues 

around this, trust issues in terms of can we trust them? Let alone 

that they have now said, we don’t need to do this in a 

democratic way. Can we trust them to make decisions about our 

designated lands? Can we trust them? Without just saying, let 

us do this; we’ll do this through regulation and just trust us. 

 

Whatever happened to the legislative oversight on these things? 

Whatever happened to members and the democratic process that 

we have in here, of the opportunity for opposition members to 

carefully go over the Bills? Because all that we have here at the 

moment is, trust us because we’ll do it by regulations. And we 

have seen where that has landed us on many occasions. And 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4747 

then it’s not only the members who are involved with the 

organizations that are concerned but the individual biologists 

and the scientists in this area, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re also 

asking, why are we looking at these designated lands? 

 

Because they feel that the critical lands that are listed, over 95 

per cent, they’re telling us that these are done right, that they 

feel after all the years that they have spent looking at this that it 

is done right, so why are we pulling these out? And why are we 

giving . . . Why is the government wanting the right to decide 

by regulations what they should sell and setting the price and 

the rest of it? 

 

So a lot of concerns out there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The points 

that I make are, this is a serious issue. This is serious for us all. 

I know that at many times this falls on deaf ears on the other 

side, and so be it. And so be it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But we not 

only speak to those folks who do not listen, but we are also 

speaking to the people out in Saskatchewan who care about, 

who care dearly about these issues and are passionate about 

them. And they can take one group at a time. They can 

mismanage the finances. They can cut Dutch elm . . . protection 

of Dutch elm trees. They can take away the payment for 

chiropractors. They can do a number of those kind of things. 

 

The surgical centres, they can do that. They can deal with the 

children’s hospital in Saskatoon and make promises about that, 

and we wonder where that is. And this is starting to stack up, 

and I don’t think I would want to be carrying that knapsack 

around with the number of rocks that those folks over there are 

gathering in it. It must be getting a little heavy on that side and 

now you can tell, day after day, the embarrassment of trying to 

defend these issues because they’re unable to defend them. 

 

And they must be wondering, a lot of them, of how did we get 

to this? How did we get to this when we got left so much 

money, and how did we get to this? So instead of doing that, 

and as people are saying here, where did all the money go? But 

even further, what have they done and why do they need to go 

into areas like with Bill 132? Is there not enough, is there not 

enough work that they now have to go and damage the ecology? 

Do they not have to now; is there not enough there to do? Have 

they spent so much money that now they have to go and talk 

about designated lands and they want to maybe sell these off to 

make some more money? Is that where we’re going to here with 

this, so that we can sell designated critical lands that have been 

on the list, that biologists and scientists say are . . . over 95 per 

cent should be on there. They can’t even see the 5 per cent, but 

they’re willing to give them that much and now they’re moving 

into here. Is that where they’ve now gotten to after all the 

legislation? 

 

And where has it truly got them? Because people aren’t buying 

the message that they’re promoting over there because they 

know it’s a message of destruction. They know it’s a message 

of division, and people are seeing through that. They’re seeing 

the division that they’re seeding and they’re seeing what they’re 

doing to this province and they’re saying they’re not that keen 

on what’s happening; they don’t like it, and particularly now 

with the finances. 

 

Now over the Easter break I had a chance to do door knocking 

and talking to a lot of people out there, and they are in disbelief. 

But the one thing we hear, I’ll tell you this, is that that party’s 

promoting through billboards and everything and saying, we’re 

reducing the deficit, and they’re not reducing the deficit at all. 

Well that one billboard might have been right for the first hour 

it was put up; after that it was not true, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Nothing on that billboard was right because in fact the deficit is 

increasing. The deficit is increasing. 

 

And so now that they spent all the money, now they go around 

and now they’re dealing with the ecology, because now they 

feel that, well let’s get our hands on some of this sensitive land 

and maybe we can sell it or let’s see what we can do with it. 

And we’ll do it all behind closed doors, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because now that they finished with the money, now they’re 

going into areas like Bill 132 on the wildlife habitat. 

 

And without consultation around there, to pretend that they’re 

experts, they’re about as expert as when they were passing 

labour legislation and they had to redo just about every piece 

that they put forward, because again here they didn’t consult. 

And where’s the faith with Bill 132, The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, that they are going to look at that and they’re 

going to get it right when we have the very people who were 

involved in this saying to us this is wrong? This is wrong, and 

what are they trying to achieve here? Because nobody has 

talked to us. Nobody has talked to us here. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is it any wonder that we are 

concerned? When you make your mark at the United Nations 

. . . and that will be your greatest thing because after the next 

election that member will be gone. He’ll be gone. He won’t be 

there. But they’ll remember what he did, and I guess if you 

want to make your mark with the United Nations, and that way 

for the future history when people will read about that, well 

whoop-de-do. Whoop-de-do, I would say to that member. 

You’ve really made your mark there. I was in politics for four 

years and I was recognized by the United Nations. The United 

Nations is where I was recognized by and I’m sure that the 

Minister of the Environment has already gotten some 

international recognition. She’s got some international 

recognition and maybe that wasn’t enough. She’s bucking for 

more because she wants to be like her member from Greystone. 

She wants to say, gee, you know, you got recognition from the 

United Nations. I only made it into the New York national post. 

You know, I was close. Close, but the United Nations is a larger 

building there, so maybe she’s trying to get to that level that she 

also wants her name in the listing there. 

 

So here’s what we have then, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have a 

government that refuses to consult, that snubs their nose at the 

international community. Snubs their nose at the international 

community when they tell them that you should consult. Plain 

and simple, you should consult. You can’t get away from that. 

How did you do this? How did you get something so basic so 

wrong? So wrong. 

 

They didn’t say you should be ashamed, but I’m sure they 

thought that and they wondered now who is this person here. 

But it doesn’t take them long when they would check and you 

would say to them, well it was the Premier of that province that 

said he would go to war with working people and families of 

that province. So not very hard to make the connections, not 

very hard to make the connections on that. And perhaps it was 



4748 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

the same Premier who in the 1980s said he lost his way. He lost 

his way and got caught up with a crew that spent a lot of 

money. They spent a lot of money. 

 

Much similar here, as they’re spending money and then they’re 

going after the habitat. They spent a lot of money but also . . . 

spent the money but was involved in some deliveries, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It was involved in some deliveries of 

purchases of alcohol. And that was the claim to fame of that 

member from Swift Current, and now we’re requesting that 

they would pay some of that money back to the people of 

Saskatchewan. And that’s what we would really like to see on 

this side. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that is their history. That is that 

government’s history. Now they will also be known for the lack 

of consultation, the recognition by the United Nations. It’s a 

record that I’m sure that they, in their quiet moments, even they 

can’t be very happy about, but we leave that to them, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to do that. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again if I could review the phone calls 

that we are receiving, the people that are contacting us, it’s 

amazing that you would think perhaps . . . You know, it 

shouldn’t strike us as that we might not be told what’s going on 

here, but when the very people that this impacts are saying to 

us, they didn’t talk to us about this and what does this mean, 

now that, that’s rather alarming, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you 

hear those kind of statements — other people saying that. It’s 

not surprising, but it is alarming. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know there is a lot more that I would 

also like to say on this piece, but I think the points around the 

consultation that I have made were really the ones that I wanted 

to make on this piece. I don’t pretend to be an expert in this 

area, but I tell you the passionate discussions, the passionate, 

the passionate discussions that I’ve had with people on this, and 

those people who care deeply about these issues, I’m amazed, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m amazed at the lack, at the lack of due 

diligence that was done on this piece of legislation. 

 

And I’m really glad that I had the opportunity here to get up and 

say a few words on this because it is an important issue. And 

it’s unbelievable, unbelievable that around issues like this that 

we have to have people saying that there were no consultations, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a very sad day for Saskatchewan. It’s 

a very sad day for this very important land, pieces of land, the 

conservation pieces that we have here. 

 

The lack of rationale for why you would repeal the schedule 

listing designating lands without discussion around that . . . 

Perhaps the people there are afraid that they wouldn’t be able to 

get it through. I’m not sure what the reason is. But with that, I 

would at this time adjourn debate on 132. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member from 

Saskatoon Fairview has moved adjournment of debate of Bill 

No. 132, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Amendment Act, 2009. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

[21:15] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 123 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 123 — The 

Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2009 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, I’m pleased 

enter into debate this evening in the Assembly, this time on An 

Act to amend the Forest Resources Management Act and to 

make related amendments to The Parks Act. 

 

Now in case the members opposite are listening and paying 

attention, I’m not speaking a foreign language; I’m speaking 

English in making reference to forestry. Because for them it’s 

something that’s become absolutely foreign. And what’s 

happened is a total abandonment of the industry, a total 

abandonment of forest workers and their families, an 

abandonment certainly of an industry that is in dire need, quite 

frankly. 

 

Now if you look at the Sask Party record when it comes to 

forestry management and forestry generally in Saskatchewan, 

the best that you can say is it’s abysmal. It’s absolutely shoddy. 

They have absolutely no idea when it comes to managing the 

forest, working with the forestry industry. All that they’ve done 

with industry is make disparaging remarks, divide an FMA 

[forest management agreement] inappropriately that ensures 

that the industry continues to flounder. 

 

So the track record is absolutely terrible. In fact it’s not stuck in 

neutral; it’s going in reverse. And for everything that they’ve 

promised — and they made quite a few in the forestry industry 

and in forestry communities — they’ve delivered nothing. In 

fact they’ve delivered less than nothing, much like a Sask Party 

potash pledge. 

 

Now in reference to the forestry resources management Act, I 

think it’s appropriate to talk about the Sask Party record as it 

relates to the forestry industry in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Those who know forestry in Saskatchewan will know that about 

55 per cent of the province is covered by a forest. The forest of 

Saskatchewan is roughly equivalent to the size of the country of 

Germany. And so it’s a huge area, and it’s important that when 

you draw up legislation, when you design legislation, that you 

get it right. Certainly it’s important when you work with 

industry in a manner that would support the industry. You 

would want to get that right as well. 

 

And so what’s the record, you might ask. Well the record 

simply is this. The member from Batoche was part of a task 

force that while in opposition travelled throughout the province 

on the taxpayers’ dime and said that they would create a report 

upon completion of the forestry task force that he headed. No 

report was issued, although the minister responsible, the 

member from Kindersley, has claimed that the report was 

integrated into the party platform. Now if that’s true, certainly 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4749 

some three years later they could produce a report. But they 

can’t and they won’t. 

 

And so I find it a little bit strange and perhaps embarrassing for 

the member from Batoche that they can’t produce a report that 

was commissioned some three years ago, paid for by the 

taxpayers, and apparently utilized in some form by the 

Saskatchewan Party. But they can’t produce it. And so that’s 

the beginning of their record prior to taking over the 

government. 

 

They also promised during an election that “a Sask Party 

government will work with stakeholders in northern 

communities to strengthen Saskatchewan’s forest industry.” 

Well members in those communities would ask, what happened 

to the promise? What happened to a promise to work with 

communities and stakeholders to strengthen the industry? 

 

Because I can tell you right now that that’s not what they’re 

feeling in Big River. The community of Big River can’t believe 

the disrespect shown to the entire community, a town that has 

for over 100 years depended largely on forestry for their 

citizens to make a living. They’ve had what at one point was the 

largest saw mill in Confederation, and so certainly they have a 

tremendous history with the industry. They know how to work 

in forestry. They know how to compete globally. They 

understand the industry because there are some third and fourth 

generation people working in the industry. And all they asked 

for was to have a proper division of an FMA. That’s it. Simple 

as that. And certainly that didn’t happen. And so they would ask 

certainly what was meant in an election promise that they will 

work with stakeholders and northern communities to strengthen 

the industry because they haven’t seen any of it, in fact quite the 

opposite. 

 

They informed me on a visit there late last summer that the 

minister responsible, the member from Kindersley, had 

promised to get back to them on a number of issues, and 

certainly one was with respect to their saw mill, the community 

saw mill, and the FMA that was to be divided up. And he 

wouldn’t even return a phone call. They said it had been three 

months and they hadn’t gotten a word from him. And so when 

they say that they’re going to work with stakeholders, certainly 

the folks in Big River wouldn’t agree with that. 

 

Now that’s just the start of it. When the member from Batoche 

struck his task force and figured out the part of the platform, I 

guess, that they would work with stakeholders, what was the 

first thing they do when they took office? What was the first 

thing they did? They tore up the deal with Domtar that was 

struck and suggested that the publicly traded company agreed to 

a politically motivated deal. 

 

Now the accusations levied against companies in the forestry 

industry have been egregious. Certainly this is the start of it 

where they said that Domtar was politically motivated for the 

deal and for no other reason did they sign it. But they went on 

to do it with other companies, and certainly I’ll speak to that 

later as part of a chronology of failure. 

 

The next thing that they did, which was extremely frustrating, 

related to the forest and forestry was they presided over the 

closure of the Hudson Bay OSB [oriented strand board] mill 

and three more mills in the fall of 2008 — two in Meadow Lake 

and one in La Ronge. The one in La Ronge has since been 

moved out of the province, and that doesn’t represent a loss of 

GDP [gross domestic product] exclusively. It doesn’t represent 

a hit to the province’s economy exclusively, but it also 

represents the loss of 370 direct jobs. And normally in this 

industry you can add about 100 per cent more jobs lost in 

indirect jobs, and so you’ll have somewhere in the 

neighbourhood of 740 direct and indirect jobs lost in that 

industry in one summer and fall period. 

 

Then they went on to announce the formation of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan’s forestry sector team. Now this happened a year 

into their mandate in spite of the fact that the Premier himself 

said at the North Saskatoon Business Association luncheon that 

within a month of taking office they would have Enterprise 

Saskatchewan up and running. That was his pledge because he 

said something very close to the lines of, business people by 

their very nature aren’t patient people. And so they would want 

to get the Enterprise Saskatchewan up and running as quickly as 

possible and that they’d do it within a month. 

 

Now knowing full well that forestry was in crisis, a crisis that 

they certainly exacerbated upon taking office, what did they do? 

They took a year to create a forestry sector team. And some 8 to 

12 months after that, I had a chance to question the minister 

responsible for that sector team in estimates in this very 

building. And when I asked him how many times they’d met 

and how many recommendations they’d provided, the answer 

was somewhere in the neighbourhood of one or two meetings 

— I can’t remember, but it was unbelievably insignificant — 

and that they hadn’t provided a recommendation. 

 

Now if you understand when you take office that forestry’s in a 

crisis and you admit that, and you have a member from P.A. 

[Prince Albert] Carlton who says, “A vote for Darryl is a vote 

for the mill open and people working.” He takes out that ad in 

the Prince Albert Daily Herald. He takes out that ad with no 

intention of fulfilling the pledge. And they understand that 

forestry’s in a crisis, and after two years in office, they’ve met 

one or two times and they had no recommendations. Now I 

would argue that that is an unbelievable failure by the part of 

this government, and I think that other people would argue the 

same thing, especially people in La Ronge, Hudson Bay, Prince 

Albert, and Big River. 

 

And sadly in this chronology of failure, Mr. Speaker, I’m just 

getting warmed up. I haven’t even started to detail all of the 

failures . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Now the member from 

Martensville shouts from her seat that this isn’t relevant. And 

it’s unbelievable to me that she can’t understand that Bill 123, 

An Act to amend The Forestry Resources Management Act, has 

nothing to do with forestry. It’s unbelievable but it’s not 

surprising. It’s not surprising because this government has 

absolutely no idea when it comes to forestry in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and they prove it on a daily basis in this 

Chamber and the communities in and around Saskatchewan. So 

she should keep shouting from her seat that forestry has nothing 

to do with The Forestry Resources Management Act but I think 

she’s not credible. And I think a lot of people would agree with 

me. 

 

The very next thing they would do, Mr. Speaker, after 



4750 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

announcing the formation of Enterprise Saskatchewan’s 

forestry sector team, and meeting once in two years, they 

renamed the Saskatchewan’s forestry centre, ForestFirst. They 

renamed it and in a year when the government put out over 

1,000 press releases, they wouldn’t put out a press release on 

this one. They were so proud of it that they named it 

ForestFirst. They changed the name and they generated work 

for people who design letterheads. They generate work for 

people who make writing pads, because they had to change 

those, and business cards — but not one job in the forest. They 

change it and didn’t create a single job in the forest of 

Saskatchewan. And so where does it go from there, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

They announced on May 27th of ’09 that the value-added 

business development mandate of ForestFirst would be 

delegated to FPInnovations that same day that the agroforestry 

and biomass functions of ForestFirst will be transferred to the 

Saskatchewan Research Council which will move into the 

Saskatchewan Forest Centre. So it takes them just a few months 

to go from changing the forestry centre to ForestFirst to 

collapsing that into another entity and then essentially firing all 

the workers. It’s got about one-third of the staff or a quarter of 

the staff that worked there before. And so that’s their answer to 

forest issues in Saskatchewan, is to rename the building and 

then rename it again and shut it down. Additionally it’s 

interesting to note that there’s no information on the current 

mandate for ForestFirst. You can’t find it; they won’t provide it. 

Certainly wouldn’t even put out a press release to inform people 

that the change was being made. 

 

[21:30] 

 

The next thing that they did was to announce a number of 

allocations and choose to attempt to take credit for the 

Community Development Trust Fund for communities affected 

by forest closures. And they wanted to take a bunch of credit for 

that in spite of the fact that it was all federal money, somewhere 

close to the neighbourhood of $36 million, which I would argue 

should not have been given out by the federal government on a 

per capita basis. It should have been a reflection of forest in the 

province where they were designating the funding. So instead, 

with Saskatchewan’s million people, out of a little over $1 

billion, we got $36 million, in spite of the fact that the forest in 

Saskatchewan is the size of Germany. So they fail again to 

consult and to get anything out of the federal government in 

terms of what we should be allotted for support for an industry. 

 

Now if that’s not bad enough, if that’s not bad enough, Mr. 

Speaker, that took place about two years ago. And you know 

what’s happened in this very budget? In this very budget 

they’re holding back $2.8 million of federal funding that they 

were given two years ago, and they’re using it for who knows 

what else to fund things because they can’t manage the finances 

of the province of Saskatchewan. They’re taking money that 

was designated for negatively affected forest communities, 

because of their inaction in the forestry file, in order to fund 

further inadequacies. So you can see certainly, Mr. Speaker, 

why the people in the province of Saskatchewan, when it comes 

to forestry and forestry-related issues, have absolutely no trust 

when it comes to this government and the decisions that they 

make. 

 

Now fast-forward a little bit to the last several months and 

further failures by the Saskatchewan Party government when it 

comes to the forest and its management in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The minister responsible for the forest in Saskatchewan has an 

opportunity to divide up the forestry management agreement, 

and he’s got an opportunity to provide a small amount of 

assistance to a community that’s got one of the only forest 

assets left under this government in the province of 

Saskatchewan by simply doing one thing, and that’s allocating 

the forest management agreement and allocating it so that, as 

has happened in virtually every other jurisdiction in Canada — 

or in North America, sorry — where the asset is guaranteed a 

portion of the FMA. The FMA follows the asset. 

 

And instead of doing that and ensuring that there would be a 

saw mill at least in the province of Saskatchewan, what do they 

do? The minister responsible ignores, as I’d mentioned earlier, 

the town of Big River because that’s very close to where the 

saw mill is located, makes promises to them that he didn’t end 

up keeping, and then has the nerve, because somebody would 

purchase a forestry asset under this government in the province 

of Saskatchewan, to say that the person who purchased the asset 

. . . Well first of all, he said the company that purchased the 

asset is “a shady company.” He said that. But he didn’t stop 

there, Mr. Speaker. The member from Kindersley, the minister 

responsible, said that the CEO [chief executive officer] of that 

company is “a shady character.” 

 

Now it is absolutely egregious that a member of the executive 

of the Government of Saskatchewan would call a private citizen 

a name like that when they are attempting to invest in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And why did he do it? What’s his 

motivation? Well you’d have to ask him, but certainly I can’t 

understand it. The people of Big River can’t understand it. And 

what is sad is that with him as the minister, the member from 

Kindersley as the minister, the people of Saskatchewan are the 

losers. 

 

And all he has to do is provide the most marginal amount of 

support, just divide an FMA up appropriately. It doesn’t cost 

him anything. It doesn’t cost him anything. But instead of 

dividing the FMA up appropriately, what does he do? He calls 

into question the character of the CEO of the company. 

Senseless and ridiculous move as that is, that’s what he does. 

And so you can understand the frustration by the communities 

all around Saskatchewan over their treatment of forest resources 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I guess it’s a footnote at this point, but certainly worth 

noting, that shortly after the comments made by the member 

from Kindersley about the CEO and the company itself, 

investors and investment bankers made a different judgment on 

that company. In fact the company raised $145 million to 

purchase further assets, and the only idled asset they now own 

is sitting in Saskatchewan right around Big River awaiting a 

forestry management agreement allotment. 

 

And so it is . . . As you might note, I didn’t plan on going on 

this long, but when you add it up, the record on forestry 

management, though not an entirely exhaustive list, is an 

exhausting list. And it’s unfortunate because again the people 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4751 

who they promised during the election would benefit from them 

being elected have been ignored, have been ignored. And so it 

is unfortunate that the people believed them during the election 

because it’s proven that it wasn’t warranted. It wasn’t 

warranted. And certainly we think that that’ll change in 

November of 2011. I’m confident of that. 

 

Now specifically with relation to this Bill and some of the notes 

that they’ve written on it, the purpose of the Act is to “. . . 

promote the sustainable use of forest land for the benefit of 

current and future generations by balancing the need for 

economic, social and cultural opportunities with the need to 

maintain and enhance the health of forest land.” Well when 

you’ve got such an abysmal record of failure to begin with, who 

could believe that now they’re going to be stewards of the 

forest? Who would believe that? 

 

The proposed amendments mark a shift, and it’s a shift from 

licences to manage the forest to audits for some activities. Now 

that shift is a shift for activities posing low environmental risk. 

And fair enough, there are many practices in the forest that are 

low environmental risk. But who’s going to make that 

determination, and why isn’t that a part of the Bill? And if more 

audits are done instead of licences provided that force 

responsibility, then who’s going to do the audits? Who’s going 

to pay for them? Is it the Government of Saskatchewan that 

then pays for the audits? And what are the sanctions in case the 

audits turn out to find something that is in contravention of the 

Act? What are the penalties, and who imposes the penalties? 

 

Now certainly this Act calls into question whether the 

harvesting of the forest, if it’s ever done in the province of 

Saskatchewan again, if it will still be FSC [Forest Stewardship 

Council] certified — if it’s Forestry Stewardship Council 

certified wood — because it certainly makes a difference if 

you’re in the industry and exporting lumber to another 

jurisdiction because it adds value to your operation to have that 

designation on your product. And so it’s important. And again 

when you have a record of abysmal failure such as the 

Saskatchewan Party government has when it relates to forest 

issues, can you trust that they will ensure that the FSC 

designation remains for forest products in the province of 

Saskatchewan? I would argue that that’s not the case. And so as 

I’ve delineated in some way what their failures are, and like I 

said the list is exhausting if not exhaustive. We certainly have a 

number of folks I think that still want to speak to this Bill. And 

so at this point I would move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 

Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 123, The 

Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 128 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Norris that Bill No. 128 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Labour Mobility) Amendment Act, 2009 
be now read a second time.] 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure tonight 

to speak to Bill 128, An Act to amend certain Statutes to 

facilitate Labour Mobility. And I want to start off by saying that 

we’ve long supported internal trade, internal mobility in Canada 

between the various provinces and territories in Canada. 

 

In fact the first agreement was signed in 1995. We had at that 

stage been . . . we were in our fourth year of the first Romanow 

government. And I remember the then premier speaking to us 

and saying, for heaven’s sake we have free trade with the 

United States and, it looks like, Mexico. I can’t remember when 

Mexico came in, off the top of my head, into the NAFTA 

[North American Free Trade Agreement], but we had free trade 

with the United States at that point. And Roy Romanow said, 

well why wouldn’t we have labour mobility so that workers 

from Manitoba or Ontario or Saskatchewan or any other 

province or territory could have reasonable access to 

Saskatchewan, and conversely our workers would have 

reasonable access to those other provinces and territories. So I 

want to say right at the outset that that principle is one that we 

salute on the opposition side of this legislature. 

 

There are problems with this Bill 128 though, and I see a 

pattern having developed. The problem with this Bill is one 

where the government signed the agreement, the internal 

agreement with other Canadian provinces and territories, before 

they did any of the consultation with the, oh boy, 37 different 

groups. 

 

This covers professions including agrologists, architects, 

assessment appraisers, certified general accountants, 

chiropractors, regional planners, dentists, dieticians, engineers, 

geoscientists, professional forester, although I guess that would 

mostly be out-migration after having heard the speech on 

forestry. I suspect that the call for professional foresters in 

Saskatchewan is not growing at the moment. That will change 

though.  

 

Going back to the list: embalmer, interior designers, land 

surveyor, lawyers, LPNs [licensed practical nurse], medical 

laboratory technologists, doctors, radiation technologists, 

midwives, naturopaths, occupational therapists, ophthalmic 

dispensers, optometrists, paramedics, pharmacists, physical 

therapists, podiatrists, psychologists, RNs [registered nurse], 

psychiatric nurses, registered therapists. It says municipality 

administrators; I’d always known of them as municipal 

administrators, but maybe my memory is wrong. Science 

technologists, social workers, and speech language pathologists. 

So I think that’s roughly 37 different professional organizations 

that are involved in this piece of legislation, several of whom 

when we contacted them knew nothing of this agreement. 

 

[21:45] 

 

And it again comes back to the pattern, Mr. Speaker, of a 

government that decides it wants to do something, does it, and 

then says, oh gee, maybe we should talk to the people that it 

affects. Maybe we should talk to the organization that what 

we’re doing affects. And our argument is that that’s just 

backwards. It’s got the world upside down. You do much of the 



4752 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

consultation beforehand, get broad agreement where it is you 

want to go. 

 

Because these organizations, I mean they’re chock full of great 

people, full of people that want the workings of the world, the 

workings of Saskatchewan, the workings of Canada to work 

well. They would be trying to make it work better, not worse. 

So it’s not a group that the government should be afraid to talk 

to, with one for-sure exception: chiropractors are on this list, 

and I think that the government has managed to make 

chiropractors the enemy of the Sask Party government. And 

they did that by . . . it’s interesting. In this Bill 128, the 

government signed an agreement that affects chiropracty. When 

chiropractors negotiated an agreement with the government, the 

government refused to sign that agreement with chiropractors. 

 

And I don’t know quite how that works, where you can quickly 

sign an agreement, sign a binding labour mobility amendment 

Act that is binding on chiropractors without negotiating with 

them. I don’t know how that works. And yet when they do 

negotiate with the chiropractors, the government refuses to sign 

that agreement that the chiropractors had signed in good faith. 

They negotiated in good faith, signed it in good faith. 

 

So we were skeptical on this side. We’re wondering about how 

much consultation has taken place with this Bill 128. And that’s 

the pattern that is most distressing, most disturbing to members 

of the opposition and to an awful lot of groups around the 

province. I am not, Mr. Speaker, here saying that this Bill is evil 

or necessarily even a bad Bill. I am saying that the consultation 

is following, seems to be from our research, is following the 

pattern of pass legislation, sign, do what it is that the Sask Party 

government wants to do, and then talk to people and 

organizations later and try and smooth things over and make 

them come on board. 

 

And that wears short after a while with people, particularly 

good organizations that want to make Saskatchewan work 

better, wants to make a better workplace for their people in their 

professions, and wants to just make it a better place for their 

families and all of us to live right here in Saskatchewan. And of 

course most of these people would want to have the ability to 

move into another jurisdiction if the circumstances were right 

for themselves and/or their family. Movement interprovincial or 

even into other territories is probably a good thing on balance. 

 

Much as my heart is right here in Saskatchewan and this is 

where I choose to make home, the times that I have left 

Saskatchewan have all been great learning experiences. 

Whether I left to work for a winter, as I did in British Columbia 

in 1974-75, or whether it was other travels and other times 

away from Saskatchewan, it’s always good to have that 

mobility, Mr. Speaker. And that’s a mobility that this Bill deals 

with, and it’s probably on balance a decent thing. 

 

One of the things that we fear is that Bill 128, An Act to amend 

certain Statutes to facilitate Labour Mobility is potentially 

going to be so proscriptive that the organizations that are 

responsible . . . Let’s take the very first one: agrologists. And I 

have no axe to grind — good, bad, or indifferent. I think there’s 

an awful lot of good agrologists. Well the last funeral I attended 

was a personal friend who was an agrologist. And that, so not to 

get hung up on that, but agrologists set standards of people in 

their profession. I can’t claim to be an agrologist. I don’t have 

the training, I don’t have the educational background to be an 

agrologist. There’s lots of things in this world that I can do and 

that even some of them that I’m actually good at. Being an 

agrologist is not one of them. 

 

And I think that it’s safe to say that agrologists, the organization 

of agrologists would want to have some control to make sure, to 

make certain that when an agrologist wants to come and 

practice agrology in Saskatchewan and hang their shingle out 

and you know provide, do their agrology services for a fee, the 

agrologists of Saskatchewan would want to make sure that that 

agrologist was appropriately trained, that that agrologist had the 

appropriate background to provide advice or do whatever it is 

that they were hired to do in Saskatchewan. 

 

And the same could be said for virtually everything else here. I 

know you go to assessment appraisers. You know, on the one 

hand we tend to think, well assessing a property should be the 

same whether you’re in Saskatchewan or Manitoba or Alberta. 

Well, not . . . You scratch the surface a bit, and there is a 

significant difference in what assessment appraisers, how they 

approach their job, how they do it, between Alberta and 

Saskatchewan. 

 

How do I know this? I have a brother-in-law who’s a property 

appraiser in Alberta, and Todd has been doing that for longer 

than either of us want to remember. I guess he’s, safe to say 

well over 20 years now, and he’s nearing the height of his 

professional career. But there’s a difference, and not simply that 

in Saskatchewan we tend, municipalities tend to hire the 

property assessors and maintain them on payroll; not 

exclusively, but we tend to do that. And in Alberta it’s simply 

done privately; private companies do it. They’ve moved that 

way some years back. And there’s some differences, of course, 

some twists and turns in how they do their assessment. 

 

You take, well, regional planners. It just strikes me, Mr. 

Speaker, that if I had a regional planner from the Greater Metro 

area of Toronto or Vancouver coming to Saskatoon or Regina 

or P.A. or Moose Jaw or any of the other cities or regions of 

Saskatchewan, some of the challenges that those regional 

planners would be facing would be hugely different. And it 

wouldn’t surprise me if the regional planners association of 

Saskatchewan would want to know that any new regional 

planners that came to Saskatchewan had the appropriate 

training. And maybe it’s only a three-day or a three-week 

orientation and then they’re off and running, but then they are 

off and running, and they’re productive and capable of being 

immediately productive regional planners. 

 

You look at all of the different organizations here. I mean, I’m 

just at the very top, the third line out of, I don’t know, a dozen 

or more lines of these professionals. And the point I’m making 

is that it shouldn’t ought to be, this Bill should not allow a race 

to the bottom. It shouldn’t just allow me to claim I’m a regional 

planner or I’m an agrologist or I’m a chiropractor or I’m any 

one of these other professions. 

 

And I realize I may have oversimplified that, and I apologize to 

anyone who has a professional certification, either from 

Saskatchewan or any other province, because I quite 

conveniently ignored that they have a professional designation. 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4753 

They’ve earned the right to call themselves — I’ll stick with 

regional planners — they will have earned that right in another 

province and/or earned it here. And I haven’t earned it here or 

anywhere else, so by that count alone, I couldn’t call myself a 

regional planner or any of the other professional organizations 

that are included in this Bill 128. I don’t belong to any of the 27 

groups, although I’d like to. Almost all of these hold a great 

deal of interest to me, Mr. Speaker. One that struck me as I’m 

reading is the very last one on the list, and it’s that of speech 

language pathologist. 

 

And I thought of a trip I made to St. John’s, Newfoundland. 

And I was in a situation where I was standing by a public pay 

phone, and I was listening to three teenagers, boys, talking on 

the phone. And you know, Mr. Speaker, I might as well have 

been on Mars because I didn’t understand a single word that 

they said. And it wasn’t just that they were teenagers. They had 

such a thick Newfoundland accent that I just could not grasp it, 

could not follow it. And it sort of . . . I think it would be 

interesting if you could get a speech language pathologist that 

spoke in that trying to teach someone here speech language 

pathology. It would be an interesting situation. 

 

Never mind if somebody from Quebec came because I know at 

least if it’s someone who speaks French, we have a significant 

and proud francophone population, including my 

daughter-in-law who’s a francophone teacher here in 

Saskatchewan. And I’m very proud of Kaeli and the teaching 

that she does. I’m very proud of her all the way around. She’s 

just a wonderful person. 

 

So there’s just all kinds of things going on in this labour 

mobility Bill that we don’t want . . . We want to welcome 

people from other provinces, other territories. We want to have 

them have reasonable access to job situations, to hopefully 

permanent job situations here in Saskatchewan. But we do not 

want this to be a race to the bottom. We don’t want it where this 

would allow, for example, some unscrupulous employer to 

lower their health and safety standards or lower their benefit 

package just because there’s some part of Canada that is 

economically depressed and they know they could hire people 

from there and pay them less than they would pay people from 

Saskatchewan. So you know, that kind of a race to the bottom 

serves no one well. It’s just wrong by every count, full stop, 

period. 

 

[22:00] 

 

And we don’t want Bill 128 to facilitate that kind of 

wrong-headedness, wrong thinking. We want Bill 128 to be a 

Bill that genuinely helps mobility, that helps these professional 

organizations to maintain professional standards that are 

appropriate to Saskatchewan without being unduly restrictive. 

Because we shouldn’t, we shouldn’t ought to say, oh no, 

because you — to be a little bit flippant, use my example — 

because you have an accent from the east coast, you can’t work 

here. That isn’t what I was trying to say, and it certainly isn’t 

anything, Mr. Speaker, that we would want to say. And I don’t 

want to leave that mistaken impression. 

 

But I do want to be crystal clear that what we would welcome at 

every turn is good professional people that meet the required 

minimum standards that are set out by the professional 

regulatory organizations in Saskatchewan, so that if I’m sending 

a grandchild or my kids are sending one of my grandchildren to 

a speech language pathologist, that they would get appropriate 

care. If we need the services of a medical laboratory 

technologist, that we’ve got those appropriate services. The 

whole list, Mr. Speaker, is one that we would want to make sure 

that we had the appropriate training that was suitable for 

Saskatchewan, perhaps even a little component of it that 

acknowledges some of the differences in Saskatchewan people 

and people from other places. 

 

We tend to be a very welcoming and a very friendly and a very 

trusting people. And it’s something I pride myself in being, and 

I can’t change it. I can’t seem to get that beat out of me. I like 

people. I genuinely like people. And I trust people, sometimes 

trust them too much, but I trust people. And it just comes from 

my upbringing on a co-op farm in rural Saskatchewan. And I 

argue, Mr. Speaker, it’s served me well. And I want this Bill 

128 to serve me and all Saskatchewan people well. And I don’t 

want it to be an undue hindrance to others. But we do need to 

make sure that the consultation has been done. We need to 

make sure that this doesn’t become a race to the bottom in 

terms of working standards. We need to make sure, Mr. 

Speaker, that with Bill 128, you know, we’ve got . . . This is An 

Act to amend certain Statutes to facilitate Labour Mobility. This 

is something that the Sask Party government is saying is good. 

 

But it’s the same government that said in 1997, in the last 

election campaign, that New Democrats in government were 

mismanaging, were mismanaging rural Saskatchewan and that 

there was too many vacancies, too many doctor vacancies in 

rural Saskatchewan. Well you know, Mr. Speaker, the history, 

the record shows that the number of vacancies, doctor vacancies 

in rural Saskatchewan is up over 50 per cent since the Sask 

Party formed government — more than a 50 per cent increase in 

vacancies in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So it becomes a bit of a trust issue when you have a 

government, the Sask Party, that says Bill 128, An Act to amend 

certain Statutes to facilitate Labour Mobility, is a good Bill. We 

want to believe it. But when they say it’s a good Bill, and it’s 

the same government that said, we’ll fix the rural doctor 

shortage; we’ll make sure that we take care of this situation 

where we have rural health facilities close because they don’t 

have doctors on rotation, doctors available — and yet the 

vacancies have increased more than 50 per cent. It’s a matter of 

public record on the Ministry of Health’s record. You can look 

it up on the Internet. It’s where we get our numbers on this 

matter from. The walk doesn’t match the talk when it comes to 

the Sask Party government. 

 

So we have concerns about this Bill and every other Bill. We 

have concerns around consultation that hasn’t taken place. We 

have questions about the potential for some unscrupulous 

employers. And we want, Mr. Speaker, to be sure before we 

move to harmonize all the qualifications, we want to ensure that 

it’s a good thing rather than, as I said before, that race to the 

bottom. We are very supportive of agreements that enhance the 

ability of trade interprovincially and intra-territorially — in 

other words, all in Canada. It’s just counter to our thinking on 

the opposition side to even conceive that we would want to stop 

that. We welcome workers from other provinces. We welcome 

the opportunity for our workers to go to other provinces. This is 



4754 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

always a good thing. 

 

But we don’t want it if it means that I’m sending my sons or 

daughter or my grandchildren to another province to a lower 

working standard than they would enjoy here, a lower 

particularly health and safety standard. I have less concern 

about the financial standard, because as you know, you can 

either take a job or you can not take a job within certain 

parameters. Nobody much forces you to get stuck in a dead end, 

low-paying job if you’ve got . . . I mean you’ve got to have a 

reasonable education, and there’s got to be some things going 

for you, but for the most part we strive to upgrade our job 

situation. 

 

I know when I left high school, I worked at a couple of 

minimum wage jobs. I think I’ve managed to get away from 

that. The first, well I won’t say the first break, but the best 

break I had was when I chose to work for Sask Wheat Pool in 

the farm service division. And the pay was low, but there was 

opportunities and I was able to utilize those opportunities. We 

want that for our Saskatchewan workforce, whether they’re our 

children or our grandchildren or our neighbour’s kids. That’s 

the sort of thing that we want, Mr. Speaker, and the more we 

can enhance the quality of work, the better off we all are. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been dealing with Bill 128 which, as I 

pointed out, deals with some 37 different groups, you know, 

and interestingly including doctors. 

 

Now I’m not sure what the College of Physicians and Surgeons 

have to say about this legislation. I’m not sure that the College 

of Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan would say that we 

have much legal right to dictate the medical standards of a 

doctor coming in. They’ve protected that right of the College of 

Physicians and Surgeons to license and control the doctors that 

can practise and what they can practise because . . . Well we 

had an example today. There was questions in question period 

about the gynecological oncologist that has just quit her practice 

here in Regina, which reduces us 50 per cent in Regina from 

two to one. And there’s still two in Saskatoon, but in the entire 

province we’re down by 25 per cent right now, and it looks like 

it’s heading lower. 

 

But the College of Physicians and Surgeons wouldn’t allow a 

GP [general practitioner] to claim that they had expertise in that 

area. You have to establish your credentials, that you have the 

training and the ability to be a very specialized doctor and enter 

into gynecological oncology. 

 

So clearly we would need, Mr. Speaker, we would clearly need 

to make sure that in this legislation that the professional 

organizations that are responsible for these different professions 

still have the ability to have the legitimate requirements, the 

legitimate requirements for training that there is. So that’s really 

what we want. 

 

Mr. Speaker, quite clearly we have questions. I’ve raised quite a 

number of them over the last 20 minutes or so, and we have 

many, many more questions. But I’m getting a sense that these 

questions we have potential to answer in committee, so I move 

that this Bill go to committee. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Advanced Education and Labour 

that Bill No. 128, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Labour Mobility) 

Amendment Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — To Human Services Committee, Mr. 

Deputy Chair. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 131 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 131 — The 

Conservation Easements Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise in this debate and participate this evening on 

Bill 131, The Conservation Easements Amendment Act. As 

would seem to be the case with this government, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it on the surface would appear to be a fairly 

straightforward proposition. But once you get into it, it raises a 

number of questions, chief among them relating to consultation, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And again in terms of the primary purpose of the Bill being the 

enactment of a process to create Crown conservation easements, 

how that relates to the land titles registry, how that, you know, 

there’s a subsequent amendment to the taxation Act, it’s 

something that on this side of the House we look at this and 

think, okay, fair enough. If this is about improving the 

conservation tools at the disposal of the government in terms of 

protecting valuable habitat, that’s one thing. If it’s something 

that gets eroded in the regulations, if it’s something that we find 

out that one of the chief partners in legislation like this, such as 

for example First Nations who have a duty to be consulted, if 

we find out that they have not been consulted in this, Mr. 

Speaker, that would obviously detract from the value of this 

legislation. 

 

When I look at this legislation, one of the things I think about is 

how this would affect something like the Old Man on His Back 

conservation area. And certainly in this House over the years 

we’ve had different discussions about the Old Man on His 



April 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4755 

Back. In the introductory remarks by the minister, she had 

referenced the work of the Nature Conservancy of Canada and 

how this will improve the ability of them to do their work. So I 

wonder in terms of, you know, Old Man on His Back, the great 

conservation project down in the Frenchman Valley off in the 

fair riding of Cypress Hills. I know the member for Cypress 

Hills is quite, has followed this development quite closely over 

the years to the point of quoting, I seem to recall him quoting 

Sharon Butala’s work in this Assembly. Or perhaps I’m mixing 

him up with the member from Lakeview, but I know he’s paid 

homage to Peter and Sharon Butala and the role they’ve played 

in the development of this valuable conservancy effort. 

 

[22:15] 

 

And well he should, and as we all should, in terms of the 

generosity of those individuals, and not just the Butalas, in 

terms of amassing this tremendous piece of nature, this 

tremendous piece of native prairie, this tremendous bit of 

habitat where bison have been reintroduced and seem to be 

thundering along quite nicely. I’m getting a conformational 

shake of the head from the member from Cypress Hills. I don’t 

know if he’s been out there riding herd on them of late, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but we’ll take him as indication that they’re 

doing okay. 

 

So in terms of this piece of legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if it 

will improve the ability of an organization like the Nature 

Conservancy of Canada to do their work as it relates to 

something like Old Man on His Back, we think that’s fine. If it 

expands the definition of what is protected habitats to include 

things that hadn’t previously been anticipated in the legislation 

but are important nonetheless — such as things that are not 

quite flora or fauna or animals or plants, but how this affects 

certain lichens or fungi, things not previously anticipated in the 

legislation, but of which the environmental significance has 

become increasingly clear — if it will move to protect those 

things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, then again we think that could be 

positive. 

 

In terms of how this relates to the land titles registry and the 

work of the Information Services Corporation, again there’s an 

evolution that takes place in some of these, some of the types, 

the categories of land holdings over the years. So again that we 

make those appropriate changes to the work of the land titles 

registry, that is important. 

 

In terms of the process by which a conservation easement may 

be entered into or terminated, it’s important that that is very 

clear. And again there’s a good start on that in the legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. The penalties for violations of conservation 

easement are laid out in the legislation. And those includes fines 

of up to $100,000 plus $100,000 per day for individuals in 

violation of the Act, and corporations can be fined up to 

$500,000 plus $500,000 per day if found to be in violation of 

the Act. So again those, on the face of them, appear to be fairly 

stiff penalties in consequence of violation. We’d be interested 

to know more of what the existing regime was and whether or 

not that has been actually applied to anyone. You know, has 

that made a difference to date? 

 

And in terms of the changes in this legislation around . . . 

Certainly there is a role for modernizing and keeping the 

terminology up to the times. Certainly there’s room for 

recognizing the developments that have been made in what is 

environmentally significant, what’s important to habitat as per 

the observation around things that aren’t strictly animals or 

plants but are important to the flora and fauna nonetheless of a 

unique natural habitat, and again in terms of how is there a way 

to streamline this process and to make it more responsive to an 

undertaking such as that which was provided for at Old Man on 

His Back. 

 

This was a project that went from the mid-’90s and, you know, 

certainly previous, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but for which the 

planning and the coordination of efforts really got under way in 

earnest in 1997. Certainly the Nature Conservancy played a 

critical role in helping to marshal the groups, coordinate the 

efforts, but there was a great involvement on the part of 

Environment and Resource Management from Saskatchewan 

and interested stakeholders in the area. And again there’s an 

example of something that I think worked and worked fairly 

well, that worked to live up to the conservation that is invoked 

in the title of this legislation and in the intent of this legislation 

and again in terms of what we understand to be habitat that is 

worth protecting in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

One of the earlier speeches referencing forestry resources 

touched upon the fact that 55 per cent of the province is covered 

in forest, a land mass larger than the land involved in the state 

of Germany. But of course we know, just by looking at our flag, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that green of the forest is 

complemented by the gold of the prairie. And in terms of when 

you think of the city of Regina and the fact that most of the 

trees in this particular environment were planted by hand, and 

the fact that hereabouts in the Regina region what used to be 

native prairie has of course been impacted by human population 

and by industrial activity, and it’s of course been altered 

through the time. Certainly the beautiful Dutch elms that we 

have in the city of Regina and throughout southern 

Saskatchewan generally, they’re worthy of protection. 

 

And in terms of the measures of this government in the past few 

days around the budget, again in this legislation they’re 

proclaiming the importance of conservation on the one hand, 

but in terms of the budget and making smart decisions — 

long-range decisions, decisions that you can see past the end of 

their nose — we’re seeing something where it’s been 

downloaded to the municipalities. This is a program that’s been 

in existence for 20 years, and yet they see fit to do in the Dutch 

elm prevention program. Now of course they think there’s 

going to be a savings of $500,000 off the top, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but what price will be a full-scale infestation of Dutch 

elm disease in the city of Regina, because of course there won’t 

be the preventative work being done on a province-wide basis? 

 

Now that preventative work, it was important. It only bears to 

reason that if you stop it at the border, it doesn’t wind up in 

Regina. If you stop it before it gets full-blown, you don’t have 

to chop down all the trees. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the . . . I think of my home 

neighbourhood in North Central. One of the most beautiful 

natural features of that neighbourhood, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

the wonderful green canopy of Dutch elms that we in the 

neighbourhood love so well in the summer. And you think 



4756 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2010 

about the beauty of Wascana Park and the fact of Dutch elms 

being very much a part of that wondrous habitat. 

 

Again if you’ve got a government that proclaims the value of 

conservation on the one hand and then guts the budgets that 

make meaningful protections of that habitat on the other, it’s 

hard not to look at that and say, okay we’ve got legislation that 

says they’re going to do one thing, but how is this really going 

to play out, Mr. Deputy Speaker? So we have a lot of questions 

like that. 

 

Again it’s a conservation effort put forward that comes from a 

government that promised to stabilize greenhouse gas emissions 

by 2010 and did not. I stood in the 2007 election in a debate 

with the now Minister of the Environment where in response to 

a question from the floor, she reiterated her party’s platform 

very vigorously, that this was a solid plank in their party’s 

platform. And of course we found out just how solid that plank 

was not, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they would abandon it so 

quickly. 

 

It reminds me of a talk that I’d seen given by Tom Flanagan 

where he talked about the federal Conservative approach to the 

environment, where, you know, they needed to have something 

to say so they threw a few different measures into the platform, 

but really they just needed a light in the window so they could 

say they had something to say about the environment. And I 

guess the haste with which the members opposite discarded 

their commitment to the greenhouse gas reductions by 2010, 

again I think that speaks to the same kind of approach of their 

federal cousins as talked about by Tom Flanagan. 

 

This is a government that has been ragging the puck on 

addressing climate change. And when again they come forward 

with an environmental measure, you’ll forgive us, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, if we’re somewhat less than believers on this side in 

terms of the ability of that government to say one thing and then 

live up to it in their deeds and actions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

One last thing I want to touch on is we’ll be very interested to 

know how this legislation impacts First Nations, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We know that duty to consult, the final regulations 

from the members opposite should be coming down any day 

now. But we also know that the past two-plus years of their 

involvement with First Nations on things as basic as 

consultation, as basic as respectful relations, it’s been fairly 

checkered over there, Mr. Speaker. And in terms of the work 

that the Department of the Environment has done in 

coordination with First Nations, that in particular raises a whole 

number of questions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’ll be getting 

into in the days and weeks ahead in the remainder of this 

session. 

 

But we know that there’s, you know, nothing probably more 

fundamental than land use when it comes to the basis of treaty 

rights in terms of hunting, gathering, and fishing, those 

fundamental treaty rights. And in terms of what this legislation 

does to it, we note that there’s nothing in this legislation along 

the lines of a non-derogation clause. In terms of the duty to 

consult and accommodate, there’s nothing in terms of a 

non-derogation clause around the treaty rights and the impact of 

this legislation on that, those treaty rights that are protected by 

section 35 of the Constitution of Canada. 

And again, in terms of the ability of the Minister of First 

Nations and Métis Relations to be the lead agency on First 

Nations and Métis issues in this cabinet, you’ll forgive us again, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we’re less than confident in his ability 

to do that job, let alone different other ministers over there in 

the way that they interact with the First Nations and Métis. 

 

So there have been attempts over the years, there have been 

protocols, there have been partnerships developed whereby, to 

use one example, First Nations have come together with the 

provincial government to work in a joint, coordinated fashion 

on environmental issues. And we know that in recent days, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the members opposite have done some . . . 

have taken progress that has been made and walked it 

backwards for decades, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So when they come forward with something like this where it 

doesn’t . . . Where we’ve had no mention from the minister in 

terms of how it impacts First Nations, how it impacts Métis 

people, how it impacts those Aboriginal rights under section 35 

of the Constitution, how it lives up to this government’s duty to 

consult and accommodate. Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we look 

at their records and we look at something like this and we think, 

well, very interesting. You know, could they spell it out in 

black and white what they’ve done? And if they can’t, why not, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker? Because again they’ve got a responsibility 

under the law, under Supreme Court rulings to discharge that 

responsibility. And we await the proof of that activity with great 

interest, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time of adjournment having been 

reached, this House now stands adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow 

afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 127 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2009 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4731 

 Bill No. 118 — The Milk Control Repeal Act 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4731 

  Harpauer (referral to committee) .......................................................................................................................................... 4734 

 Bill No. 101 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4734 

  Reiter (referral to committee) ................................................................................................................................................ 4739 

 Bill No. 122 — The Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4739 

 Bill No. 121 — The Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4742 

 Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4744 

 Bill No. 123 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2009 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4748 

 Bill No. 128 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Labour Mobility) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4751 

  Harpauer (referral to committee) .......................................................................................................................................... 4754 

 Bill No. 131 — The Conservation Easements Amendment Act, 2009 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4754 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


