




















































Hansard: March 15, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 30A  MONDAY, MARCH 15, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4161 

 March 15, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I have a couple of introductions that I’d like to make, 

people that are in your gallery as well as people that are in the 

west gallery. 

 

First of all, I’d like to introduce seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, to the Assembly, members of the Student Medical 

Society of Saskatchewan. They’re a political advocacy 

committee. These students are first- and second-year med 

students in Saskatoon. They were here to talk to both the 

opposition and government regarding ideas that they have to see 

better delivery of health care within the province and especially 

around rural health care and the distributive education model, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

They put on a very good presentation, and we certainly had a 

chance to visit with them. I probably should introduce each and 

every one, but I’m going to single out Nikki Rewuski who is an 

ambassador. Last Friday I was in Saskatoon to talk about how 

important it is to retain our medical students and residents. 

Nikki is one of those that will be working very hard on that as 

an ambassador. Maybe if you just want to give a wave. 

 

And so I want to thank her as well as all the medical students 

for being here today and hope you’ve enjoyed your day in the 

legislature. And we’ll see how question period develops, but 

there may be even some questions on medical students. So I’d 

ask everybody to join me in welcoming them. 

 

While I’m on my feet, I’d like to introduce three members from 

the Saskatchewan Ophthalmic Dispensers Association: Paul 

Johnson who is the president, if you want to just give a wave; 

Ken Sorensen who is the assistant registrar; and Clarence Mott 

who is the treasurer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will be introducing legislation later on today 

that will certainly make my job a lot easier on the pronunciation 

of their association as we move forward. I think it will be then 

called The Opticians Act as opposed to the Ophthalmic 

Dispensers Association, Mr. Speaker. So I’m looking forward 

to that legislation, and I’d ask all members to join me in 

welcoming them here to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 

Minister of Health in welcoming the medical students to the 

Legislative Assembly today. I understand they have been 

lobbying the government and working with the opposition. And 

I just want to say to them I hope your discussions are useful and 

successful. 

I know that, in our discussions and having lunch with a number 

of the students, I know that these are the young people 

committed to working to improve our health care. And if this is 

an example of our future medical profession, I know our health 

system is in good hands. So welcome here today. And I know 

the minister speaks on our behalf as well when he wishes you 

all the best in the years to come and looking after the most 

important issue in the province, the health care of our citizens. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs, the Minister Responsible for Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to welcome 

three guests in your gallery this afternoon, and I just ask them to 

stand. Joining us today is Kevin Cumming, president of Atco 

Midstream. Kevin joins us today from Calgary. With Kevin are 

two SaskEnergy representatives who are no strangers to the 

House: Doug Kelln, CEO [chief executive officer] of 

SaskEnergy, and Ron Podbielski who is the director of 

corporate affairs for SaskEnergy. 

 

I had the opportunity to meet with Kevin and Doug this 

morning for a good discussion about the joint venture that is 

taking place between SaskEnergy and Atco, to talk about the 

expansion of the Kisbey gas plant. One of my colleagues will 

have more to say on that earlier. I also had a chance to talk to 

Kevin about the business atmosphere in Saskatchewan, the 

stable business atmosphere that is conducive to doing more 

business here. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like, through you and to you I’d ask all 

members to welcome Kevin Cummings and the SaskEnergy 

officials to the Legislative Assembly this afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 

like to join with the Minister for SaskEnergy in welcoming 

CEO Doug Kelln from SaskEnergy and Ron Podbielski here, as 

well as Mr. Cumming from Atco. Perhaps you can also explain 

to them the virtues of the Atco-Gordon First Nation wind power 

project, that he can help out the Minister for SaskPower 

perchance on that front. But again, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask 

all members to join me in welcoming these people to the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

introduce through you to this Assembly a group of law students 

who will be articling with the Ministry of Justice over the 

coming year. And I’d ask them to stand when I mention their 

name. 

 

Firstly, Marcel St. Onge who began studying law after an 

extensive career working with young people. He is the former 

director of open custody at the Yarrow Youth Farm and most 

recently worked as an advocate with the Saskatchewan 



4162 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

Children’s Advocate’s office. We certainly look forward to the 

unique perspective that Marcel will be bringing to the ministry. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can also advise that Mr. St. Onge has a 

dark part in his life. He’s my neighbour. He lives just down the 

street, and we share a mailbox. His mailbox is the community 

one where everybody stands and visits. So he has spent many 

years enduring my bad wit. 

 

Katrina Stewart comes to us from the University of Alberta law 

school. She is an active volunteer, having participated in Easter 

Seals camps for children with special needs and is a reading 

partner with the Frontier College Students for Literacy. Mr. 

Speaker, Katrina also has some experience playing rugby, and 

the nature of that sport may well give her a good lead into the 

career in law. 

 

Heather Robertson studied law at the University of Manitoba. 

We’re glad to see that she’s come back home to Saskatchewan. 

Before attending law school, Heather was a social worker with 

the Government of Saskatchewan, working in child protection 

and as a support to families with young offender and child 

welfare concerns. She has been a volunteer with Big Brothers 

and Big Sisters and has provided a variety of pro bono legal 

assistance while studying law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in 

welcoming these articling students and wishing them every 

success in their careers in welcoming to their legislature today. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, I’d like to join the minister, the Attorney 

General, in welcoming the new articling students to the 

Legislative Assembly today. I’m glad to see that the Ministry of 

Justice continues to attract such a high quality of articling 

student. 

 

I was going to say that it’s going to be a great personal 

experience for them, but they already bring a great deal of 

experience to the job. And also I wanted to say that it’s a great 

public service that they’ll perform, and I hope that one or two or 

three of them will continue to want to perform that public 

service after their articling here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you I’d like to welcome a large group of guests 

in our gallery today. They are here to celebrate the Rendez-vous 

de la Francophonie 2010. It’s my pleasure to introduce to all the 

members of the Legislative Assembly a young group of 

francophone students from the Monseigneur de Laval school 

here in Regina. For anyone in the gallery this morning, these 

students sang the most enthusiastic version of “O Canada” I 

have heard since the men’s Olympic win. 

 

We also have with us representatives of several francophone 

community organizations that are here as part of today’s 

celebrations. Would our honoured guests please stand and give 

us a wave. I’d like to ask all members to welcome all these 

young people to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

join with the minister in welcoming our guests to the Assembly. 

I’ll have a bit more to say in members’ statements on the 

importance of Rendez-vous. 

 

Mais certainement bienvenue à l’Assemblée législative, votre 

assemblée législative, et grande bienvenue à Rendez-vous aussi. 

 

[Translation: But certainly welcome to the Legislative 

Assembly, your Legislative Assembly, and a big welcome to 

the Rendez-vous as well.] 

 

Welcome to your legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce through 

you and to you to members of the Assembly, a political science 

student association group who are seated in your gallery. 

 

Now the association looks after many of the issues that 

undergraduates and political science students have. And I know 

that we’re going to have a great discussion after question 

period. So welcome here today, and I know all members will 

join with me in welcoming you here. And we want to show you 

how question period works here. I know that you’ll enjoy that, 

and then you’ll get a chance to ask me some questions after. So 

thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 

Saskatchewan that are concerned about the safety of our 

highways, in particular Highway No. 10 from Fort Qu’Appelle 

to the junction of No. 1. Mr. Speaker, this petition clearly states 

that this highway has now become a very important route 

because it leads us and the travelling tourists of our great 

province to our year-round tourist destinations in that area. Mr. 

Speaker, I will read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and 

the junction of No. 1 Highway in order to provide 

improved safety for Saskatchewan’s motoring public. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the good 

folks from Yorkton, Pasqua Lake, Lipton, and Fort Qu’Appelle. 

I so present. 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4163 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 

have the pleasure of introducing a petition that the 

Saskatchewan Student Coalition put together. This petition is in 

support of the implementation of a Saskatchewan scholarship 

fund, as was promised by the Sask Party in the last general 

election. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement the promised Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in Langham and 

Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on the issue of indexing minimum wage, and 

that minimum wage increases are often very sporadic and do 

not always reflect the rising cost of living faced by many 

minimum wage earners, and that indexing the minimum wage 

would ensure that minimum wage earners would be able to 

maintain a standard of living as the cost of living increases. And 

the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens in Moose Jaw 

and Regina. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

presenting a petition today in support of a middle school for 

Warman. And the petition indicates that the Warman 

Elementary School is overcrowded because it was built for 350 

to 400 students and presently there are over 700 students 

enrolled. And they expect that by next fall a further 70 students 

will be enrolled in that elementary school, so they’re indicating 

that this is a community that desperately needs a middle school 

to be built. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize the urgency of a middle 

school for the fast-growing community of Warman. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, all of the petitioners are from the town of 

Warman. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 

rise to present a petition in support of affordable housing for 

Saskatchewan seniors. And we know the increasing living 

costs, including housing, are having a major impact on 

Saskatchewan senior citizens and that more affordable housing 

options would significantly help Saskatchewan seniors cope 

with the cost of living, especially those living on fixed incomes. 

 

[13:45] 

 

And I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to expand 

affordable housing options for Saskatchewan’s senior 

citizens. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed this petition 

come from the town of Marsden. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s almost a full year that people have to wait to get 

into a facility in the Cumberland constituency. And I would like 

to read the prayer as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a petition 

that has been circulated by the Saskatchewan Student Coalition. 

It’s a petition in support of affordable undergraduate tuition, a 

request that the Sask Party’s actions match its rhetoric. The 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average of 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 



4164 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise today and present a petition that’s also being circulated by 

the Saskatchewan Student Coalition. It’s a petition in support of 

reducing the interest on fixed rate student loans to prime, due 

largely to the fact that the students in Saskatchewan are 

amongst those paying the highest amount of interest on fixed 

rate student loans in Canada at prime plus two and a half per 

cent. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately reduce the interest on 

fixed rate student loans to the prime rate of borrowing so 

that students can accumulate less debt and focus their 

finances on building their lives here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Saskatoon and 

Langham, Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand to 

present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan dealing with yet another water situation. And that 

a government ministry has directed that customers may no 

longer treat non-potable water using methods approved by Sask 

Health, and that Furdale residents dealing in good faith with 

SaskWater for over 30 years have paid large amounts for their 

domestic systems and in-home treatment equipment. The 

alternative water supply referred by a government ministry is a 

private operator offering treated, non-pressurized water at great 

cost with no guarantee of quality, quantity, or availability of 

water, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of Furdale 

causing great hardship with no suitable alternatives, to 

exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further water service 

cut-offs by granting the grandfather clause under The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2002 and 

The Water Regulations, 2002, and that this government 

fulfils its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Furdale. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today and present a 

petition in support of withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, the 

results of a stable labour relations environment provide for 

quality work and safe construction sites. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

building trades contracts have supported an apprenticeship 

system of training which result in a highly skilled workforce. 

And the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions are signed by the people in Regina. I so 

present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

rise in my place and present a petition on behalf of residents of 

the province of Saskatchewan who wish to bring to your 

attention that many seniors living in Saskatchewan on fixed 

incomes are victims of physical, emotional, and financial abuse. 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners call upon the Legislative Assembly 

to: 

 

. . . enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which 

would provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and 

economic security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good residents of The 

Battlefords constituency. 

 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again rise to 

present a petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan 

concerned about this government’s disregard for legal and 

constitutional rights. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples, and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so submit, Mr. Speaker. And today’s petition is signed by 

residents of Saskatoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve risen every day 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4165 

within session, I’m pleased to rise again here today and present 

petitions on behalf of Saskatchewan residents as it relates to the 

unprecedented mismanagement of their finances by the Sask 

Party. They allude to the $1 billion shameful deficit that’s been 

built by the Sask Party, and they recognize that this is a problem 

that’s getting worse, not any better, Mr. Speaker. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens of Regina. I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

to present a petition in support of the expansion of the graduate 

retention program. This petition is about fairness and the need 

to maintain some of our best and brightest here in the province. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present on behalf of the citizens of Weyburn and Kenosee 

Lake who have signed this petition. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

Les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

since 1993, Saskatchewan francophones across the province 

have taken two weeks to celebrate their culture and language by 

participating in a variety of activities organized by schools and 

communities. Les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie is being 

held this year from March 5th to 21st. It will be comprised of 

two national elements: la semaine nationale de la Francophonie 

— National Francophone Week, which is the education 

component — and les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie, which 

celebrates the achievements of the francophone communities. 

 

The Provincial Secretary will host a francophone reception at 

Government House on March 15th. The guest list to the 

reception includes many dignitaries, including francophone 

mayors and members of the advisory committee on 

francophone affairs. 

 

I encourage everyone to reflect on the significant contributions 

of the francophone community and to recognize their special 

place in Canadian history. 

 

Felicitations à toutes les personnes francophones de la belle 

province de Saskatchewan. Merci. 

 

[Translation: Congratulations to all the francophones of the 

beautiful province of Saskatchewan. Thank you.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Merci bien, Monsieur le président. 

 

[Translation: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.] 

 

The weeks March 5th to 21st have officially been proclaimed 

Les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie in Saskatchewan. La 

Francophonie brings together over 54 countries and 

governments who share and cherish the French language and 

culture. Today is the international day of la Francophonie and 

the very heart of the Rendez-vous festivities to celebrate both 

the French language and francophone culture in our great 

province. 

 

Monsieur le président, Les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie du 

5 au 21 mars ont été proclamés officielment en Saskatchewan 

par le ministre des relations gouvernementales. La 

Francophonie s’en compris plus de 54 pays et gouvernements 

qui ont le français en commun. 

 

C’est un honneur pour moi de célébrer cette joyeuse occasion 

en français dans notre assemblée legislative provinciale. Nous 

apprécions beaucoup la diversité que notre communauté 

francophone contribue en Saskatchewan. Les contributions de 

la Francophonie sont indispensable pour le développement 

social, culturel, et economique de notre province durant toute 

l’année. J’encourage tous mes collègues à soutenir les 

francophones tout au long de l’année. Merci, monsieur le 

président, et vivre les fransaskois, et vivre la Francophonie. 

 

[Translation: Mr. Speaker, Les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 

from March 5th to 21st was officially proclaimed in 

Saskatchewan by the Minister of Government Relations. La 

Francophonie is comprised of more than 54 countries and 

governments that have French in common. 

 

It is an honour for me to celebrate this joyous occasion in 

French in our provincial Legislative Assembly. We very much 

appreciate the diversity that our francophone community 

contributes to Saskatchewan. The contributions of la 

Francophonie are indispensible for the social, cultural, and 

economic development of our province during the whole year. I 

encourage my colleagues to support francophones throughout 

the year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and long live the 

Fransaskois, and long live la Francophonie.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 



4166 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

Honouring the Memory of Clayton Gerein 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise in this 

House to honour the memory of a great citizen and athlete in 

the province of Saskatchewan. Two weeks after carrying the 

Olympic torch through Fort Qu’Appelle in January of this year, 

seven-time Paralympian Clayton Gerein lost his battle with 

cancer. Clayton’s story is a testament to the vitality and 

endurance of the human spirit. 

 

While training horses in 1982, Clayton broke his neck. 

However he did not let this unfortunate event hinder his already 

active life. Within two years, Clayton travelled to Los Angeles 

to compete in the 1984 Paralympic Games as a swimmer. This 

experience spurred his interest in wheelchair sports, and so he 

began his absolutely remarkable career as a Paralympian. 

Clayton won a total of seven gold, four silver, and three bronze 

medals. 

 

But Clayton was more than a Paralympian; he was a community 

leader. His work with the Canadian Paraplegic Association 

would go on and does go on to inspire others to see their 

condition as an opportunity for great things. In fact his winning 

and positive attitude earned him the title of Sask Sport’s Male 

Athlete of the Year in 1987, 1996, and 2001. Clayton retired 

from sport after competing in the Paralympic Games in Beijing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Clayton was an incredible role model for us all. 

Let’s ensure that his legacy of athletic excellence and 

community involvement lives on through all of us. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Student Wellness Initiative Toward Community Health 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member from 

Saskatoon Eastview and I had the pleasure of touring the 

SWITCH [student wellness initiative toward community health] 

clinic in the heart of the community of Riversdale in Saskatoon 

on Saturday. 

 

The student wellness initiative towards community health or 

SWITCH is a student-managed, intercollaborative, 

patient-centred clinic where many disciplines — social work, 

medicine, nursing, physiotherapy, psychology, nutrition, just to 

name a few — come together around the client to provide the 

best care possible. The SWITCH health project allows for the 

extension of the hours of the well-utilized Westside clinic. The 

student volunteers provide the services from their respective 

disciplines under the direct supervision of licensed health care 

professionals. 

 

Aside from the direct health care services, SWITCH clients also 

have access to things like a needle exchange; affordable, 

healthy food; immunizations; use of a phone; free child care for 

program participants; advocacy and other programming. 

 

Brenda Jackson, a soon-to-be nurse, says one of the best parts 

of SWITCH for her is the learning that takes place. No matter 

what a textbook says or what takes place in the classroom, she 

has said there’s nothing better than hearing it first-hand from 

the person experiencing it so you can learn from them how best 

to help address the issue. Says Jackson: 

 

You’re learning from the clients, you’re learning from the 

mentors, and the mentors are learning from the students. 

In that interdisciplinary environment, everyone is learning 

from each other. It’s a big house of creativity where 

you’re finding real solutions, not just band-aids. 

 

SWITCH is one of only five student-run primary health care 

clinics in Canada with a fifth opening recently in Regina called 

SEARCH [Student Energy in Action for Regina Community 

Health]. 

 

Members of the SWITCH team will be travelling to Australia 

this spring to share this model with that country which is eager 

to learn about and replicate our success. Saskatchewan can be 

proud to be home to these two innovative and important health 

projects. Please join me in congratulating SWITCH and 

SEARCH for the great work they do in our communities. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from 

Cannington. 

 

Gas Plant Expansion 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 

to inform the Assembly of the completion of a major expansion 

project involving SaskEnergy and Atco Midstream of Alberta. 

Both companies are joint venture partners in the Kisbey gas 

plant in the Cannington constituency and which was purchased 

in 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this $44 million flare gas capture expansion is 

funded jointly by SaskEnergy’s Bayhurst Energy Services 

subsidiary and Atco Midstream. This project increases the 

capacity of the Kisbey gas plant and extends the current 

pipeline gathering system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, projects of this type are good news for the oil and 

gas industry, for the environment, and the Saskatchewan 

economy. Oil producers will reinvest these dollars into further 

exploration, with spinoff effects felt throughout the region. 

Communities such as Kisbey, Arcola, Lampman, and Kennedy 

will all benefit as producers throughout this region now have 

access to expanded gas processing capacity. 

 

This project means more local dollars for everything from 

construction to consumer services. Our government supports 

these partnerships, encourages Crowns like SaskEnergy to 

continue to put Saskatchewan first in their business planning 

today and into the future. 

 

[14:00] 

 

I offer my congratulations to Mr. Kevin Cumming, the 

president of Atco Midstream, who joins us in the Assembly 

today; to Doug Kelln, president and CEO of SaskEnergy, for 

his leadership and vision in securing this and other investment 

opportunities throughout Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4167 

Party Tactics 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Author Irene Roth 

offers us insights into why some kids bully others. Based on 

recent events, these insights seem to apply quite well to the 

Saskatchewan Party. She says, and I quote, “Bullies may have a 

problem that they don’t know how to fix, so they feel 

vulnerable and out of place. Bullies sometimes lack 

self-confidence too. So to compensate for that, they usually pick 

on kids who seem to have self-confidence or have character 

traits or attributes that they don’t have.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the SaskParty is resorting to bullying 

tactics because they have problems that they simply don’t know 

how to fix, like a $1 billion deficit or a trail of broken promises. 

Mr. Speaker, as the opposition, we welcome the extra time. 

 

Or perhaps the Sask Party is resorting to ungovernment-like 

tactics because they feel vulnerable and out of place, especially 

during question period. After all, the Government House Leader 

is in the papers today saying he doesn’t want to extend the 

sitting days because that would mean more question periods. 

 

Whatever the reason, it is clear that just after five days into this 

session — five days — the Saskatchewan Party government is 

going back to its usual intimidation tactics in the hopes of 

forcing the opposition into silence. Mr. Speaker, it won’t work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Employment Statistics 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the ninth 

consecutive month, Saskatchewan has the lowest 

unemployment rate in Canada. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s 

February unemployment rate of 4.3 per cent sits well below the 

national average of 8.2 per cent. 

 

Our province is leading the way in many different economic 

categories. For example, there are 517,400 people working in 

Saskatchewan. There was an . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I think it would be appropriate 

to allow the member to be able to make their statement without 

so much interference that it takes away from the audience’s 

ability to even hear what’s being said. The member from Biggar 

can start over. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the ninth 

consecutive month, Saskatchewan has the lowest 

unemployment rate in Canada. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s 

February unemployment rate of 4.3 per cent sits well below the 

national average of 8.2 per cent. 

 

Our province is leading the way in many different economic 

categories. For example, there are 517,400 people working in 

Saskatchewan. There was an increase of jobs year over year. 

February 2010 saw an increase of 3,100 jobs over last February. 

Mr. Speaker, the numbers from this February are a record high 

for the month. 

 

Of particular note for the member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place, full-time employment increased by 12,000. I say this to 

pre-empt the doom and gloom about our great province that 

comes from the members opposite. At a time when the people 

of our province are working hard and moving forward with 

economic opportunities, some people are still stuck in the past. 

But I guess some people will always want the status quo and 

look back to the old days as something to strive for. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that we are seeing fewer and fewer of 

these backwards looking people in the new Saskatchewan. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Poster 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 

week the Minister of Environment demonstrated an extreme 

lack of judgment by sending out a fundraising poster depicting 

a horrific scene from 9/11. A spokesperson for the fire 

department of New York said, “We do think the use of images 

of the attacks for political or monetary gain, like the image on 

this poster, is in bad taste.” 

 

The event’s guest speaker also said in the New York Post, “It 

was inappropriate without a doubt. They wanted me to talk 

about September 11 and they bundled it with a fundraiser and 

with a pig roast. It wasn’t too bright on someone’s part.” 

 

To the minister: does the minister now realize that her poster 

was in bad taste and was inappropriate without a doubt? 

 

The Speaker: — Members are aware the question should be 

related to a minister’s responsibility or department. That was 

strictly a political event. I recognize the member for Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s chief organizer flat 

out refused to apologize when asked by the New York Post and 

instead said that those who were offended are simply “. . . 

kicking up dust over nothing.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this story has garnered unfavourable 

international attention in both the United States and Australia. 

One comment in the New York Post said, “That image is so 

horrible that no one can convince me there is a need to display 

it anywhere. I’m a native New Yorker and I still cannot watch 

the videotape or look at the still photos.” 

 

To the Minister for Intergovernmental Affairs: does he think the 

New York firefighters, the guest speaker at this event, and those 

who have expressed outrage are simply kicking up dust over 

nothing? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I just reminded the member of the fact 

that questions are to be directed to ministers based on their 

responsibilities and their ministerial responsibilities. When it 

comes to issues outside of ministerial responsibilities, ministers 

. . . 



4168 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Speakers in the past have also ruled in 

this regard. The rules are there. The rules state that if it’s a 

question related to a direct ministerial area, then the question 

can be applied. Or the minister, as we saw a number of years 

ago with the member from Moose Jaw North at the time, the 

minister may or the minister can refuse to answer the question if 

it’s not directly related to ministerial responsibility. The 

member from Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, a few years ago when a caucus 

staffer referred to President Bush as “President Shrub,” the Sask 

Party was in an uproar stating that we cannot afford to offend 

our neighbours to the south and we cannot afford to have 

negative, embarrassing attention. The Sask Party demanded that 

that employee be fired, and that employee was fired. We are 

asking for the same thing for something more egregious. 

 

The Environment minister’s actions have been widely 

denounced across Canada and in the United States. Her actions 

have offended countless people and her actions have brought 

unfavourable and embarrassing attention to our province. 

 

Will the Premier do the right thing and ask this minister to 

tender her resignation today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, when concerns about the 

poster in question were brought forward to the member, the 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] responsible, to 

myself, the government was clear that there was obviously no 

malintent here at all — in fact the event itself was to in part 

highlight the heroism of that day in New York City — and the 

government tendered an apology through the media. It’s my 

understanding that the member herself has been in contact with 

the New York fire department to tender an apology as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think any government in recent history in 

this province has worked harder to improve relations with the 

United States than our government, to open doors in Capitol 

Hill, Mr. Speaker; to open doors to the likes of Senator Kerry 

and Senator Graham and Senator Lieberman; to open doors in 

the White House to important issues of energy and the 

environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we take that relationship very, very seriously. And 

in this case, appropriate steps have been taken, Mr. Speaker, 

and no further action will be taken. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Supply of Health Care Workers 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Cardiac care is in crisis 

because the Sask Party government has failed to recruit 

perfusionists to Saskatchewan and indeed has failed to even 

retain the few we do have. Mr. Speaker, what is the minister 

doing to ensure that this failure doesn’t continue to put people’s 

lives in danger? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, in the two and a half 

years that we have been government, I would say that priority 

number one has been ensuring that we have the proper 

complement of human resources, whether it’s physicians, 

whether it’s nurses, whether it’s nurse practitioners, Mr. 

Speaker, or in this case, the perfusionist. We have worked very 

hard as a government, as well as health regions have worked 

very hard, to make sure they have the proper complement of 

health care professionals. 

 

In this case it is a responsibility of the Saskatoon Health Region 

to ensure they have the proper complement. I heard, after 

speaking to the CEO, that a perfusionist was starting today to 

help deal with the backlog. There are a couple of perfusionists 

away, Mr. Speaker, but the health region is aware of that. 

They’re working to ensure that we have the proper complement. 

 

But what I will say, Mr. Speaker, is there’s been more done in 

the last two and a half years on recruitment of physicians, of 

nurses, Mr. Speaker. It was ignored for far too many years 

under the NDP [New Democratic Party] government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has hung his 

reputation on nurses, I believe, and we’re talking about 

perfusionists at this moment. The perfusionists that we have, 

they work 2,000 hours a year of regular work, 300 hours of 

overtime, and they’re on call for 3,400 hours. There are four 

perfusionists in Saskatoon, two of which are on leave due to 

work-related issues, and the remaining two perfusionists are on 

call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Mr. Speaker, cardiac care is 

in crisis because of this punishing workload. The people are 

exhausted. 

 

The ministry has told Health Sciences Association to wait two 

weeks while they figure out something. Meanwhile nothing is 

happening here and immediate action is needed. What is the 

minister doing today to fix this problem — not hide behind the 

health district — but what is he doing to fix the problem to 

guarantee patient safety? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, all health care 

professionals in this province are extremely valuable. They’re 

also in demand across Canada and around the world, Mr. 

Speaker. But it’s interesting that the member would say, what 

are we doing? I’ve already answered that question. 

 

A perfusionist, an extra perfusionist, started today, recruited by 

the Saskatoon Health Region. Two are on leave. It was 

unforeseen, Mr. Speaker. We don’t have extra staff waiting 

around. If two have to leave unexpectedly, Mr. Speaker, it 

leaves us in a bind. But I will say that the Saskatoon Health 

Region has done an excellent job. They have one starting as of 

today that will start lightening the load for the two that are 

remaining. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4169 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister says that they’ve hired 

a new perfusionist, but the president of Health Sciences 

Association says the person is having second thoughts about 

coming here because of the workload, and then he may not be 

coming. 

 

Perfusionists are in a group of health care providers who don’t 

have a contract, who have been negotiating for over a year. And 

there is no end in sight for any of them. And some of the issues 

at the table are workload and recruitment and retention. Can the 

minister guarantee today that a new perfusionist is indeed 

coming, and when will they start? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I would hope that 

member opposite would understand that it’s the Saskatoon 

Health Region that hires, actually hires the perfusionist, Mr. 

Speaker. We have the responsibility as a government on an 

overarching plan to make sure we have the proper health care 

professionals. 

 

You know, for years and years under that former government, 

under that former government, Mr. Speaker, they kept the 

College of Medicine at 60 seats. They kept the residency 

positions at 60 seats, Mr. Speaker. They eliminated seats for 

nursing. And, Mr. Speaker, because of that we are facing the 

problems that we’re facing right now. 

 

Our government has changed that attitude and increased seats. 

We have an aggressive campaign to make sure we retain and 

recruit our own graduates, Mr. Speaker. We are making 

progress. It’s slow, but it’s slow because of the hole that that 

former government left us in. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — The minister can play hide-and-seek all he 

wants, but here’s some other facts that he hasn’t taken into 

consideration. His government took over and had $2.3 billion in 

the bank. And what has happened since then? Wait times are 

higher than they’ve been in two years. Doctor vacancies have 

doubled. Rural communities are putting black garbage bags 

over their hospital signs on the highway. The children’s hospital 

is on an indefinite wait-list. Chiropractors are being de-insured. 

And we have a crisis in cardiac care because there aren’t 

enough perfusionists to deal with the punishing workload. 

Because of the Premier’s fiscal mismanagement, the province is 

now $1 billion in debt and the minister is saying, don’t worry; 

be happy. 

 

To the minister: he didn’t solve the problems when he had 

money. How can anybody believe that he can solve the 

problems now when there is no money? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, today in Saskatoon we 

have one perfusionist. There’s a locum coming into the 

province. We have another one starting orientation today, Mr. 

Speaker, back up to the four complement of perfusionists that 

were working in that health region before. The question has 

been answered, and I think by the Saskatoon Health Region 

answered very well. 

 

But I would say, Mr. Speaker, this is a quote from a former 

NDP MLA and a retired physician who says, “It is sheer 

hypocrisy for Judy Junor to carp about rural health care,” Mr. 

Speaker. She was present, and as the present leader of the NDP, 

to start talking about rural health care, Mr. Speaker, because it 

was under their government that 52 hospitals closed and 

hundreds and hundreds of health care workers were laid off, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Medical Education 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, today in your gallery we have a 

group of students from the College of Medicine at the 

University of Saskatchewan. Last year when tuition was 

increased an average of 4.5 per cent across the campus, students 

in professional colleges saw their tuition increase up to three 

times as much. This year it’s already clear that the minister is 

forcing through another tuition hike. It’s just a question of how 

much — likely in the double digits. 

 

When will the minister admit that he has no plan around tuition, 

and he simply takes his marching orders from a disgraced 

Finance minister? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks and resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to take that question on behalf of the government, 

Mr. Speaker. In the time that the government has been working 

towards finalizing the budget, the Minister for Advanced 

Education for the province has been working very diligently 

with our two main universities in the province, Mr. Speaker, to 

make sure that they are using all of their resources as efficiently 

and as effectively as possible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can tell the member that this government is working very 

hard to make sure that all of the programs that the universities 

are offering will continue and continue at a rate and at a tuition 

level that is clearly acceptable to students and to the people of 

this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the students in the College of 

Medicine are among our country’s most talented citizens. The 

students have told me the experience they gain while working 

with practising physicians in the community is irreplaceable. 

These preceptors are vital to the transfer of knowledge and to 

the building of a strong local medical community. Students are 

now concerned that the ratio of preceptors to students is too 

great, placing undue stress on the existing physicians and 



4170 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

reducing the amount of teaching time. 

 

To the minister: when will he admit that there is a shortage of 

preceptors, and when will he commit to fix the problem? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I had through the 

introduction, had talked about the medical students that are here 

today, those were the issues that they were talking about, the 

whole piece around preceptors, Mr. Speaker, and the fact that 

we don’t have enough yet in the province. And I would agree to 

that, and that’s why I announced today $2 million to go to the 

academic health network to work on very issues such as that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But those issues come because there’s been an increase and a 

growth in the College of Medicine for both medical students 

and residents, Mr. Speaker, something that should have been 

done many years ago. Otherwise the province wouldn’t be in 

the situation it is today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Two million dollars went into the program, Mr. Speaker, that 

will address that issue, because the distributive education model 

is the model that we want to see move forward, Mr. Speaker. It 

doesn’t happen overnight, but we’ve got a plan and we’re 

moving in the right direction. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know who prepares the 

minister’s briefing binder, but he’s been using the same answer 

since he was elected, Mr. Speaker. Students came here today 

with a very specific issue: the issue of preceptors, the issue of 

the need for this government to work with partners to ensure 

that there are more preceptors here in the province to ensure 

that these students receive the best possible medical education, 

the education they’re used to and the education that they 

deserve. 

 

My question to the minister, specifically on the issue of 

preceptors: what is he doing to ensure that there is an adequate 

supply of preceptors here in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Let me slow it down, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, this morning I made an announcement: $2 million 

that goes to the Academic Health Sciences Network to look at 

these very issues, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that we have the 

proper complement of preceptors around the province. 

 

I guess we could certainly go back. Let’s go back to the old 

days under the NDP. Let’s roll the clock back, Mr. Speaker, and 

let’s roll it back to 60 seats in the College of Medicine and 60 

residency seats, Mr. Speaker. Then you don’ t have any 

problem about preceptors if you go back 15 years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s not what our government is doing. We’re moving 

forward, Mr. Speaker, and we’re addressing the problems that 

are faced in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the next question, I’d just 

remind members to place the questions through the Speaker and 

not directly at an individual but through the department or 

ministry. I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Forthcoming Budget 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Credible 

sources are telling the opposition that “The budget process has 

been extremely chaotic.” To the minister: does he really think 

Saskatchewan people can afford yet another chaotic budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the budget process has 

been anything but chaotic. It has been very methodical and very 

carefully planned and laid out. It has started, as it normally 

does, in the fall of the year when we ask our ministries to come 

up with the ideas, what they have for their priorities. We went 

through that whole process with the ministries with a great deal 

of detail. 

 

As Treasury Board, we met with ministries and went over their 

specific budgets with a lot of detail. And for the first time, Mr. 

Speaker, in this budget process, we actually met with regional 

health authorities to talk about their budgets because they 

represent such an important segment of the overall budget 

estimates for the year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every year you learn something in terms of how 

you can do things better, and this has been no different than past 

budgets. We’ve been very disciplined. We’ve been very 

methodical. It’s going to be a great budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s intriguing that that minister’s 

perception is always very different than the reality, Mr. 

Speaker. According to insiders, the reason why the budget 

process has been extremely chaotic is because there has been 

“no central theme, no direction, with ministers committing to 

expenditure reductions that they don’t fully comprehend.” 

 

Last year the Sask Party government made revenue projections 

that did not fully comprehend. We all know how that turned 

out. Now they’re slashing expenditures without fully 

comprehending the implications. To the minister: why is the 

Sask Party government making cuts that they don’t fully 

comprehend? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this budget 

has been prepared with a great deal of discipline and caution 

and prudence. That is something we have always exhibited to 

the very best of our ability, Mr. Speaker. And the whole point 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Finance. 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4171 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I think that it is fair to characterize this budget 

preparation as being very meticulous and very methodical, very 

cautious, very prudent on the Finance’s revenue numbers, and 

very disciplined on the expense side. Mr. Speaker, I think that is 

an important objective for any budget preparation process and I 

would like to ask the member opposite, if he has quotes that 

he’s attributing to someone, would he please table those 

documents. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The reciprocal 

to that one might be, that if the minister has any plan, any plan 

whatsoever as it relates to finance, would he table that and share 

that with the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an inside source goes on to tell us: “There is no 

vision. There is no plan. Hence the cuts are not coordinated. 

Rather it’s a random package of reductions.” 

 

Last year it was random revenue projections. This year it’s 

going to be random cuts. To the minister: when will you learn 

that preparing budgets requires careful and thoughtful 

consideration? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 

member opposite might have stumbled on the idea that a budget 

requires careful preparation. I knew it all along, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I would welcome the opportunity, if 

you’re making specific quotes, that you list the source because I 

think that that is the appropriate way in parliamentary 

procedure. But, Mr. Speaker, I can certainly, I can certainly 

confirm that every minister’s been very intimately and detailed 

involved in this process. Every department and ministry has 

been involved in it. The Government of Saskatchewan has 

worked very diligently in preparation of this budget and the 

Government of Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan 

are going to be very proud of it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it gets to my point once 

again. The fact the minister says that all ministers have been 

intimately involved in this process, that scares us, Mr. Speaker. 

That scares us. That scares us when we look to the Minister of 

Energy and Resources that last year said there was going to be 

$3 billion in potash revenues and we’re now cutting a cheque 

for $200 million. What a joke over there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, according to insiders, this is what we have to look 

forward to next week: a chaotic budget; no vision, no plan, no 

central theme, no direction; uncoordinated, random cuts that the 

Sask Party government doesn’t even understand. 

 

To the minister: why are you setting up yet another budget for 

complete failure? 

 

The Speaker: — Before I recognize the minister, I would ask 

the opposition members to allow the minister to respond 

without a lot of undue interference in the ability to respond to 

the question. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what part of 

previous budgets that the member opposite is unhappy with, 

Mr. Speaker. For example, for example, Mr. Speaker, for 

example, do they take . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Well just to remind the opposition 

members that if you want the Speaker to call the House to 

order, you’re just taking away from your opportunity to present 

questions. Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this government 

provided $300 million of tax relief to the lowest income people 

in the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, that was an 

important initiative. We’ve implemented the greatest decrease 

to educational property tax in the history of this province, and 

that was a good indication. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we paid off 40 per cent of the debt of this 

province, and that was an important thing. Mr. Speaker, we 

increased allowances for the most vulnerable in our province to 

protect them against the wages of inflation, and that was a good 

thing, Mr. Speaker. All of those things are important initiatives 

in budgets of this government, and all of them are very 

important. And I’d like to see that opposition suggest that 

they’d roll back any of those important initiatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also invested in an unprecedented way into the 

infrastructure of this province. All of these things are hallmarks 

of a Saskatchewan Party government, and we’re very proud of 

every one of them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The minister who’s supposed to be 

answering questions is asking questions, so I respond. What 

don’t we like about the last budget? The $1 billion dollar 

deficit; the 110 per cent miss on potash revenue projections; the 

double-digit, runaway, out-of-control spending of this 

government; the fact that this government, in just two years, has 

taken this province from $2.3 billion of surplus and a booming 

economy to a $1 billion dollar deficit. That’s shameful. 

 

The fact that when this game started here this year, we had a $3 

billion revenue projection; now we’re making cheques back to 

the potash companies to the tune of $200 million. That’s a 

chronology of failure. We ask that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I agree. 

But I want to make sure the member’s aware of the fact that 

what we’ve agreed to in regards to placing of questions. I would 

ask the member to place his question directly. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — With respect to this chronology of 

failure, I ask the minister: what’s your plan? 

 



4172 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we can 

point with a great deal of satisfaction and pride to the fact that 

Saskatchewan is again leading the nation in very many 

categories. For example, we have the lowest unemployment rate 

at 4.3 per cent and Canada has 8.2 per cent for nine consecutive 

months. Employment is up 3,100 people; 12,000 full-time jobs 

created since February 2010. Nearly 6,000 jobs on saskjobs.ca 

today, Mr. Speaker. We have the lowest youth unemployment 

rate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of these things are very, very important to 

indicate that the economy of this province is doing very, very 

well. And you’ll know exactly what the specific plan is on the 

24th of this month when the budget is tabled in this Assembly. 

 

[14:30] 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

Enhancement to Wildlife Damage Compensation Program 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, on March 11th at the SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] convention, I announced 

enhancement to the crop insurance wildlife damage 

compensation program. Together with the federal government, 

we will provide approximately $2.5 million annually in the 

cost-shared funding of these program improvements. 

 

First, producers will now be compensated for 100 per cent of 

the market value of their livestock killed by predators and up to 

80 per cent of the market value for injured livestock requiring 

veterinary services. Predation has been an ongoing concern and 

this new program feature will help livestock producers address 

this issue. There has never been this type of program in 

Saskatchewan until now. For years, compensation has been 

provided for wildlife damage to crops, and it’s important for 

livestock producers to have the same program benefits available 

to them. 

 

Second, the wildlife damage compensation program will be 

enhanced to include compensation for wildlife damage to crops 

and feed used for swath, bale, and corn grazing. As winter 

grazing is becoming more popular, it is important we provide 

coverage for these losses. 

 

Third, we are removing the $5,200 compensation limit per yard 

site, for wildlife damage to stacked feed. Wildlife do not have a 

limit on the amount of damage they cause, so neither should our 

program. 

 

And lastly, producers will now be compensated for crop 

damage caused by wild boars. There are certain areas of the 

province where wild boars have caused significant damage to 

the crops. Now producers will be compensated for those losses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these program improvements have been requested 

by our producers. These new features will help producers deal 

with wildlife issues and protect their investment. We are 

continually working to improve all of our programs to better 

address the needs of farmers and ranchers. Mr. Speaker, these 

new wildlife damage compensation program features are a step 

in the right direction. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the minister 

for sending across his statement so we could have a look at it. 

And I want to say that we do appreciate that the government has 

decided to provide this assistance. I think it’s a step in the right 

direction. 

 

I might add that it’s a step in the right direction after a failed 

program that was tested. And I think the minister would readily 

admit it, that the paying of $20 per coyote for killing a number 

of thousands of coyotes, I think the total cost of the program is 

about half a million dollars. And at a time when we are at a loss 

to find money for many programs in this province, to pay out 

half a million dollars I think the minister would agree with me 

was a flawed program to say the least. 

 

One farmer, I think he was joking, said that — at least I hope he 

was joking — made the comment that he could get $20 for the 

paws and $30 for the ears in Alberta, and it was more money 

than raising pigs under this government. I think he was joking, 

but it outlines how wrong that other program was. 

 

The fact of the matter is that agriculture in the province has 

changed a great deal in the last two years, and I know that the 

members from rural Saskatchewan will know that. Two years 

ago grain prices were doing very well and farmers were 

flourishing. That’s not the case, that’s not the case today. With 

the collapse of grain prices, grain farmers are struggling. It’s 

fair to say that pork producers . . . The number of animals in the 

province is more than 40 per cent lower than it was when the 

minister because Minister of Agriculture . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . No, that’s true. It’s down by 40 per cent. 

 

No, the numbers the minister is talking about, and he can 

correct me if I’m wrong, but Stats Canada shows that the 

number of hogs in Saskatchewan is down by 40 per cent since 

the Sask Party was elected. And cattle are in trouble as well. So 

any little bit of help we can get, like the program announced 

today, is at least a bit for the farmers of Saskatchewan but it’s 

not enough. While power rates have gone up 20 per cent in the 

last 14 months at the farm gate, and while many of the things 

that farmers use are going up in price and grain prices are going 

down, and there is trouble at the farm gate in this province 

under the tutelage of this Sask Party government, any little bit 

helps. And I do say in closing that I appreciate at least this bit 

that the minister has been able to get out of the Minister of 

Finance to help the farmers of our province. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Cannington on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — For a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington to 

speak to a point of order. 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4173 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

during question period, the member from Regina Rosemont 

quoted from an unknown document and an unknown source a 

number of times. Mr. Speaker, would that member please table 

that document? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Just to 

respond to a point of order, the member knows full well that in 

this House in the process of asking questions, Mr. Speaker, we 

can use information that’s provided. We don’t have to provide 

that information to one another unless you’re using from a 

government document, and we’re not doing so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you to the member for Cannington and 

the member from Regina Dewdney for their comments 

regarding the point of order. However, I would just mention to 

the member from Cannington that ministers are required if 

quoting from direct documents. Private members are not 

obligated to present the information. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 125 — The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2009 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to move second reading of Bill 125, An Act to amend 

the Crown Minerals Act henceforth known as The Crown 

Minerals Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s non-renewable resources are key 

drivers through much of the province’s economy, and they are 

moving forward on our government’s vision for a secure and 

prosperous Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan communities and 

Saskatchewan people are benefiting greatly from the increased 

investment and increased activity in our resource industries. We 

see those benefits in job opportunities and in steadily increasing 

population numbers in our province. 

 

Ensuring that resource industries continue to grow requires that 

we provide those industries with the best support services 

possible from government. We firmly believe this, and that is 

why we are continually seeking new and innovative ways to 

make our processes more efficient and effective, which in turn 

benefits the industry and the entire province. 

 

This is a major aspect of ensuring that Saskatchewan remains a 

competitive place to do business, and initiatives like this will 

help keep our province moving forward. We have learned 

valuable lessons from other jurisdictions when it comes to the 

importance of creating a positive business atmosphere in the 

resource sector, and we continue to apply that knowledge here 

at home. 

 

Over the past two years, our ministry has laid the groundwork 

for a complete transformation of our business activities in the 

area of mining and oil and gas. Beginning in 2009-2010 and 

extending for the next four years, the ministry will undertake a 

complete modernization of its business and regulatory systems 

targeted to the energy and resource sectors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments that we are bringing forward in 

this Bill are necessary to support the implementation of a new 

web-based mineral registry system. Along with the need for 

new regulation-making powers, legislative amendments are also 

required to govern the conversion of pre-existing dispositions to 

the new electronic registry. We need the amendments to allow 

for the creation of an electronic mapping system as the legal 

basis for ensuring new dispositions and the assignment of legal 

status to the electronic records and documents required to 

operate the system. 

 

We’ll be able to move forward with the establishment of 

procedures for resolving disputes that may arise when 

electronic mapping projections are converted to actual boundary 

surveys and to manage the allocation of risk and liabilities 

related to the use of a web-based electronic registry. 

 

These amendments will enable the implementation later next 

year of the new mineral administration registry Saskatchewan, 

the MARS program. The electronic registry system will enable 

mineral rights for precious metals, base metals, uranium, 

diamond, and rare earths to be acquired and managed through 

an online registry. In subsequent years, oil and gas, potash, coal, 

and quarry will also be able to move into online registry 

systems as the relevant regulations are updated. 

 

These amendments are part of our ongoing efforts to keep our 

province competitive and strong. Mr. Speaker, these 

amendments are a result of the consultation with the industry 

and its co-operation throughout. Industry wants and needs the 

government to make these changes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Implementing an electronic registry will reduce the costs of 

acquiring mineral dispositions by eliminating costly ground 

staking. We’ll be able to provide registry access for the 

industry’s use any time of day or night anywhere in the world. 

It will speed up the issuance of mineral dispositions by 

integrating electronic information maintained by the Energy and 

Resources ministry and the geoportal maintained by the 

Information Services Corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the advanced technology will simplify the 

administration and mineral dispositions including the filing of 

reports and the payment of fees. Mr. Speaker, to provide easier 

access to information pertaining to dispositions, earlier transfer 

of dispositions importantly will reduce the need for paper 

documentation. Implementation of new web-based mineral 

registry systems is a win for the government and a win for 

industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am indeed pleased to move the second reading of 

The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Energy and Resources has 



4174 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

moved second reading of Bill No. 125, The Crown Minerals 

Amendment Act, 2009. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise and add some comments to the minister’s 

comments on the Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act, Bill 

No. 125. 

 

There is not many things that the minister and I would probably 

agree on, but when he talks about the non-renewable resources, 

the benefit to this province and also the importance to the 

province — that we can agree on. 

 

They are important to the province and they are important in the 

many ways that the minister referred to: providing jobs for 

Saskatchewan people and providing good wages and supporting 

families right across the province, but also providing jobs for 

young people entering the workforce and also the benefits, Mr. 

Speaker, that we see flowing into the provincial government. So 

it is true. 

 

Now there is something I would like to add, Mr. Speaker. It is 

important that these companies receive appropriate services 

from the province. And that was something also that the 

minister made comment on right when he began his comments 

and initial speech on second reading of this Bill. But I have to 

say, Mr. Speaker, I think this really is a well-earned reputation 

for the people within the mining sector. And when it has to do 

with the Crown mineral Act, whether it is oil and gas, whether 

it is the mineral sector, whether it is precious metals, whatever 

the resource and whatever the activity, Saskatchewan 

bureaucrats and employees within the various departments have 

a very well-earned reputation for providing good service to 

these companies — a professional service and in a very timely 

manner. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, time and time again I have heard comments 

from companies that have dealt both with Saskatchewan and 

Alberta, and have commented on the turnaround time for 

various applications and paperwork that needs to be filled for a 

variety of activities, that Saskatchewan was much more 

efficient at it. 

 

So when we look at moving to an electronic registry, that’s just 

the next step, Mr. Speaker, because so many businesses, so 

many functions that we do on a day-to-day basis are now all 

computerized and technology has taken on a much larger role in 

the world that we see and the world that we live in, Mr. 

Speaker. So this is a natural step for this sector and for the 

minister to move ahead. 

 

Now it was interesting that the minister said that over the next 

four years, there would be a complete overhaul of not only the 

business model, I believe he said, and the regulations when it 

dealt with this whole system. Four years is pretty quick 

turnaround. So I would, I mean, I know when we get into 

committee and we have an opportunity to sit and ask more 

detailed questions of the minister, we will be able to get into the 

timelines: what work has been done to date; what type of 

expense will we see with the whole changeover and 

redevelopment and overhaul, was the words that the minister 

used. 

[14:45] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is important and I know a number of times 

when we were in government, Mr. Speaker, we would do tours 

around to various departments and various areas of the 

province, visit with communities. And I know we had an 

opportunity to stop one time at an office that dealt with 

basically just this area — the maps, the information, and the 

up-to-date information and how it was maintained and kept and 

the work that went on. It was absolutely amazing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that that’s probably one of the 

most eye-opening things about this job. I think any of us when 

we first run for office and are elected to represent our 

communities, we feel that we’re pretty well informed about 

what’s going on, on a day-to-day basis, pay attention to politics 

nationally, probably, and provincially of course. But it is a real 

eye-opener once you have the opportunity to travel this 

beautiful province and just see exactly the amount of work that 

goes on, the variety of the work that goes on. And in this whole 

mineral sector, it is important that that’s recognized and taken 

into consideration. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we look at in this piece of legislation, the 

changes that are being proposed, a great deal of it is, well it’s all 

directly to do with putting in an electronic system. And it lays 

out what needs to change, what will allow the changes to take 

place and the work to begin. And as I said, Mr. Speaker, it puts 

in place a more appropriate piece of legislation to deal with . . . 

Whether it’s transfers or security interests, Crown dispositions, 

the applications that have to be made — it all needs to be done 

as a preparation for an electronic system to be put in place. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be interesting as this moves ahead 

and we have a chance to go through the legislation and ask 

more detailed questions to find out what exactly has been done 

to date, what we’re looking at for a final outcome in four years 

time as the minister said it would be — the overhaul would be 

done within four years — with the other areas to be rolled in. 

I’m not sure whether he meant everything would be rolled in 

within four years or at the end of four years we would start 

rolling in other sectors. He’s nodding his head, so that means 

that we can ask questions after, once we get into committee, on 

this piece of legislation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it looks like a lot of it is just really setting up 

for the electronic registry. And I have to say, going through the 

process with ISC [Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan], going through the whole process with health 

records, it sounds easy. But there are always many glitches that 

we run into. Not that they are not all solvable to the advantage 

of Saskatchewan residents but, Mr. Speaker, it’s a lot more 

difficult than what it sounds. 

 

So I look forward to having an opportunity to ask more detailed 

questions as we move into committee, but I know that there are 

a number of my colleagues that also are looking forward to 

making comments on the changes proposed for The Crown 

Minerals Act. So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 125. Is it the pleasure 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4175 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 134 — The Opticians Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The Opticians 

Act. In developing this legislation, the government has 

consulted closely with the Saskatchewan Ophthalmic 

Dispensers Association. Mr. Paul Johnson, president of the 

association, and his colleagues are in the gallery today. Paul, I 

wish to thank you and your colleagues for your dedicated work 

in helping update the Act in this new Bill. 

 

I would also like to acknowledge the importance your members 

play in our health system and in serving the health needs of 

Saskatchewan people as health professionals experienced in 

providing accurate and appropriate vision, where ophthalmic 

dispensers have a variety of skills essential to building the kind 

of health system we want for this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Ophthalmic Dispensers 

Association has asked for a number of legislative changes to the 

Act. Specifically this Bill will reserve the title optician for the 

profession of ophthalmic dispensers to be consistent with other 

jurisdictions across Canada. And it will also change the name of 

The Ophthalmic Dispensers Act to The Opticians Act to reflect 

the title used by the profession of ophthalmic dispensers in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In similar fashion, it will change the regulatory bodies named 

from the Saskatchewan Ophthalmic Dispensers Association to 

the Saskatchewan College of Opticians. This name change 

reflects the trend among regulatory bodies for this profession in 

other provinces across Canada. At the same time, the change 

from association to college more accurately reflects the 

regulatory function of this professional organization. 

 

The Bill will include new provisions clarifying that the duty of 

the regulatory body is to serve and protect the interest of the 

public, not the interests of its members. The Bill will also 

appoint three public representatives on the council of the 

Saskatchewan College of Opticians, one of whom will serve on 

the discipline committee. Doing so will give the public a greater 

voice in regulations of opticians. 

 

These changes along with other concerns, minor administrative 

detail, will make the Act consistent with other health 

professional regulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to an accessible, 

quality, health care system. We will provide leadership in 

making the changes needed to strengthen and sustain the system 

for the future. For this reason, Mr. Speaker, we believe it is 

important to bring this legislation to the House today. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of The Opticians 

Act. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 134, The Opticians Act. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a 

pleasure to rise and offer a few comments on Bill No. 34, An 

Act respecting the Profession of Opticians and making a 

consequential amendment to The Optometry Act, 1985. Fairly 

straightforward from the comments that the minister made, but I 

have a number of questions for sure that came to mind as we 

were listening to the minister’s comments. 

 

I’m glad that there was consultations with the dispensing 

association and that there had been discussions. And basically, 

from what the minister’s comments were, is that these are being 

done at the request of the dispensing association, recognizing 

not only a variety of skills but a name change that makes us 

consistent or brings us in line with the terminology that’s used 

in other provinces. And that also reflects on the regulatory 

body, the name change. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in some ways, it’s housekeeping. But what 

brought to mind when the minister was making his comments, I 

know that we’ve just dealt with a couple of days ago An Act to 

amend certain Statutes to facilitate Labour Mobility. And I was 

wondering how these tied together and if there was changes that 

were needed, or if the changes were implemented into the 

original Bill that was tabled last fall, Bill No. 128. Or if it was 

even an issue whether The Optometry Act needed the changes. 

And, Mr. Speaker, in looking through, it looks like there was 

some changes in Bill 128 that’s been made to The Optometry 

Act, 1985. 

 

So I’ve been flipping back and forth trying to figure out how 

this all fits together. And I’m sure the minister has thought of 

that when he has put forward the Bill. And I’m sure that he’s 

initiated the appropriate changes, Mr. Speaker, to make sure 

that all self-regulating bodies are up to date, that their skills are 

appropriately recognized, and that the correct terminology . . . 

 

As you’re well aware, Mr. Speaker, there’s a mountain of 

legislation that applies in the province of Saskatchewan, and it 

is almost a full-time job to make sure that it is up to date, 

appropriate, using correct terminology. Because not only does 

the process of governments change, but also all of these 

professions are forever changing, forever updating their skills, 

improving areas of operation. And legislation needs to keep 

pace with these professions. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that there is not a lot of issue with 

what’s being done. But I do know that my colleagues would 

like to take a closer look at it. So at this point in time I would 

adjourn debate on Bill 134 until a number of my colleagues 

have also had an opportunity to speak to it. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

adjourned debate on Bill No. 134, The Opticians Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



4176 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 117 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 117 — The 

Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to join in the 

debate today on Bill 117, An Act respecting Hunting, Fishing 

and Trapping. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think there are concerns from people in the 

Cumberland constituency, also in the North, that actually do 

trapping. And the process that a Bill like this has come forward, 

there’s so many concerns that people have and they’re not sure. 

And I think the government of the day has given people who do 

trapping for a living . . . And as part of their culture as First 

Nations and Métis and northerners, it’s an inherited right for 

them to do that, and they have done it for generations and for 

many years. 

 

And when I look at this Act, and I realize they want to respect 

hunting, fishing, and trapping, and it’s fine to say that to show 

the respect and have a heritage day and honour our hunting and 

fishing and trapping. But always there are some concerns and 

caution that people have. And we don’t know exactly where this 

Act will go and what else will come of this Act. You know, we 

have certain regulations that after the fact things are passed. 

People don’t ask the questions, and we have an opportunity to 

debate it. 

 

And I am very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to get into this debate to 

discuss an Act. And I know it seems harmless. And some 

people will say, oh pass it, and you know, it’s harmless. It’s 

good for everybody. It recognizes one day, November 15th I 

believe is the day they want to recognize each year. But there 

are concerns back home and in the North with some of the, I 

guess, regulations and Acts that have been passed by the Sask 

Party. There’s so many concerns about the duty to consult and 

accommodate from First Nations and Métis people and 

traditional land users that this government, any time it brings in 

an Act when it comes to fishing, hunting, trapping, it’s quite a 

concern to some people. 

 

And just to allow, you know, an Act like this to go ahead 

without debating it, Mr. Speaker, and truly understanding — 

what else will come? This is one start. I’m not sure why an Act 

like this is needed to have a Heritage Day, to honour a day 

respecting, they say, the trappers. 

 

When there’s regulations passed, Mr. Speaker, that really to be 

honest with you, when I think of just one, I want to give an 

example that’s been brought to my attention by people back 

home in the Cumberland constituency. You know, they’re 

30-some years old. They’ve trapped a long time. They trapped 

with their grandparents, with their parents. And now they’re 

asked that they have to take a course in order for them to get a 

hunting, a fur licence, to get a big game licence. It’s a little 

concerning to them and to myself to find out that there are 

regulations out there that this government has passed, supported 

to take away. 

 

Who did they consult when they went and made these new 

regulations, you know? I’m looking at, you know, a copy of it. 

People born after January 1st, 1997 must graduate from a 

firearms safety or hunting education course in order to hold or 

apply for a Saskatchewan gaming or fur licence. The individual 

should be prepared to present proof of training when purchasing 

or applying for a licence. First-time trappers. 

 

Well that’s a regulation I realize of this government passed in, I 

believe, 2009. I’ve had people asking when these regulations 

came out, and I guess Acts, who do they consult with, Mr. 

Speaker? And I honestly have trouble to find out anybody that 

they’ve consulted with or they talked to in the First Nations and 

Métis community and trappers. Some people are very 

concerned where we’re going with this. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And their track record as a Sask Party government is not good 

when it comes to duty to consult and accommodate First 

Nations and Métis. It’s kind of appalling what’s been going on. 

And I have to wonder what’s on their agenda. You know, we 

want to recognize and say we respect hunting, fishing, and 

trapping. And there’s always these concerns from people back 

home. What are they up to? It’s not as simple as we sometimes 

think that, you know, will this affect their traditional trapping? 

Will it affect somebody who’s a traditional commercial 

fisherman, hunter hunting for sustenance? And a lot of First 

Nations and Métis and northern people do. And I guess you can 

look at an education. 

 

So if I look at a regulation, and if they’re willing to go this way 

with a regulation that was passed and ask that a trapper who has 

trapped for 30-some years to get a course in hunter safety or 

have to show that they’re, I guess, certified or have the 

experience, well I think 30-some years on the trapline with their 

grandparents, with their parents . . . I find it a little appalling 

and I think, you know, alarming that we expect somebody with 

30-some years as a trapper to actually go out and have to get a 

course, take hunter safety. I mean to me it just doesn’t make 

sense. And then when you ask them, as a trapper, were you ever 

consulted? And I haven’t found anybody. 

 

That just goes to show you, Mr. Speaker, where these guys are 

willing to go. It’s about a trust thing. And any time, Mr. 

Speaker, you have a government willing to, you know, say they 

respect and want to have an Act to name a day, Bill 117, well I 

wonder where they’re going and what’s the motive behind it, 

Mr. Speaker. What is that motive behind respecting it? 

 

We have respected the trappers who have 30-some years. I 

don’t need to have a government come up with a regulation to 

tell me that we should respect a trapper or a commercial 

fisherman who’s gathered food and has done that as a living — 

traditional, lived off the land, and supplement their income. 

Why should we expect that they should have to take a course? 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4177 

Again it goes back to the Sask Party government’s duty to 

consult and accommodate with First Nations and Métis and the 

land users. You guys have no intention on working with them 

and consulting. You just want to get your own agenda. You 

want to bring legislation that, for whatever reason, you think is 

best for them. You want to tell First Nations and Métis what’s 

good for them. And the trappers, fishermen, traditional land 

users, and people who hunt for subsistence as First Nations — 

an inherent right. 

 

You know, the Supreme Court of Canada makes it very clear. 

The Crown has the obligation to accommodate, to consult First 

Nations and Métis, Aboriginal people. The Crown does; you 

have. This government has an obligation to do that. And I see 

people telling me that they were not consulted when these 

regulations were changed. They’re very concerned; they’re 

alarmed. And nobody seems to really want to face these 

challenges that they’re having. I think it’s up to the government 

to face them. You guys have an obligation as the government, 

the power to be, to make sure that First Nations and Métis 

people, northern people are accommodated, that they feel like 

they’ve taken part in a debate, that they’ve had their say. 

 

They know the land. Nobody knows the land better than some 

of our First Nations and Métis and northern trappers. They 

know the land. They breathe it; they eat it. And they truly 

understand. 

 

And I find it a little . . . No, I don’t find it a little, I find it just 

appalling that we change regulations that impact traditional land 

users. We go in there and it just goes back to show what the 

Sask Party’s all about. Your agenda, I don’t know what it is, but 

people are concerned, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when I look at, you know, the Bill 117, you want to support 

it because you think maybe it’ll be a good thing to recognize 

and honour hunting, fishing, and trapping. But on the other 

hand, Mr. Speaker, I wonder what’s next. What would this 

government table next when it comes to traditional land use? 

Well what’s the agenda? 

 

And I’m very concerned that First Nations, Métis, traditional 

users of the land, Mr. Speaker, will not be consulted. And this 

Bill 117, just watching what’s gone on in the last two and a half 

years of this government, the Sask Party government, it truly 

sends some concerns out there. And people aren’t feeling like 

this government truly is taking the best interests of the 

commercial fishermen, the trappers, and the traditional land 

users. 

 

The government talks about it. It comes up with a draft policy 

framework for co-operation and all that, and they say, oh yes 

we’ve gone out, we consulted with the people, and this is what 

they want. Here it is. But you know, a lot of people are being 

affected by some of the legislation that of course may affect 

them, may not. But the ones that are truly affected, has this 

government gone out and, Mr. Speaker, talked to them? Make 

sure that their concerns . . . 

 

And, you know, you go back and you think about the fish 

management regulations. Who did they consult? And this goes 

back to here’s another Bill we have, 117, hunting, fishing, 

trapping. Who did they consult, Mr. Speaker, when they went 

out and changed this and come up with a draft? You know, fish 

management regulations, policy, plan, whatever you want to 

call it, it’s concerning that they don’t go out and consult with 

the people. They just want to say, here’s what we have for you. 

It’s good for you. Accept it. Well that isn’t good for the people 

in the North. It isn’t good enough for the rest of Saskatchewan 

people. They should be appalled. Demand, hold the government 

accountable. 

 

We have an opportunity to come here and debate and talk about 

Bills that will affect traditional land users, First Nations, Métis, 

northerners, trappers, fishers, hunters. We find it so easy to pass 

regulations or Acts, whatever it will be, and especially this 

government. To actually go out and consult, I don’t see it. We 

don’t hear it out there. Mr. Speaker, they just want to go out and 

this is what’s good. Here it is. That’s the way it’s going to be. 

Well that’s not good enough, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Traditional land users, First Nations who hunt and fish and 

gather for food, have a right. And there’s a process and this 

process is supposed to work for everyone in our province. But, 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe there’s enough. I don’t believe that 

this government’s doing enough when it comes to the file of 

duty to consult and accommodate. It’s appalling. They know 

that, Mr. Speaker. It’s very clear. You’re going to do the 

cheerleading one day a year to say, oh we have a heritage day, 

November 15th. Wow, isn’t that . . . We recognize, and don’t 

we respect the hunting and fishing and trapping that goes on? 

That’s not enough. You have an obligation as a government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don’t think this Bill actually, to be honest, is going to do 

anything. I wonder why it’s even here. What’s it supposed to 

accomplish? What’s behind it? And I know people back home 

want to know, why all of a sudden have a heritage Bill? 

Traditional land users, hunters, fishers, they are a very proud 

people. They do it for a living. They have years and years . . . 

They have more experience. They should be teaching this 

course, giving a course, not expecting someone with 30-some 

years to have to go take a course. It’s appalling. But regulations 

are passed. They have to follow. I know some that couldn’t get 

their fur licence because they didn’t have the scores. That to me 

is appalling. 

 

So when I look at Bill 117, I sometimes wonder, is this a start to 

something else? Where else will they go? Oh, they say, oh it’s 

to honour you and respect you. One day we’re going to honour 

and respect trappers, fisher, hunting . Well I’m a little 

concerned. Why don’t you take that one day and have First 

Nations, Métis, traditional land users, hunters, fishers, trappers 

come in and sit with them and truly do the duty to consult and 

work with them? You know, that’s something I’d like to see. 

Let’s spend the day doing that. But no. No, that doesn’t happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know back home people are very proud — the 

trappers, the fishers. And they want to make sure that . . . It’s 

part of their culture. It’s not just . . . some maybe subsidize their 

income a little bit. They try their best. 

 

And sometimes they’re impacted by the mining sector or by 

industry and whatever come into their traditional lands. And a 

lot of times, they’re not consulted. You know, you look at it 

and, Mr. Speaker, some of them are very frustrated and I think 



4178 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

sometimes feel left behind, that somebody’s allowed to come in 

on their traditional land, destroy their trapline, impact it so 

greatly that the animals flee. They don’t come back. They don’t 

come back. Once an area is disturbed, Mr. Speaker, they don’t 

come back. It’s very concerning. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, that we look at, oh some of the 

business, that there’s outfitters that impact traditional land 

users, the outfitters. And this Act recognizes maybe some of the 

. . . Oh, let’s see. I’m trying to make sure that I word this 

properly, Mr. Speaker. We have a number of people who, I 

guess as a business, tourism business. Let’s see, who else does 

this? 

 

You have some of the people actually, outfitters. You look at 

what the outfitters are accomplishing, some of the outfitters. 

And they will, Mr. Speaker, be outfitters that will enter a certain 

land and, for some reason, without consulting the trappers or 

the traditional land users, the outfitters will go in or the 

government grants them licence to go and hunt bear, big game, 

go impact on a land that somebody has occupied for maybe 

generations. 

 

Just goes to show you, the people back home are losing control 

over their traditional land and they’re upset. They’re appalled, 

and they should be. They were there. They have a footprint and 

there’s an imprint of them. It could have been their 

great-great-grandfather, great-great-grandmother. 

 

You know, I just find it, Mr. Speaker, very alarming and again 

appalling that a government would not do the duty to consult 

and accommodate before they go and allow outfitters, before 

they allow anyone to go on. Very disappointing. And you know 

what? It’s a good point, Mr. Speaker. It is very disappointing 

that this government, the Sask Party government does not take 

the duty to consult and accommodate more serious, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s appalling, and they should be ashamed. 

 

There’s more work has to be done, and I know we will keep 

them on their toes. And there’s going to be a process, and it will 

come before this Bill. Bills will come here. We’ll debate them. 

We’ll talk about them. 

 

But what’s really sad is when I go back home, and I have 

people approach me, Mr. Speaker, and they’re concerned about 

legislation or Acts that are going to impact their traditional 

lands. They’re unhappy. They say, why weren’t we consulted? 

Once somebody’s on your land — and you have a traditional 

land — and somebody’s going in there and just doing what they 

want, they didn’t talk to you. They just show up. To me that’s 

appalling, and it should be to anybody. 

 

There should be more . . . Yes, there should be more protection. 

We put more protection into the wild ponies than we have on 

protecting First Nation and Métis rights. That’s appalling to me 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No. And who do they consult on 

that one? They didn’t consult First Nations. They didn’t consult 

traditional land users. They didn’t consult the Métis. What did 

they do? 

 

[15:15] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, going back to this Bill, Bill 117. You know, 

it’s interesting. I don’t know how it’s going to impact my 

grandchildren. I don’t know, you know. I’m going to talk to 

them a little more about it; I have to be honest. One day a year 

we’re going to recognize and say, oh what an honour. We’re 

going to honour the, you know, hunting and fishing and 

trapping. They don’t want to be honoured in that way for one 

day in November by this government and an Act that does that. 

They want respect 365 days a year. 

 

So to tell me that one day out of the year this government’s 

going to pass an Act to shed some light on a heritage day is 

appalling again. Respect them 365 days a year, Mr. Speaker. 

They have a right. They have been there for generations. They 

know the land. If you will consult them, they will tell you 

what’s best for it, what’s the right way to go, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when I think about Bill 117 and the impact, you know, I was 

sitting here thinking about it and some of the people that have 

made comments to me: how come the government want to 

recognize one day a year? And how come they’re coming out 

with regulations, whether it’s for traditional land use, whether 

it’s trapping, fishing? 

 

You look at the fish management policy they’re coming up 

with. Well they call it a draft. That’s got to be so concerning out 

there to so many people. But have they gone out and consulted? 

No. Do they care? No. But the Crown made it very clear, you 

know, and the Supreme Court made it very clear, the Crown 

had the obligation. 

 

So let’s make sure that the NDP and the opposition holds them 

accountable so that the people that truly are using the land for 

hunting, fishing are recognized, that are using it traditional — 

not with barriers and ways of telling them they can’t get a fur 

licence because they didn’t take a course. They’re 30-some 

years, Mr. Speaker, that they’ve been on that land, trapping, 

hunting, and they need a course by some regulation. 

 

So I wonder where Bill 117 will go. Is it a start of something 

else? I don’t trust them. Back home they don’t trust this 

government, the Sask Party government; they do not. They’re 

very concerned. Your track record in the last two and a half 

years is not very good. So don’t say and tell the people out there 

that you do the duty to consult. I mean that’s your opinion; you 

may want to say that. 

 

So when I see Bill 117, Mr. Speaker, the way it will impact and, 

you know, a heritage day, the heritage Act, one day, November 

the 15, again I want to go back to this — I’m concerned who 

will it impact, Mr. Speaker. Will it impact some of our 

commercial fishermen back home, the trappers, you know? The 

hunting, who gather for some . . . I know a lot of the First 

Nations hunt on a regular basis. 

 

The Métis have won their inherent right. The Métis have a right 

to hunt and fish and trap. And it’s a tough one. They should be 

given that right and the government should come up with an 

Act that does that, that allows them to recognize, which the 

Supreme Court of Canada has. 

 

So this Bill 117, you know, to recognize hunting and fishing 

for, again, one day a year. One day a year. You know what? It 

should be coming out with something that says, honour and 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4179 

respecting them with a duty to consult 365 days a year, is what 

that government should be doing — not one day, you know. 

 

You go back home and you watch the fur business and you talk 

to some of the people that are actually out there. They’re 

working hard. They’re trying to make a living. They 

supplement their income with, you know, trapping, fishing, and 

they’re doing an excellent job. They share it with their 

grandchildren. They want to make sure that the next generation 

knows. 

 

But you know, it’s concerning to see how their land is being 

impacted. And every time the Sask Party and this government 

changes regulations or an Act, it impacts them, and greatly. And 

it’s alarming to them, but they don’t feel like this government 

cares. It’s got an agenda. It’s working on that. 

 

Tourism is good. It’s wonderful for everyone. There’s some 

business. But sometimes the outfitters impact and there are 

times where it’s not good. But again, if the opportunity comes 

for a business the Sask Party, the government supports the 

outfitters to go in an area. I’ve had people concerned. They 

weren’t consulted when the government gave somebody so 

many licences to go in and shoot bear on their traditional land. 

They weren’t consulted. They weren’t even talked to. They just, 

that’s the way it is. Sorry, that’s how we’re doing it. That’s the 

way the regulations are. That’s the business. 

 

So your track record as a government, Sask Party government, 

when it comes to the duty to consult and accommodate First 

Nations, Métis, traditional land users, trappers, fishers, is 

terrible to be honest, Mr. Speaker. It’s terrible. It’s a shame. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, there’s going to be a lot of regulations. 

And I imagine the government will be bringing them forward. 

And they’ll come before, I guess if it’s an Act, it will come 

before the House. If it’s the regulations, it will go to order in 

council. It’s concerning to a lot of us back home, the impact it 

will have on us when we’re not consulted and talked to, when 

we don’t sit around a table and get a chance to express our 

concerns and the impact it will have on our generation and after 

generation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are so many different things that impact 

traditional land use. The government has an obligation to make 

sure it works with those people, those individuals, to make sure 

that they’re protected and their rights are protected. Honour 

them. Show them the respect that they deserve. Don’t come out 

with an Act for one day — November the 15th — we’ll respect 

hunting, fishing, and trapping. Don’t try to sell that. It’s not 

right. There should be the respect 365 days a year that this 

government should honour. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, regulations come out. Acts come 

out and different people have input. But I know for a fact the 

people I have talked to personally on this matter, they were not 

talked to. They didn’t have a chance to say how it would impact 

them. But now they’re being told. They’re being denied a fur 

licence because they don’t have a course, but yet they’ve been 

on the trapline for 30-some years. It doesn’t even make sense. It 

doesn’t make sense, Mr. Speaker. So every . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: —Where is the common sense? 

Mr. Vermette: — Where is the common sense? There you go. 

There’s none. No common sense. So, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 

117, as far as I see it, it’s a could be a start to something and we 

don’t know where it’s going to go. 

 

This government can pass certain Acts and want to bring them 

before . . . But I know that I’ll talk to the people back home to 

make sure that when we come in here to debate these things we 

know what’s going on, how they’re being impacted back home, 

how they’re not feeling consulted, how they’re not feeling a 

part of the process when a decision on regulations or an Act is 

made. 

 

You know I find it’s . . . You know, I talked to my brothers and, 

I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, they love to hunt. And you know 

being Métis people, we have an inherent right to hunt. And I 

find it pretty alarming and concerning that when they want to 

go out and hunt for sustenance, you know, there’s all these 

regulations that may come into effect to stop them. And some 

will go and hunt and some are not scared. Some are challenging 

it, and they’re challenging them in court, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know to honour Métis people who go hunting and 

gathering fish for sustenance . . . Fishing — give you another 

thing — you know they love to do this. And sometimes people 

have done it for generation after generation. And now they’re 

being told, no you can’t. Supreme Court of Canada makes it 

very clear the Métis have won that right. We’ve been 

challenged in this province on different times. I think it’s time 

that we don’t recognize the Métis for their . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Yes, their tradition. And I don’t think it’s time 

that the Métis should have to anymore. 

 

Why don’t you bring an Act in that way that will see the right, 

that they’re the rights bearer of the land to hunt and fish for 

sustenance and gather for their family, that they provide? Why 

don’t you bring an Act like that in that covers them for 365 days 

a year — instead of playing — honouring that? So there’s many 

challenges. 

 

I talked to my uncles and, you know, they’ve got concerns 

about where this government’s going on the traditional Métis. 

Well you know they’re wondering what exactly would this Act 

do, you know when you ask them, recognize hunting and 

fishing for one day out of the year. How come we’re not 

recognized 365 days a year? It’s very interesting. 

 

So not only does the younger generation talk about it, Mr. 

Speaker, but the older generation as they move on are 

wondering, what’s this government’s plan for us? We had a 

traditional lifestyle. And you know if they want to hunt and 

gather for sustenance, it’s very clear. But sometimes you know 

people are challenged. And the government comes along and 

says, no you can’t. And it’s regulations and Acts, I guess, that 

are passed here. 

 

An Hon. Member: — What do the elders tell the youth? 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Well the elders tell the youth . . . And this is 

interesting. The elders say, through our eyes and through what 

the elders have gone through — and they have hunted and 

fished for generations — and what they’ve learned, that’s part 

of the culture. And they’re trying to bring them back, Mr. 



4180 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

Speaker. They’re trying to bring the youth to their culture — 

hunting, fishing. It is living a traditional lifestyle. They’re 

working hard. 

 

There’s some programs out there that are a huge success, going 

back and getting in tune, in touch, going back to the culture that 

they were very proud of. First Nations and Métis are a very 

proud culture — like many cultures are — their traditional 

lands and the traditional lifestyle. And there’s been challenges, 

Mr. Speaker. But you know what? They’ve got over those 

challenges. They’ve worked with people and sometimes, you 

know, the battles were long and hard. 

 

But you know, sometimes, Mr. Speaker, they worked through 

them, and they felt like the government heard them. But this 

government right now, Sask Party government, doesn’t hear 

them. They know that. They’re not happy about that. They 

know they have rights, inherited rights. And it’s time that, you 

know, Mr. Speaker, it’s time that the government act on that 

and respect the Métis for their hunting and fishing. It’s time. So 

let’s bring in an Act . . . Why don’t they bring an Act in that 

gives them recognition 365 days a year? 

 

And let’s go back. I just want to make sure we talk about our 

elders and the respect they have for the land, the traditions that 

they have, and what they want they want to bring back to their 

people, the pride in their culture. They’re very proud, and they 

should be very proud. They have a lot to be proud of. I am very 

proud as an Aboriginal person. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, so when I see a Bill coming forward 

like 117, you’re going to recognize again and I just — one day 

a year — I wonder where it’s coming from. What’s behind the 

agenda for that? One day we’re going to recognize hunting, 

fishing, and trapping. And to me, that’s concerning. 

 

You know, they can say, oh just support it. It’s a Bill. It’s good. 

You know, when somebody tells me oh just support it, it’s good 

for you — no way. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Just trust me. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Trust me. Yes, right, trust us. Can you 

imagine that, Mr. Speaker — trust us? We see their track 

record. Well we’ve seen their budget. Trust their budgets? What 

a joke that one was. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go back and think about Bill 

No. 117. You know, really when you look at it, what’s behind 

that, Mr. Speaker, I wonder. What is behind that Bill? What is 

this a start of? What else are we going to have one day to 

recognize? We’re going to take things away that you used to get 

365 days a year and we’re going to recognize it for one day and 

we’re going to make an Act for it. That’s what concerning to 

some people. They’re wondering where that’s going. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this time I’ve shared some things from what 

I’ve heard from people that trap. They’re concerned. They can’t 

get their fur licence because of the . . . They’ve been trapping 

30-some years. You know, this individual was very concerned. 

He spent more time than anybody, than others have, the one 

about this. With his grandparents, he was on the trapline. He 

grew up and he learned his culture. He truly knows how to hunt, 

fish. He could give this course. But you know what? He 

couldn’t get a fur licence because the regulations say he had to 

go take a course. 

 

He just found it so frustrating. And you know what? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Where’s the common sense? 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Yes. Go back to that. You know, I’ve heard 

different people say, common sense. Where’s the common 

sense here, Mr. Speaker? Sometimes, I don’t know, the motives 

behind people and what they say sometimes are different than 

what they do. So I think it’s time that we make sure that, Mr. 

Speaker, we get a chance to debate this 117 more. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And I think some of us are going to talk to some of the trappers, 

the fishers, the hunters to make sure how this will impact them. 

And will it impact them? We don’t know for sure. Because we 

don’t know what this is the start of. We don’t know where it 

came from. Why is it even here? Whose agenda? Whose agenda 

is this? I wonder. 

 

First Nations and Métis, they know. They’re proud. They don’t 

have to have one day to respect their culture. They respect the 

land. They respect the wildlife. They will manage things well. 

They have done it for generation after generation. They don’t 

need somebody to come in and give them one day of 

recognition. They truly know how to manage the land, the 

resources. 

 

But you don’t consult them, First Nations and Métis. And you 

need to do more of that. This Bill should go before them and 

see what they think about it before we enact it: make sure they 

accept it; make sure they even want it. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this point, you know, I’m trying to . . . I 

know my other colleagues want to get in on it and I want to let 

them get in on the debate. You know, I’m very pleased and 

honoured that I had an opportunity, especially when I go back 

home. And I can share with the community members that are 

there in the Cumberland constituency that truly trap, fish, hunt, 

that have concerns about the Sask Party government’s, you 

know, dealing with certain issues and topics. Their track record 

is not very good, not very good at all, Mr. Speaker . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well okay. I’ll tell you about it. 

 

You know, they talk about budgets and they come and present 

certain information. Some of them even talk about $3 billion 

potash. And, you know, they come back and they have to write 

cheques, rebate cheques back. I don’t know what you call them, 

but it’s a little alarming. Two hundred and, I think, four million 

dollars in a refund cheque? Well you know, refund cheque? 

Like that’s kind of appalling. That’s sad. 

 

You know, I can tell you more about some of the things they’ve 

done on roads in the North. Well roads — on housing. It’s 

terrible . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well you guys want to 

know more. Okay, they’re asking over there, Mr. Speaker, for 

more. So, Mr. Harrison, I will do that. The Minister of 

Municipal Affairs wants to hear more. I’ll pass that on. 

 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4181 

You know, you look at some of the conditions of our housing. 

You look at some of the roads and the infrastructure. It’s not 

very good, Mr. Speaker. Terrible. So there’s a track record right 

there. I don’t know if they want to hear more about some of the 

things that they’re not doing to the North or to the rest of the 

province. But you know, I’d like to go back now, Mr. Speaker, 

and really talk about Bill 117, you know. 

 

It’s touched a lot of people and I think, Mr. Speaker, common 

sense, common sense would tell you to go and consult First 

Nations and Métis and the traditional land users, northerners, 

before you bring Bills like this forward. But do they? No, of 

course not. That’s commonsense things to do. That’s the right 

thing to do. Make sure you know. Well you know, again I go 

back to this, Mr. Speaker. I know a lot of my colleagues would 

like to get on to this debate, so I’ll share you a little bit more, 

Mr. Speaker, then. 

 

Well it’s interesting. You know, I’m not sure how budgets are 

going to affect Bill 117. Except you can see what will budgets 

impact. Are we going to be able to have the balloons and do the 

cheerleading with this budget that’s coming down? I hope so. 

When this thing passes, I hope with the new budget there’ll be 

money in it for having the cheerleading and the balloons that 

they’re so used to using and they could cheer loud — loud, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I hope . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, yes, yes, they 

might have enough money in that budget. Well maybe some of 

us could lend them some so they could buy a cake. You know, 

that would be nice . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well there 

you go. What’s a party. So they want to have a party. So 

hopefully, Mr. Speaker, that when we celebrate this Bill — if it 

passes, Mr. Speaker, if Bill 117 passes — that there’ll be 

enough money in this budget and, you know, the way they’ve 

done that, that there’ll be enough in the new budget on March 

24th to buy balloons and cake and to do a little bit of a 

celebration on this if that’s what they want to do. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well no, we 

won’t even go there because like I know, you know, I want to 

stay focused on Bill 117. 

 

And some of the money that they might be able to find in the 

budget to have a party and celebrate, you know, should this Bill 

ever pass, you know . . . And it might pass, you know; it might 

not. But it’s nice to know that we have time to discuss it and 

make sure that at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, that we truly 

have an opportunity to debate it, to make sure that people that it 

will be impacted had a chance to share with the official 

opposition — and I hope with the government members — how 

it will impact them on the traditional trapping, fishing, hunting. 

 

And I think it’s time that the government listen to those 

individuals. It’s time. Come and join us. We’ll share with you 

around the North. We’ll tell you what we need. Better ideas, 

Mr. Speaker. You can learn from northern people. They will tell 

you. First Nations and Métis, traditional trappers, land users 

will tell you the best way to manage the resources. They have a 

lot of knowledge and they care. They truly do, Mr. Speaker. 

There is a compassion when these people speak. They know the 

land. They understand that they’ve been through cycles. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this time, I hope the government will reach 

out to traditional land users, First Nations and Métis, and make 

sure that they’re hearing their concerns and how Acts like Bill 

117 impact them — that they truly do care and want to listen to 

northern people. 

 

And you know, the Aboriginal . . . And being Aboriginal, I 

want to just say, there’s an opportunity for government to reach 

out and I truly hope they will reach out to the Aboriginal 

communities. They are the traditional land users. They hunt, 

they fish, they gather for sustenance. It’s very important about 

some of the traditions, and we must protect that. And I 

commend what First Nations and Métis people and northern 

people and traditional land users are doing to protect their lands. 

And they need to do more, and we need to protect them. And 

we need to stay focused and work with them very hard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time — and again, it’s been an honour to 

share some of the concerns from back home, some of my own 

thoughts, and my concerns, some of my own experiences — at 

this time I would like to move adjourn this debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 117. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join 

the debate on Bill 117 on the hunting and trapping and fishing 

— a day, Mr. Speaker, to recognize the important role, Mr. 

Speaker, that these individuals have played in our province over 

the years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and it’s a true honour, a true honour to follow in 

the footsteps or follow the speech after . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Why is the member, 

Government House Leader, on his feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — It’s tradition in this House, Mr. Speaker, 

that members speak from their seat, not from a neighbouring 

seat, Mr. Speaker. The member has simply moved over now. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

stand here and enter into this debate. I know my seatmate, he 

becomes very animated when he speaks. And the arm 

movements, Mr. Speaker, I was simply being careful that I 

would not get a cuff on the ear or a whack on the head that I 

wouldn’t appreciate. So I’m glad to be in my seat, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When looking at Bill 117, an Act representing hunting, fishing, 

and trapping, it’s important to examine the motives. It’s 

important to examine why individuals on the opposite side 

would find it appropriate, would think that it’s the best 

approach to bring forward this type of legislation. 

 



4182 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

There are a variety of motives, I think, that members opposite 

have when they are bringing forward a piece of legislation, a 

variety of different rationale, different points that they want to 

bring forward when they’re introducing a piece of legislation. 

 

Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, a piece of legislation is brought 

forward because members opposite think that it serves an 

important public policy purpose — it serves a role that makes 

the province stronger, makes the province better. It serves a role 

in ensuring that when we’re looking at what kind of future we 

want in Saskatchewan, the piece of legislation will address the 

particular issue that they have put forward in the legislation. 

 

There are other instances, Mr. Speaker, where a piece of 

legislation is brought forward to simply speak to an issue in a 

particular area. Perhaps there’s a hot spot with an issue, 

individuals are wondering what in fact can take place with this 

issue, and legislation is brought forward to address a concern. 

 

There’s another type of legislation that I see members opposite 

bring forward at times, Mr. Speaker, and this is a type of 

legislation that is not necessarily a bad thing. It’s not something 

that serves against the interests of Saskatchewan people, but it 

opens up a can of worms in the sense that it causes us to ask 

many questions about what is the motivation for this particular 

piece of legislation. 

 

And with An Act respecting Hunting, Fishing and Trapping, as 

I listen to my colleagues speak and this Act where there would 

be one day recognized where the role of hunters, fishers, and 

trappers would be paid special recognition on that one day, it 

causes me to ask as a member of this Assembly, what is the 

rationale for bringing this forward? 

 

Is this something that the individuals who have spent time in the 

North have been wondering about? Is this something that 

individuals that are engaged in these traditional pursuits want? 

Have they been calling for this? Is this something that makes 

their life better and makes the work that they do in their 

traditional territory — the hunting, fishing, and trapping that 

they engage in — easier for them, more special for them? Or is 

this . . . So that’s the one argument, Mr. Speaker, that perhaps 

these individuals are asking for this type of legislation because 

they think that it serves some benefit. 

 

The other hand, Mr. Speaker, which could be a competing 

motive for why this piece of legislation, Bill 117, An Act 

respecting Hunting, Fishing and Trapping to come forward is 

more along the lines of — I’m not saying this is the situation — 

but it could be a degree of tokenism where instead of addressing 

concerns, as the member from Cumberland said, on an ongoing 

basis throughout the year, 365 days, members opposite try to 

have some piece of legislation that provides a day of 

recognition in the hope that it would deflect criticism in other 

areas, in the hope that when they are criticized or questioned or 

called for their behaviour to do with aspects that affect hunters, 

fishers, and trappers that they could point to this one piece. 

 

They could say, I know we are not consulting with you in a 

proper way, in a way that speaks to understanding what are 

your concerns, what are your needs. Bute have appointed a day; 

we’ recognized one day, Mr. Speaker, where we’re able to 

recognize the role that hunters, fishers, and trappers have in 

society. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know where in fact members 

opposite fall with what is their motivation in this Bill, whether 

this is something that they are bringing in order to speak to the 

needs and concerns of individuals engaged in hunting, fishing, 

and trapping. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker. But also, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s a very true and real possibility that this Bill could fall 

more into the window-dressing category where members 

opposite simply want to introduce one specific piece of 

legislation as a means to deflect criticism in other areas where 

they are failing the people of Saskatchewan so badly. And as 

my colleague from Cumberland pointed out, there are many 

concerns that northerners have, that Aboriginals have, that First 

Nations and Métis people have in the province about how this 

Bill does in fact affect individuals, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When looking at the legislation, the proposed legislation, Bill 

117, An Act respecting Hunting, Fishing and Trapping, the 

preamble makes reference to the role of hunting, fishing, and 

trapping, the role that it’s played in shaping our social, cultural, 

and economic heritage. And I think in looking at that whereas 

clause, Mr. Speaker, that’s certainly something that I could 

support because I know the role of hunting, fishing, and 

trapping has indeed formed a great part of our history and a 

great part of what we as Saskatchewan people recognize as our 

very rich history. 

 

I mean, it’s known — perhaps not known well enough — but 

you know, I remember being in grade school and learning how 

the fur trade, Mr. Speaker, opened up the West, how individuals 

explored further and further into the West, how Europeans had 

contact with First Nations people. And that’s part of our very 

rich heritage and a heritage that is proper and is good to 

celebrate here in Saskatchewan. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So in that aspect, Mr. Speaker, I do think that in looking at this 

whereas clause; where the fishing, hunting, and trapping has 

played an important role in the social, cultural, and economic 

heritage, I would fully agree with that. And I think many 

individuals in this Assembly would in fact also agree with that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but this is where I have my concerns. Because it’s 

one thing to have a good whereas clause. It’s one thing to have 

a bright idea to recognize the role of hunting, fishing, and 

trapping here in the province. But it needs to, Mr. Speaker, be 

tied into a larger, a more focused and thoughtful approach to 

how we deal with individuals who are engaged in hunting, 

fishing, and trapping. It cannot be, as I see it, Mr. Speaker, an 

approach to simply pass a day of recognition for individuals in 

this type of work and hope that everything will be fine, that 

everything will be okay, to hope that any concerns that 

northerners have about hunting, fishing, and trapping are then 

swept under the carpet, are completely . . . the whole situation is 

at peace and at ease simply because there is a day to recognize 

an Act Respecting Hunting, Fishing and Trapping. 

 

So while I’m not necessarily opposed to the notion of having a 

day of recognition for individuals engaged in hunting, fishing, 

and trapping, I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that it’s the silver 

bullet that can allow members opposite to go about their 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4183 

business and say that everything is wonderful in the North and 

that individuals who are engaged in hunting, fishing, and 

trapping are pleased with what this government is doing and 

how they are consulting with them. I don’t think that is the 

situation. 

 

I would draw a comparison, Mr. Speaker, to when we have 

International Women’s Day here, celebrated around the world 

and here in the province. Mr. Speaker, while it is appropriate, 

while it is proper to recognize on one day the role that women 

have served in society, in our province, and in our families and 

our workplaces, that’s not an excuse, Mr. Speaker, during every 

other day of the year to ignore the concerns that women have in 

society, to ignore important issues. Whether it’s pay equity, Mr. 

Speaker, whether it is violence that individuals may experience, 

whether it is any type of sexism, Mr. Speaker, simply because 

there is a day to recognize International Women’s Day, it does 

not mean that it is fine to turn a blind eye every other day of the 

year on that issue. 

 

In the same way when we’re looking at Bill No. 117, An Act 

Respecting Hunting, Fishing and Trapping, introducing a day to 

recognize hunters, fishers, and trappers, okay, that’s fine. And 

perhaps this is what individuals in the North are wanting. I’ve 

spent some time in the North, but certainly not to the extent that 

the member from Cumberland or the member from Athabasca 

or any number of my colleagues have spent time there. Perhaps 

this is what they’re wanting. 

 

But what I can guarantee they don’t want, Mr. Speaker, is an 

approach to their concerns, an approach to the issues that they 

bring forward, that is one of just simple tokenism. It’s not 

enough to have one day carved off or highlighted with a 

ceremony recognizing the concerns of individuals engaged in 

hunting, fishing, and trapping. It’s not enough to have one day. 

It needs to be something that has a focus 365 days of the year. 

 

And sadly, Mr. Speaker, on so many occasions, this is a reality 

that escapes the Sask Party. We can look at any number of 

instances and we see this pattern of behaviour. And that’s why I 

have concerns about Bill No. 117 because I’m concerned that 

this type of tokenism, this type of a bit of fluff and a bit of 

hoopla around an event — though it may be fun, though it may 

be okay, though it may be appropriate — it doesn’t necessarily 

address the issues. 

 

A perfect example also: essential services legislation. Members 

opposite, instead of encouraging negotiation to come to a good 

settlement, Mr. Speaker, in order to ensure that we have the best 

health care system around the year, 365 days of the year, 

members opposite would prefer instead to simply use a hammer 

in times when it’s convenient for them. I don’t think that is an 

approach that is a well thought out approach or a thorough 

approach, one that speaks to the needs in that sector. 

 

And in the same way with Bill 117, by simply having one day 

that recognizes the role of hunting, fishing, and trapping, while 

perhaps some individuals in the province want it and perhaps 

it’s something that I could indeed support at the end of the day, 

the concern that I want to state on the record now is that it is not 

enough, Mr. Speaker, to simply take one day of the calendar, 

throw a dart at the calendar, choose a day, and then that is the 

extent of policy thought and legislation that goes into the area 

of hunting, fishing, and trapping. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so I in fact would like to spend a great amount of 

time on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, but I know there are other 

colleagues who do want to speak to this piece of legislation. So 

as I’ve had a chance to talk about some of my feelings about 

this Bill in the respect that perhaps there is a decent motive, but 

perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the motive is not so decent. Perhaps the 

motive is one of tokenism as opposed to a thoughtful and 

considerate legislative plan. 

 

And to me that is not yet clear. And I say that, Mr. Speaker, 

because I’ve seen many instances by this government when 

approaching issues — whether it is something of essential 

services, whether it is something like International Women’s 

Day, Mr. Speaker, whatever the issue is — there’s a great 

tendency of members opposite to have a lot of hoopla, to have 

balloons, to have cake, to have ribbons, Mr. Speaker, but to not 

actually be speaking to the issues at the core of the concern or 

the problem or at the core of the needs of individuals in that part 

of the province. 

 

So I’m concerned that this could in fact be, Mr. Speaker, I think 

there’s some strong evidence to suggest that this could in fact 

be another example of tokenism by the members opposite, as 

opposed to a thoughtful and considerate and a reasoned and 

balanced approach to dealing with the issues that affect hunting, 

fishing, and trapping in the North. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will draw my remarks to a 

conclusion as I know there are other individuals who want to 

speak to this. And, Mr. Speaker, I would move on this Bill that 

we adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 117. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion, say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed, say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nays have it. I recognize the 

member from Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

truly gives me a great deal of pleasure to have the opportunity 

to enter into this debate, this debate on Bill No. 117, the Act 

respecting hunting, fishing and trapping. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

will attempt to follow my colleagues who have done such an 

excellent, excellent job of discussing and debating and bringing 

up the issues that the opposition of course have concerns with in 

this particular Bill. 

 

And whenever, Mr. Speaker, a Bill comes forward, I think it’s 



4184 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

the duty of the opposition to be you know careful that we do a 

good job. The duty of the opposition to do a job of reviewing 

the Bill and looking at the Bill, not only in the face value which 

is quite obvious, Mr. Speaker, but to look at as to what is the 

government really up to, and what does the government intend 

to achieve by this Bill. 

 

And I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the normal process in 

this House is the House gives the opportunity for members to 

express their thoughts and their positions of that, of themselves 

but also of their constituents on a particular Bill, and then being 

able to have the time to go out and consult with those folks who 

are impacted by this Bill. That of course, Mr. Speaker, I think is 

a very important thing for opposition to do because when you 

look at the Bills, this Bill in particular but other Bills the 

government has brought forward, you can see that the 

government hasn’t done its duty of consulting. And so the role 

of consulting would have to be that of the opposition, and of 

course the opposition would need time to do that. 

 

So the normal process in the adjournment of the Bill is to give 

us the opportunity to consult with those various groups and 

individuals who are impacted by this Bill, to identify whether, 

according to them and their beliefs, that this Bill is going to be a 

positive effect on them, whether it be a positive effect on them 

as an individual or a positive effect on them as a group. Or is it 

going to be negative? Perhaps it’s going to be negative. And if 

it’s going to be negative, in what way will it be negative? 

 

And that’s the role really of the opposition, to be able to 

identify, with the help of those people being affected, identify 

those issues so that we can then bring it back to the floor of the 

legislature and have an earnest and honest debate and open 

discussion with the government members, to be able to inform 

the government members if they have failed to do their 

consulting, they’ve failed to be able to consult with various 

groups. And as a result of that failure, they haven’t been able to 

identify some of the negatives that this Bill is about to bring 

about on individuals or groups right across this great province. 

 

And that would be the role of course of the opposition to bring 

forward . . . It would be the role of the government to be able to 

debate that with the opposition and recognize, recognize the 

error of their ways. Recognize that the government has failed to 

do its consulting. Recognize that they have failed to be able to 

identify the negative effects it may have on individuals or 

groups and to be able to right that wrong. And that’s the role of 

a government. I believe a government is intended I think, in the 

best of ways, to try to provide legislation that’s going to benefit 

the people of this great province. 

 

And I would think that that would be the role of a government 

of any political stripe. That should be their goal. That should be 

their intent to be able to achieve, bringing forward changes that 

are going to modernize the legislation, to bring it in line with 

the times, perhaps identify errors that have been made in the 

past or shortfalls of the legislation in the past, to correct those 

errors as the wishes of those people who are being affected. 

 

I don’t see that, Mr. Speaker, as being something that this 

government has been high on because there’s been really no 

evidence of them doing — them, I mean the government — 

doing a decent job of consulting with the people across this 

great province, especially those people who are being affected. 

 

Now since, Mr. Speaker, this is an Act respecting hunting, 

fishing, and trapping, I think it’s safe to say that those people 

who are probably foremost to be affected by this Act would be 

those people of First Nation heritage and Métis. These really, in 

this great province of ours, if you look at the history of 

Saskatchewan, we would quickly identify that these were the 

people who were the first to be involved in the activities of 

hunting and fishing and trapping. 

 

And for many of them, it’s a generational thing. It’s an 

occupation that’s been passed on from generation to generation 

to generation. I think you can safely bet that the older trappers, 

you know, say the father has passed on the techniques of his 

trapping and the experience of his trapping. Those experiences 

and those techniques have been passed on from father to son 

over a number of generations. 

 

And that’s an important thing to recognize because when we 

make these changes to an Act, and I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

safe to say that when it’s . . . One has to be careful when one’s 

in government. One has to be careful when you do make 

changes to an Act because what would seem to be a simple 

change, often in the intricacies of government, a simple change 

will have long-ranging effects. 

 

It’s sort of like the domino effect. When one falls, many other 

things fall. So when you make a change in one Act, it has an 

effect on many other Acts, many other pieces of legislation, and 

many other regulations throughout government. So it’s very 

important that government, before they make those changes, 

that government does a thorough job of consulting, a thorough 

job of talking to those people within our society and within our 

economy that are affected or could be affected through certain 

changes to legislation and certain changes to the Act. 

 

And I haven’t seen any signs that this government has done that 

on this particular Bill. It saddens me to say that, Mr. Speaker. 

But there doesn’t seem to be any evidence that they’ve done 

that thorough job of consulting because we haven’t heard or we 

haven’t seen anything that would suggest that that was the case. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve already said, and I think we all would 

agree, that those people who are probably the front-line people 

to be affected by these changes are our fine people, our citizens 

of First Nations ancestry and Métis. And these are the people 

who have a long-standing tradition in this great province of ours 

of being involved in the hunting and trapping and fishing 

industry. And they have a heritage, I guess you would say, in 

that industry and one that’s been passed on from father to son 

over many, many generations. 

 

And I suppose in today’s world, Mr. Speaker, it’s probably 

passed on to father to daughter. I think you’d probably find that 

the traditional thought process was that the trapper out there or 

the hunter or the fisher was always a male. Well it’s not the 

case today. I think in a lot of these instances you’d find that 

there’s females are involved very much in this industry. 

 

[16:00] 

 

I know that in fact some of my colleagues here, Mr. Speaker, 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4185 

who are females are very much avid hunters and have 

experienced hunting on many, many occasions, both for 

waterfowl and for big game. And I think that’s the case to say 

right across our society, is that whenever we enter into any of 

these occupations, there was always the traditional belief that 

this was an area that was strictly the jurisdiction of a male. But 

that today is no longer the case. We have women involved in 

hunting and hunting industry and are very good hunters. And 

certainly fishers and trappers would probably fall into the same 

category. 

 

And I think that’s a movement forward. I think that’s a positive 

movement, moving this forward to allow all of our society to 

enjoy the benefits that one does receive from getting out into 

the great outdoors and to fresh air and enjoying the opportunity 

to participate in for example hunting. I know a number of good 

hunters have done some great job in hunting and done so in a 

way that they certainly enjoyed their time there. 

 

And I think that that would be fair to say that First Nations 

people fall into that same category. I don’t think it’s any longer 

just isolated to a male occupation or a male right or a male 

tradition to be able to enjoy the privilege of hunting. I think that 

you’d find that both male and female very much do that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think again we need to ensure, we need to 

ensure that when we make these changes as outlined in this Act 

here, that these changes come about only after, only after 

government has done a thorough job of consulting with those 

occupations and those that will be affected by this, but also 

those occupations that have a tradition of being involved in that 

industry. And those groups of people who have a tradition of 

being involved in the industry, we need to know that the 

government has done a thorough and honest job of consulting 

with these folks to get their opinions, get their thoughts, many 

times their experiences. Because it’s the experiences of the 

first-line people there that will outline what is the necessary 

changes to the legislation to make it more accommodating, to 

make it more effective to those involved in the industry. 

 

And there’s a long long-standing tradition in this great province 

of ours of hunting. I think that not only is it a way of life for 

those of the First Nations community and the Métis community, 

its substance and sustaining of life is probably the basis to a lot 

of their hunting activity and their involvement in the hunting 

activity. 

 

But it has also become very much of a large sport in this great 

province where we have a lot of people involved in hunting in a 

regulated way. And particularly in the fall time, I’m thinking 

about the big game. There’s all types of hunting. There’s 

hunting for waterfowl that takes place earlier in the year. And in 

a lot of ways it’s a very essential part of maintaining a balance 

within our waterfowl population. Licences are provided to 

ensure that the waterfowl population is kept at a level that is 

healthy, that we need to ensure that the waterfowl population is 

not allowed to outgrow its ability to have areas to forage in. 

 

And what happens often in mother nature when you have 

population that has a boom, I guess you would say, or a huge 

increase in its numbers, it often sets the stage for diseases and 

issues such as that — mother nature’s way, I suppose, of 

controlling the population. But it has then a negative effect on 

the ability for the hunters to go hunting, the ability for the 

commerce around that hunting industry. 

 

And there is a big commerce around hunting. For example, I 

had the opportunity this fall to travel around this great province 

of ours, and I was travelling one particular day with the thought 

of being able to overnight in Shaunavon, Saskatchewan and 

assuming that, you know, Shaunavon is a small rural 

community in Saskatchewan; likely it wouldn’t be bombarded 

with a great deal of tourists that would create a situation where I 

would have a hard time to find a room to overnight in. 

 

So with that I just quite frankly didn’t phone ahead and did not 

make provisions for a reservation. I pulled into Shaunavon 

about . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — That was a mistake. 

 

Mr. Harper: — That was a mistake. That was a mistake, Mr. 

Speaker, because I pulled into Shaunavon about 4 o’clock in the 

afternoon and I went to the first hotel I came to. And there was 

a big sign outside — no vacancy. So well okay, that’s the first 

one, but certainly the second one wouldn’t be the case. So I 

went down the street a little ways and there was a second motel 

and sure enough, sign there in the window — no vacancies. 

Unfortunately I went to the third one and it was exactly the 

same thing — no vacancies. 

 

So then I went to the hotel which had a little bit of a motel 

attached to it, and I went in and I asked if there was any room. 

And the lady said, no, I am booked up until the end of the 

month. And I said, wow, I said, this is the fourth motel I’ve 

been in in Shaunavon and, I said, there’s no vacancies. What’s 

going on? She says, it’s goose hunting season. Goose hunting 

season. Right. So there I was standing in the middle of 

Shaunavon with a lot of motel rooms there, but they were all 

booked up, and why is because it was goose hunting season. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that would tell me one thing. That would tell 

me that that particular season is a good economic driver for that 

community and other communities across this great province of 

ours. If you can have that type of a turnout and that type of an 

interest and that type of enthusiastic following that’s involved 

in the goose hunting industry, then that’s good. That’s good. 

 

So to end my story, Mr. Speaker, I know you’re wanting to 

know what I did. Did I stay in Shaunavon in my car overnight? 

Well no, I was forced to drive back to Swift Current and stay 

there. And then since I had meetings in Shaunavon the 

following morning, I had to make the trip back again. 

 

But that was an experience, Mr. Speaker, and that tells me just a 

little bit — and I think it tells many others — it tells me a little 

bit about the strength of the hunting industry in this great 

province of ours and how important it is as a part of the puzzle 

of our economy, is that if you can have that type of interest, that 

type of interest in hunting that you could have all the motel 

rooms in small town Shaunavon . . . And Gull Lake, by the 

way. I stopped at Gull Lake and I forgot to tell you this. On the 

way back I stopped at Gull Lake. There were a couple of motels 

there and they too were booked up. So it was goose hunting 

season and quite frankly they were all booked up. 

 



4186 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

So from now on, Mr. Speaker, if I’m going to be travelling in 

Saskatchewan, I’m going to (a) phone ahead and make sure I 

have a reservation. But (b) I’m also going to check to see what 

time of year it is and what the activity may be. And if it’s a 

hunting season of some type in rural Saskatchewan, I’m going 

to certainly be phoning ahead to make those reservations 

because it is a strong, strong economy. 

 

And it certainly indicates the importance of wildlife and it 

indicates the importance of the hunting industry to us here in 

Saskatchewan and to the business communities across the way. 

I would think it’s safe to say that in rural Saskatchewan it’s a 

hunting season like that would bring not only a fair amount of 

activity, positive activity to the motels but also to the 

restaurants and the grocery stores and the service stations 

selling gas and the support of the industries in a lot of different 

ways. 

 

So in a lot of ways Shaunavon, which is a farming community, 

which is in the heart of farm land in Saskatchewan, here’s some 

of the prime farm land, great farm lands of Saskatchewan, 

certainly benefits an agriculture industry. But hunting is a very 

important cog, I guess you’d say, in the economic wheel of that 

particular community. 

 

So I think this is just one little point or one little lesson that we 

can learn from my experience of travelling Saskatchewan this 

fall, that hunting is something that we shouldn’t just disregard. 

Some of us who have been involved in the industry, although a 

lot of years ago, Mr. Speaker, but I think there are many in our 

Chamber here that do participate on a yearly basis. I know some 

of my colleagues do on a regular basis go out for white-tailed 

deer and I think they’ve gone out for moose and so on and so 

forth. So I think it’s just a small indication of how important 

that industry is to not only to this province but to our economy 

in this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s also fair to say that there is a need 

to maintain that and to in fact in some ways encourage it so that 

it maintains a balance, a reasonable, safe, healthy balance 

within our wildlife population. Hunting is no doubt a very 

important tool that is used by the Department of the 

Environment to control and to be able to manage the wildlife 

population of this great province. 

 

And that is done in concert — I would hope at least it’s done in 

concert — with those people who are involved in the industry 

as a requirement for their way of life, for example the First 

Nations or Métis people who have the inherent right to hunt. 

It’s because it’s simply a part of their livelihood. It’s a very 

important part, in many cases, of their ability to feed and care 

for their families. And that has always, that’s been a long-time 

tradition for First Nations people who’ve had access to wildlife 

and access to game to be able to feed their families. 

 

And that reminds me of a situation where I had the opportunity 

of, a couple years back, to travel northern Saskatchewan, 

although it’d be on a whole different issue. It’d be on the issue 

of the northern overtime exemption. But during my experience 

involved in doing the research and doing holding hearings and 

consultations on the overtime exemption issue, I had the 

opportunity of visiting with the council at Black Lake. 

 

And when we got there, we met with the council and a number 

of the members of the council, and one of the first things that 

was pointed out to us was that the chief was not available 

simply because the chief wasn’t in town. The chief was north; 

north of Black Lake. He was up hunting and was a part of the 

hunting party and they were hunting caribou. 

 

And that was a long-time, again, tradition where the chief 

would take some of the very experienced hunters from the 

community and they would go north and they would spend a 

reasonable length of time. I can’t remember now — I’m just 

trying to search my memory as to how long they were up there 

— but I think it was something like three weeks. And during 

that period of time they were hunting caribou. And the proceeds 

of their hunt, the success of their hunt, would be brought back 

and to be shared with all the villagers. And that was a very 

important part of the substance that the villagers would use to 

sustain their family throughout the forthcoming winter and 

throughout the forthcoming year. 

 

So hunting is to many of us here in this building and many of us 

in the southern part of the province, is something that we’ve 

either experienced as a sport or we’ve been involved in it in 

some manner, shape, or form at some point in time in our life. 

But for many it’s a way of life; it’s a way of life. 

 

First Nations, Métis people have the inherent right to hunt 

because it’s a way of life. It’s a part, and a key part of their 

ability to feed their families, to maintain themselves. And it is 

something that I would hope that when the government has 

made changes as they propose in this Act and as well as other 

Acts, Mr. Speaker, that they take to heart and that they actually 

go out and they talk to those people who are so closely tied to 

our wildlife population and have been for generations upon 

generations upon generations. And that they have serious 

consultations with these folks to find out from them what 

changes that they foresee should be done within the Act to 

improve their particular situation. Because, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe it’s the intent of any government to, hopefully, to bring 

in legislation that will improve the quality of life for the citizens 

of this great province. I think any government, that’s their hope 

and that’s their desired achievement. 

 

But I don’t see, Mr. Speaker, any evidence, any evidence that 

this government has gone that far. I don’t see any evidence that 

this government has gone out and done serious consultations 

with those people who are the front-line people to be affected 

by the changes, such as our First Nations people and our Métis 

people. Have they talked to them? And if they have, then I 

would like the government to provide us that proof, provide us 

that information, provide us a list of those people who they’ve 

talked to. When and where and what was the results of those 

consultations? What did they hear? What were the testimonies 

that was put forward by the First Nations people that would 

cause the government to say, okay, this is all we have to do. All 

we have to do is select one day, one day out of the year, and 

that day we’d call it Heritage Day, and it would be in honour of 

trapping and fishing and that would satisfy those people in that 

industry. 

 

And I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, it comes anywhere near that, 

and I don’t think it does simply because they haven’t had the 

opportunity or haven’t taken the opportunity to consult with the 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4187 

front-line people — First Nations and Métis people — of our 

great province. So it brings then, Mr. Speaker, it brings up the 

question: why the urgency? Why the urgency? Why is the 

government bringing this forward at this time? But more 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, why is the government jamming it? 

That becomes the question. 

 

So then, Mr. Speaker, you say, well looking at it, it’s only got 

five clauses to it; it’s really not a much more than a 

housekeeping Bill. Or is it? That becomes the question. Or is it? 

Is it a housekeeping Bill? If it is a housekeeping Bill, then why 

is the government jamming it? If it’s not a housekeeping Bill 

and if the government is prepared to indicate that it’s not just a 

housekeeping Bill, then begs the question: what is the hidden 

agenda? What is the hidden agenda on what really, really is a 

narrow Bill? Five clauses, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So it brings out a number of questions, a number of questions 

that certainly need to be answered. The first question that I 

would like to have an answer to is: has this government done 

any consultation — not all but any consultation — on this Bill 

with the front-line people who are affected by the changes to 

this Bill, the First Nations and Métis people? Has there been 

any consultation on that front? 

 

Has this government done any consultation with the sports 

organizations? This is sports organizations that represent the 

hundreds if not thousands of sports people who are involved in 

hunting, fishing, in this great province of ours. Have they talked 

to these sports organizations? Have they talked to them as . . . 

Are they in favour of the thrust of this Bill, or do they have any 

suggestions to make changes to it to make it more effective and 

more suitable to their members? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill really is designed for hunting, fishing, 

and trapping. There’s supposed to be one day set aside, and it’s 

supposed to make everybody involved in those industries real 

happy and feel warm and fuzzy and say, well this is a great 

government. They haven’t done anything to affect our industry 

that would make it better, but they’ve set aside a day of heritage 

that we can all feel good about. And for those of us in the 

industry, we’ll just all feel good and fuzzy, warm and fuzzy for 

one day, and we’ll go back to the problems that we face on each 

and every day other than that within our industry. I find that, 

Mr. Speaker, a bit — I’d say — puzzling, for a lack of a better 

term, simply puzzling. 

 

Trapping, Mr. Speaker, I think again, if you look back at the 

history of this great province of ours, even beyond that, if you 

look at the history of Canada, you will see that trapping was a 

very, very big part of the development of this country. Earlier 

on that was probably the driving force behind the first 

settlements in Canada, was to be able to extract the resource 

which was very, very much in demand in Europe. And that 

resource was the fur resource. And as a result of that, you’ve 

seen settlements spring up in central Canada, particularly in 

Quebec area, that from that grew the industry, the fur industry 

that expanded right across this great country of ours and really 

opened up the West in a lot of ways through those individuals 

who were rough and tough — and I mean tough people — who 

went out and weathered the elements to be able to establish a 

fur trade and bring that fur back. It would be shipped back into 

France and to European countries right across the piece. That 

certainly fed that industry. 

 

And you have to take your hats off, Mr. Speaker, to those 

people who had the nerve to go out into the wilderness. I mean 

there was no development at that time in this great country of 

ours. All it was, was wilderness. They used the rivers for their 

motorways, I guess you would say, to find their ways back into 

the heart of this great country of ours, Canada. And they did 

that for the intentions of being able to trap, being able to 

identify the fur resources that were here and be able to harvest 

them. And they did so with a great deal of vigour. 

 

And that then of course, Mr. Speaker, led to the fact that there 

was great distances, the great distances that they would have to 

travel from Quebec or from Montreal into the heart of this great 

country of ours to be able to extract the fur and take it back to 

feed the growing fur industry and the growing demand for fur in 

Europe . . . that they decided to build a system of transportation, 

a system where you could winter . . . a system where you could 

link one area to another area. 

 

So they developed the Hudson Bay Company, then set forth as 

one of the companies. North West was another company that set 

forth into this great country of ours to build forts to be able to 

set up the ability to move from one area to another and have an 

area of refuge, an area of comfort. And that was the 

development, I guess you would say, of the fur industry in this 

great country of ours. And it of course led to the development 

and the expansion of this great province of ours, Saskatchewan. 

So when you look at the history of trapping in Canada, it’s a 

history that’s entrenched in the history of Canada. And as a 

result, it’s also entrenched in the history of this great province 

of ours. 

 

So trapping has been a very important part of our history. It has 

been a very important part of our commerce in the past, 

although perhaps not as great, it plays perhaps not as great a 

degree now. But I can remember as a youngster — lots of years 

ago, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be the first to admit that — but I can 

remember as a youngster that up in my neck of the woods there 

where I was born and raised, trapping was something that 

many, many people participated in, in the wintertime. Many of 

my neighbours owned traplines, and that they would farm in the 

summer. But they would trap in the winter, and that would be a 

source of revenue for them, a source of income for them that 

would help offset the cost of raising a family, and it was a very 

important part. 

 

And there was many, many of my neighbours . . . In fact some 

of my relatives through marriage held traplines, and I believe 

that maybe some still do. But they would participate on a very 

active basis and again, these people earn their money. Trapping 

is not an easy occupation. It’s one that you, of course, you do 

outdoors, but you do it in the winter months, and you do it. You 

go and check those traps out. And it really doesn’t matter what 

the weather is. Whether it’s storming or whether it’s 45 below, 

you would see them go. 

 

And I know that it’s a tough, tough life because the first thing in 

the fall time when the snow first falls and the ground is frozen, 

you find them going out there, and they’re establishing their 



4188 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

trapline. They’re identifying beaver houses. They’re identifying 

those types of things in their trapline as to . . . And then they put 

together a system or a line that would allow them to be able to 

spend, hopefully, one day. But in a lot of cases, it would be two 

and three days continuous on that trapline to be able to service 

their many sets that they would have out. 

 

And of course beaver being the mainstay for any trapper . . . I 

think like a farmer with growing grain, wheat has always been 

the mainstay. They would do other things, but you’d always, 

you know, grow wheat as your mainstay of your operation. 

Well in a trapping operation, the collection of beaver pelts 

would be the mainstay of any operation, sort of like the bread 

and butter of any operation so that the first thing that a trapper 

would do would be to go out and be able to identify the number 

of beaver houses in his or her trapline and then in some of the 

cases cut a row, cut a trail to that beaver house because (a) it 

may be a new beaver house where there wasn’t one before, so 

there wouldn’t be an existing trail, but in (b) a lot of cases even 

if there was an existing trail, it may not have been used for a 

year or two and wind and windfall would have fallen across that 

trail and it would have to be cleared. And it would mean simply 

going out and cutting off dead windfall, throwing it aside in 

order to make a trail so that they’d be able to get to the beaver 

house with their snowmobile. 

 

And that would facilitate then their ability to check out the 

beaver house, find out where the runs are . . . And of course 

you’d have to do that kind of carefully because if it’s early in 

the fall (a) the ice isn’t all that thick, but it’s even thinner where 

the beaver run is because the beaver run . . . beavers moving 

back and forth really keep the ice very, very thin. 

 

So you’d find the trappers are quite careful, quite skilful at 

being able to identify the thickness of the ice and identify where 

those beaver runs are because they need to identify where that 

beaver run is for (a) so they don’t break through the ice and get 

themselves wet. But more importantly, they need to identify 

that so they can set up their trap in that beaver run and 

hopefully be able to catch a beaver or beavers going back and 

forth from their house into their slough area where they have 

amassed a fair amount of feed for . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Yes. 

 

My colleague asked me if there’s a maximum weight a trapper 

should be. Well no, I don’t think there is. But certainly you 

want to walk gingerly on thin ice because you don’t want to 

break through. Particularly you don’t want to break through, 

say, up to your waist in water when it’s 40 below outside, and 

you’re probably 10 miles from camp. That’s a long way to ride 

the snowmobile when you’re that wet and that cold. 

 

Not that I’ve ever experienced going that far, but I have 

experienced breaking through ice and on a beaver dam crossing, 

actually on a beaver dam, and getting wet up to my knees, not 

my waist, up to my knees, and being six miles from camp. And 

by the time we got there — and I was lucky I wasn’t alone — 

time we got there, I was glad I wasn’t alone because I would 

have not been able to get off my snow machine because my legs 

were numb, numb, simply numb from the knees down. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that we recognize the 

tradition and the importance of the trapping industry to our 

great economy, to our great society, and the great roles played 

in our history. And as I said, I know that many of . . . and I 

know first-hand from having family members involved in the 

industry but also from coming from an area where trapping was 

quite prominent. 

 

My farm at the time was about 12 miles from the edge of the 

forest reserve, and so there was large forest reserve that really 

went, simply went north, east, and west, I should say past our 

farm, and many of my friends and neighbours who were 

involved in the industry would have traplines in the forest 

reserve and that they would go up there and they would in some 

cases . . . One I’m just thinking of off the top of my head. Boy, 

if I would have known I was going to be speaking on this 

subject today, I would have asked them if I could use their 

name because I would be proud to use their names in this 

debate. But as a father-son operation there, that farm in the 

Danbury area during the summertime, and they have a trapline 

straight north of Danbury in the pine forest reserve, and they do 

a wonderful job of maintaining that trapline. They take a great 

deal of pride in it. 

 

And they have a cabin at the south end of their trapline, and 

they have another cabin at the north end. The north cabin is 

getting up awful close to Parr Hill Lake area, and the south end 

cabin is about five, six miles I guess from the forest reserve 

boundary inland and that’s their entire trapping area. So what 

they do when they go up there, they simply cover their spots, I 

guess you would say, or their trapline in the south. And it takes 

them a full day, and it’s a long day and a full day to be able to 

cover that area. And then they overnight in their cabin at the 

south end. 

 

The following day they will then make their way north. And 

while they’re making their way north, they’ll be checking sites 

and traplines all the way on their trapline, all the way north till 

they get to their north cabin. That again is another day and it’s a 

full day. Once they’re there, then they will overnight in that 

cabin, and then they will spend the third day, third consecutive 

day, checking their traps in the north of their cabin, north end of 

their trapline. And it’s a three-day affair, Mr. Speaker. And then 

of course they come back and they basically start all over again. 

 

But this is a . . . I’m just trying to demonstrate the fact that it is 

not an easy life. It is not an easy life. It’s a hard life involved in 

the trapping industry. So when you make changes to the Act, 

it’s going to have some effect on that industry. 

 

You would hope, you would hope the government would be 

mindful of these people who spend a lot of their time, a lot of 

their time in that industry and that the government would talk to 

these people — these people who have had the front-line 

experiences of a trapper spending three days, four days, five 

consecutive days on the trapline — in order to find out from 

them what changes they would recommend be made that would 

affect their industry in a positive way. And I would hope that’s 

what the government would do. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I see no signs that this government 

has done that. I see no signs that this government has taken time 

to talk to the trappers of Saskatchewan who use this — in the 

cases of my neighbours — use it as a form of offsetting their 

secondary income, I guess, offsetting their costs of living by 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4189 

being able to generate some revenue throughout the winter 

months by trapping. But it’s equally important, or perhaps even 

more important that the government should have talked to those 

people who are on the front lines, those people who have a long 

tradition in the industry — those people, of course, being the 

First Nations and Métis people of our great province. These are 

the people who are what I would call the front-line people. 

These are people who have had not just years of experiences, 

they’ve had generations of experiences in this industry. 

 

And these are the people who are affected because trapping, in 

many cases, is a mainstay to their income, is a major plank of 

their income platform. It’s the major thrust of their revenue that 

they generate to feed their families and look after their families. 

And changes to the Act would have effects on them. I would 

hope it would not be negative effects; I hope it would be 

positive effects. But I haven’t seen any evidence coming 

forward from this government, through this Act or any of the 

other Acts that they’ve put forward, that that is the reality, 

based on the consultation that this government has done. 

 

The sad part of it is, when you look at it, Mr. Speaker, one 

would have to suggest that no consultation has been done. No 

consultation has been done with these people who are the 

front-line people, the people who have to live by the changes 

that are made. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the minister or whomever it is over 

there who has decided to jam this is trying to sneak it through 

so that those folks out there, it’s changed before they get wind 

of it. It’s changed before they have the ability to react to it. It’s 

changed before they have the ability to organize and come 

down here and lobby government publicly for this Bill to be 

shelved, or at least for reasonable and decent consultation to 

take place before this Bill is introduced for a final reading and 

passed in this great Assembly of ours. Mr. Speaker, I would 

hope that isn’t the case, but I see nothing, I see nothing to 

suggest that I am wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, fishing. Fishing is also a part of this Bill. It’s 

hunting, fishing, and trapping. Fishing is once again, Mr. 

Speaker, is like hunting or perhaps even like trapping. It 

represents the mainstay, a very important food source for our 

First Nations and Métis people for generations. They were the 

first fishers in this great province of ours. They were fishers out 

of necessity. They were fishing because that was a form of food 

on the table, sustained their families, fed their families. The 

importance of fishing is very important to the First Nations 

people, Mr. Speaker. Again it’s just like hunting. 

 

And in fact in some ways, it’s even greater than trapping 

because fishing, hunting and fishing was something that the 

First Nations people were involved in long before trapping even 

came along. Long before the white man came to this great 

country and said, well here we can have a fur industry here, and 

you can help us develop this fur industry, and we would pay 

you a small, small reward for the pelts you sold us. And that 

came much later in the system. Really, when you look at it, Mr. 

Speaker, hunting and fishing is something that was the mainstay 

for the First Nations people from the beginning of history. 

 

And it is interesting, Mr. Speaker, that this government hasn’t 

seen fit, this government hasn’t seen fit to consult with those 

people who have played such an important part in the history of 

this great province of ours, hasn’t seen fit to consult with them 

in regards to changes that would affect a long-standing 

traditional sources such as hunting and such as trapping and 

such as fishing. 

 

And I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that it was either an oversight 

by the government and that they will recognize it was an 

oversight and that they would do what they could do to correct 

the errors of their way by instituting some type of a consultation 

process, and to do so without jamming the Bill. To stand up in 

the House and say, yes, the opposition has identified that we 

haven’t done what we feel is a reasonable job of consulting with 

the front-line people who are affected by the changes to this 

Act, and that we’re going to put the Bill on a shelf and it’s 

going to stay there until such time as we can do adequate 

consultations with the First Nations people, and they will bring 

back to ensure that the changes to this Act does not have a 

negative effect on them. 

 

That’s all we’re asking, is has that consultation taken place? 

Have those talks taken place? Have they talked with the 

individuals out there? Have they talked with groups out there to 

ensure that the changes here would not end up having a 

negative effect upon those First Nations people? Because I 

think it’s so important because these are the first; the first 

trappers, the first hunters, and the first fishers in this great 

province of ours were those First Nations and Métis people. 

And I think it’s only respectful that we would talk to them 

about proposed changes to an Act that could — that could — 

possibly have some effect on them. 

 

And I would hope that that would be something that this 

government wouldn’t hesitate to do, to admit that perhaps they 

hadn’t done a thorough enough job of consultation, and they 

would step forward and look at doing such a thing as that. 

 

We have, Mr. Speaker, the importance, the importance of the 

hunting industry. The hunting industry, not only the importance 

for our First Nations people and our Métis people and really, 

Mr. Speaker, not only the importance to the sports people 

across this great province of ours who participate in hunting; 

whether it be in waterfowl, fowl or big game hunting. And we 

know that there’s lots of them. 

 

And if you look at the fall time, if you look at the synopsis, the 

hunting synopsis put out by the Department of Environment, 

you’ll see that that hunting period is stretched over quite a large 

period. There’s all types of hunting. When it comes to big 

game, when it comes to big game, there’s the bow and arrow, 

believe it’s called bow and arrow. And I think crossbow is in 

that category too. 

 

Hunting, I think there’s a week or something set aside for that, 

for those people who are involved in that sport. Those people 

who are involved in that sport, they can certainly take 

advantage of that period of time. They can go out and they can 

build their blinds, or perhaps be able to inherit a blind from 

somebody in the area there, and be able to hide there and be 

able to participate in their sport. And if they enjoy it, that’s fine. 

They should do that. They should do that. 



4190 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

And then, Mr. Speaker, they will find that there’s a period of 

time put aside for black powder hunting, and that’s the old 

musket. That’s where the hunters go out there in the old 

traditional style, where they use the front-loading musket and 

they pack the charge in there, and they go hunting with that. 

And it’s a great sport, I would think. 

 

I mean, you’ve only got one shot. And I don’t know how 

accurate those things are, and I would think that it would be 

quite a challenge, quite a challenge to be able to fall your game 

with that one shot. Because you’ve only got one crack at it 

because by the time you’ve got it reloaded if you missed, the 

time you reloaded it, I’m afraid that deer — as well as me — 

would be a long, long way away. So I think that it would be 

quite a challenge. It’s something I’ve never been involved in, 

but I do know that there are those out there who do. And they 

find it with a great deal of joy, take a great deal of joy in that 

sport. And I would think that it would be quite a challenge. 

There’s no doubt about it. 

 

But if you notice in the synopsis, there’s a period of time set 

aside in the fall months for hunting. A period of time set aside 

for black powder hunting. There’s also a period of time set 

aside for bear hunting. And that is another sport that I’ve never, 

never ever been involved in. I know some of my neighbours, I 

believe perhaps even some of my colleagues, have done that. 

But I’ve never, never, ever been involved in bear hunting 

season, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s those who have said that it’s a great sport, going out 

and hunting black bear. In our area up there where I was born 

and raised, it would be black bear. There might be the odd 

brown bear, but the predominant bear population in that area 

was the black bear. And as much as I have a great deal of 

respect for bears, Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen many, many of them 

all through my lifetime. And I have never seen one up real close 

because there are usually both bear and I going in opposite 

directions when we spot each other. And I freely admit that. 

 

And I’ve often said with one of my colleagues here, I said I 

wouldn’t be scared to actually go out and bear hunt with one of 

my colleagues here because I believe that all I would need to 

ensure my safety is a good pair of running shoes. My colleague 

would say, well you’d be foolish. You’ll never outrun a bear. 

And I said I had no intentions of outrunning the bear. I just had 

intentions of outrunning my colleague. That’s all. Not my 

seatmate, no. One of my other colleagues, not my seatmate. I 

want to make that clear, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the thing here, the point I’m trying to point out, Mr. 

Speaker, is that there is a category of time set aside for bear 

hunting so that those sportsmen who are involved in that 

industry, those sportsmen who find it a challenge to go out and 

hunt black bear — or bear of any kind but I will use black bear 

for the example — then they have that opportunity in that 

period of time that’s listed in the synopsis. They have that 

period of time to go out there and do the hunting. 

 

And then after that will follow a period of a draw. There’s a 

draw season where hunters will be able to submit their names. I 

believe they make application; I believe they even pay a small 

fee to the Department of Environment. And so many hunters 

will get drawn per block or per area, per zone I believe it’s 

called, and they will be able to hunt a certain type of animal — 

let’s say, draw a moose for example. They’ll be able to hunt, I 

believe it’s cow and bull moose during that period of time. And 

they will be able to . . . But there will only be a certain number 

selected for the particular block or particular zone and that 

they’ll be able to hunt in there during that small particular time 

period, which I believe is a week. 

 

And then there will be the open hunting where everybody, if 

you go and you buy a permit, a licence, you can go hunt. And 

there’ll be so many for white-tailed deer and there’d be so many 

for . . . I think there’d be two tags now for white-tailed deer, 

and certainly one tag for moose, and even elk is in that 

category. I believe you can buy a licence to go out and hunt elk 

at that particular time. But if you look at the synopsis and if you 

look at the period of time that the hunting season is open 

throughout in Saskatchewan here, it’s a long, long period of 

time. It covers, I believe, at least a couple of months if not 

more. Well, Mr. Speaker, can you imagine the financial impact 

that has on our province when you have hundreds of hunters 

travelling across this great province of ours hunting? 

 

It has a tremendous impact on our communities. For example, 

as I said earlier about my experience in Shaunavon, going into 

Shaunavon during goose hunting period, the motels were all 

taken up so that means there was a lot of people in there goose 

hunting. That means that motels were getting revenue out of it, 

but so would the restaurants, so do the grocery stores, so do the 

service stations selling gas, and the convenience stores selling 

goodies and so on and so forth. The hunters would buy. The 

hunters would buy. And that would be in every community 

across this great province of ours. So that would be a very 

important part of the economy of that community, that period of 

time when those hunters would come in and drop their money 

for the services that they would receive and do so willingly. 

 

But that was just for one period, Mr. Speaker, for goose hunting 

period. Now can you multiply that by the number of other 

seasons and the number of other species that are hunted in this 

great province, what a tremendous economic impact that has on 

our province. So you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, that many of 

the small business people throughout Saskatchewan here 

depend upon that period of time. 

 

I know of a gentleman who I don’t think is in the business 

anymore, but used to be in the motel business in Hudson Bay, 

Saskatchewan. And he used to tell me that moose hunting 

season, hunting season period, but particularly moose hunting 

season . . . That area was famous for its moose. I mean there 

were some very, very big moose brought out of that area and 

some trophy antlers brought out of that area. But he used to own 

and operate a motel business in there, and he used to say that 

moose hunting business was his harvest. That was his harvest. 

He really looked forward . . . 

 

I mean he did a good job throughout the summer months with 

tourists and tourists travelling through there because it’s a 

beautiful part of the province to drive through; it’s a forest area, 

and it certainly is a very welcoming area. If you’ve ever had the 

opportunity to stop into that community, as I’ve had, you’ll find 

that the people are very warm and friendly and welcoming 

there, as they are I guess in any other part of Saskatchewan. 

 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4191 

But it was the opportunity for fishing in the summertime. Of 

course fishers would go through there, and they would stop and 

stay overnight in his motel. But he used to say that moose 

hunting, that moose hunting season was his harvest because he 

would be booked up, year after year, solid. I mean every room 

would be taken up. And it would be not just for one year, but he 

would have reservations for year after year after year. So that 

was something that he counted on as a very big part of his 

revenue for his operation overall. 

 

Now he wouldn’t be the only one there, Mr. Speaker; there’d 

also be the gentleman down the street who owned the 

restaurant, and there’d be the gentleman down the street who 

owned the automotive centre that serviced vehicles, sold gas, 

that did the servicing of vehicles, perhaps sold some tires. So it 

all was linked together, I guess you would say. And the ties that 

bind was the hunting industry. It was the wildlife themselves 

that was the main thrust here. That was the ties that bind this 

whole industry together, and the ties that bind the commerce 

and the economic benefit that’s enjoyed by the communities 

across Saskatchewan. 

 

So when you make changes to an Act, when a government 

makes changes to an Act that could possibly have some effect 

on that — that significant economic activity that goes on — one 

would think the government would take the time to consult with 

those people involved in that, that economy, and ask them if 

these changes are going to be positive changes or could they 

identify anything negative about these changes that perhaps the 

government could fix before they brought the Bill to this great 

Assembly. 

 

I haven’t seen any signs of that, Mr. Speaker. I haven’t seen any 

signs or desire by this government to make sure that their 

changes are the right changes. I haven’t seen any signs that this 

government has any indication to do what is the right thing for 

the people involved in this industry, for the people who the 

spinoff in this industry is so important to their livelihood, 

whether it’d be those people in our communities that provide 

the services to the hunters. I don’t see that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:45] 

 

What I do see here is a government that must be afraid of 

something, because they’re jamming this legislature on a Bill 

with five clauses in it. Mr. Speaker, they’re jamming this 

legislature, attempting to deny the true operation, I guess you’d 

say, of democracy here, by jamming a Bill with no more than 

five clauses in it. And they’re doing it on day five of the sitting 

of this House. Mr. Speaker, it’s unbelievable. 

 

It’s unbelievable that a government would try to bully the 

opposition, but also try to bully the people of this great province 

into denying the ability for the opposition to have the time to 

consult with those people who are going to be affected by the 

changes to this legislation as to whether or not these changes 

are beneficial or detrimental. That’s all we ask, Mr. Speaker, is 

just the opportunity to have that consultation because, 

obviously, the government hasn’t done it. Certainly they’re not 

indicating any signs that they have done that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, you have to wonder why. What is the hidden 

agenda? Why is the government jamming? What is their hidden 

agenda? What are they hiding? But more importantly, what are 

they afraid of? Are they afraid of something? There’s 

something here that they’re afraid the people of this great 

province might discover, that the opposition might uncover 

something that would be embarrassing to this government in 

this particular industry. 

 

I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. I would hope not. I would really 

hope not. But the way they’re going about jamming this 

legislature and trying to limit the debate on this particular Bill is 

something that puzzles me. I wonder why. Why are they doing 

this, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Nothing like a sip of cold coffee to get you going again. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this Bill, An Act respecting 

Hunting, Fishing and Trapping, Bill No. 117, a very important 

part of this is the fishing aspect. Fishing aspect is something 

that I think we enjoy in this great province. I think we’re kind 

of fortunate because wherever you look in Saskatchewan you’ll 

see the opportunity to enjoy the sport of fishing, and I think 

many, many, many of our citizens do. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I have been known myself to go out and 

on occasions to try my hand at fishing. I will freely admit, Mr. 

Speaker, that I am a poor fisherman. As my colleagues 

indicated, I am a poor fisherman and I will freely admit to that. 

I will do that because if I don’t, my wife will be the first to tell 

everybody that she is a much better fisherperson than I am. And 

that is true. That is true, Mr. Speaker. When we go out fishing, I 

don’t even try to compete any more. I have given up on that 

because she knows more about fishing than I ever hope to learn. 

And she has shown me up on more than one occasion on our 

fishing trips of being able to not only catch more fish than me, 

but she’s able to catch the bigger ones than me too, Mr. 

Speaker. And I admit that because if I don’t admit it, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m sure that somebody will come along with her 

approval and urging and point that out. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Did you know that ice shacks have to be 

off the ice by the 15th of . . . 

 

Mr. Harper: — There you go. Thank you for that. Yes, there’s 

a good point. I didn’t realize that, and I’m sure that many of our 

colleagues here may not, is that the provisions within the Act 

that calls for the limitation of the time that a fishing hut can be 

on the ice for winter fishing and that is certainly . . . If you’ve 

ever have done winter fishing, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure you 

have. I think everybody in Saskatchewan tried their hand at 

winter fishing at some point or other. I used to like to say ice 

fishing, but that’s the only thing I used to catch is the ice — 

never caught any of the fish. 

 

But so winter fishing, Mr. Speaker, there is a limit, as those 

who are avid winter fisherpersons or ice fishermen — 

fisherpersons, politically correct. They, you know, have a hut 

out on the ice. During that period of time they can seek 

protection from the cold winds and can even build a little fire in 

there to take the chill off and while doing that enjoy the 

opportunity to do some ice fishing. And for those who are quite 

successful at it, I think they, you know, they benefit from it. 

Me, there’s two things that I used to catch when I would go ice 

fishing. One was ice and the second one was cold. Those are the 



4192 Saskatchewan Hansard March 15, 2010 

two things I pretty well guaranteed, guaranteed. 

 

But I understand that according to the rules and regulations that 

operate and govern the ice fishing in this great province of ours, 

there is a limitation or a date past which you cannot have your 

hut on the ice. And I understand that that is today, March the 

15th. I understand that’s today. If you’ve got a hut out there, 

you’d better hurry up and get it off there because I think when, 

sun down tonight, it would probably be . . . you could be in 

trouble with the rules and regulations and you could have the 

Department of Environment officer out there giving you a ticket 

first thing tomorrow morning because you’ve surpassed the 

eligible time to have a hut on the ice. 

 

And so I guess you could say, Mr. Speaker, I’m playing my part 

in doing a public service announcement, just reminding people, 

the thousands and thousands of people are tuned into our 

television, they’re watching this, that they’re running out of 

time to get that hut off the ice. 

 

And I see some of the members over there must have just 

realized that now because they finally woke up to the fact that 

— or maybe they were just sleeping anyway because of my 

speech, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know, but — anyway I see a 

couple of members that woke up and it must be because they 

have an ice fishing hut out on the lake and they forgot to take it 

off and they didn’t realize that today was the last day. So you 

know what, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to see them scurrying out 

of here at 5 o’clock, headed for their favourite lake, to hook 

onto the ice fishing hut to get it off there before dark. 

 

So I can expect, Mr. Speaker, I will see certainly the member 

from Last Mountain-Touchwood being one of the first out of 

this building to get out there and get a hold of his ice fishing hut 

and pull it off. So . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s daylight until after 7 today. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Now I see . . . Well yes, that’s right, Mr. 

Speaker. The days are getting longer. So he doesn’t have to 

really rush at 5 o’clock. He could kind of take a little bit easier 

because he has probably until, oh, 7:15, 7:30 before it gets dark. 

So plenty of time to get out there and get a hold of the ice 

fishing hut and get it off that lake there just in time, so that the 

conservation officer doesn’t come around at the urging of the 

minister tomorrow morning and leave a nice big ticket stuck on 

the door of that ice fishing hut, so that the member, my 

colleague across the way there, wouldn’t find himself in an 

embarrassing situation of having to pay a fine for the ice fishing 

hut that he forgot to take off the lake in time. 

 

But yes, Mr. Speaker, you should allow a little time because it’s 

been warm the last few days here and there could be some 

premature melting on the ice there and that fish hut could have 

maybe settled in a little bit. And if it froze by evening, it’ll be 

starting to freeze already, so he may have to dig it out a little 

bit. So be a little bit mindful that it may take you a little time to 

get it out there and get it off. 

 

But I think it’s safe to say that if you’re out in the middle of the 

lake like that and you’re rescuing your fishing hut, you don’t 

have to worry about beaver runs because they wouldn’t have 

beaver runs in that part of the lake — at least I would hope not. 

But anyway, Mr. Speaker, I hope that the public service 

announcement here has been beneficial to the thousands of 

people that are watching as well as my colleagues in this 

Assembly here. 

 

But on a little more serious note, Mr. Speaker, I think the intent 

of the Bill, at least at first blush, is probably one that is of good 

intent. It’s suggesting that the hunting and the fishing and the 

trapping industries are important industries to our society, 

important industries to our economy, important industries to 

this province, important enough that it should be recognized in 

a special day set aside to recognize the importance that it has 

brought to us throughout our history and been such a driving 

force and a development of our great province of ours. But it 

also is important to recognize that it’s a huge contributor to our 

society and to our economy on an ongoing basis. 

 

So I think if that is the intent, and I think it’s certainly an intent 

in the right direction, my concern, Mr. Speaker, is, is this 

simply the only thing that this government intends to do as far 

as the industry is concerned? And as far as being able to satisfy 

the industry’s needs as perhaps, as perhaps organizations 

representing the industry here have been lobbying the 

government for certain changes, certain changes to Acts that 

exist today, and that this government has decided that well no, 

they don’t want to make those changes. They don’t want to 

make the changes that various organizations have been 

lobbying this government for. 

 

They would rather try to perhaps satisfy the concerns by simply 

designating a day out of the year and then turn to these 

organizations and say, well no, we’re not going to be able to 

make the changes to the Act that will affect your livelihood. 

We’re not going to do that at all. But we’re going to set aside a 

day. We’re going to call a special day — November the 15th, I 

believe it is — and set that aside and call it a hunting, fishing, 

and trapping heritage day. And that should be enough to satisfy 

you. 

 

Yes, we’re not going to make any changes that’s going to have 

a positive effect on your industry, or those changes have a 

positive effect on your ability to maintain your livelihood and 

that, to feed your family. But we’re going to make you feel 

warm and fuzzy for one day, and we’re going to set aside a day. 

In fact we may even etch it on the calendar. We may even have 

it etched on the calendar at some point in time saying that this is 

the hunting, fishing, and trapping heritage day, and that you 

should for that one day just feel warm and fuzzy because your 

industry’s being recognized. 

 

It doesn’t do anything as far as ensuring your livelihood. It 

doesn’t do anything ensuring that you have wildlife in this 

province from generation to generation to generation to be able 

to sustain that livelihood, but also just able to sustain our sports 

industry that depends upon, quite frankly, those wildlife. 

 

And that is quite frankly disappointing to me, Mr. Speaker, 

because in order to do that, the government would have had to 

go out and consult, consult with those people involved in the 

industry — not only the First Nations and Métis people who 

depend upon it as a way of life but also to consult with the 

sports fishing and the sports industry, whether it be the fishing 

industry or whether it be the hunting industry or those involved 



March 15, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4193 

in trapping in the trapping associations across this great 

province of ours. And they do have associations because they 

have conventions every spring. 

 

And to talk to them and to ask them to put forward 

recommendations as to their suggestions or what changes 

should take place that would be beneficial, be positive to their 

society, to their industry so that the government could 

incorporate that in the changes when they introduce an Act in 

this great Assembly of ours. When they introduce an Act, I 

would hope, Mr. Speaker, it would be modernized, modernized 

up to the current time so that it reflects the reality of the 

industry as it exists today. 

 

In order to do that, you need to go out and talk to those people 

who are involved in the industry so that you can get that 

feedback, so you can get the feedback from the industry and get 

their recommendations as to meaningful changes that would 

ensure the industry would be strong and the industry would 

thrive into the future. And the industry has everything at stake 

and nothing to gain and everything to lose if they don’t do their 

part working hand in hand in concert with government officials 

to ensure that we have a strong wildlife population in this 

province and that wildlife population stays strong, not only into 

the foreseeable future but for generations to come. 

 

Because we’ve identified, Mr. Speaker, I think as a society 

we’ve identified in the past mistakes where certain species were 

overhunted and were perhaps even hunted into extinction. 

We’ve identified those certain species that were saved just in 

the nick of time, and I’m thinking of the whooping crane, for 

example. There was just a few whooping cranes left and it was 

with a good intervention and a great deal of very careful 

planning, careful handling by officials and people very versed 

at doing this stuff that we were able to save that species and 

have that species around for those of us of our generation to 

enjoy and hopefully for generations to come. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we don’t want to see anything that would 

jeopardize those species that we have today. In fact what we 

want to see, Mr. Speaker, is rules and regulations put into place 

by this government or any other government that would ensure 

that that wildlife population would stay strong, would stay 

healthy, and would be there for the future generations to enjoy. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, in order to balance that population, to ensure 

that population stays balanced so that it’s healthy, so that it’s 

capable of being able to sustain itself into the future; this is 

where man plays a role in setting a limits of hunting. And that 

limits of hunting, Mr. Speaker, is so important because that 

ensures that we have a safe and healthy population to be able to 

be enjoyed by those coming in the future. 

 

So to do that, Mr. Speaker, you need to — before you make 

changes such as introducing in Bill 117 here, making changes to 

the hunting and fishing and trapping industry in this great 

province — you need to carry out that consultation. You need 

to talk to those people whose livelihood it is, whose livelihood 

depends upon having that strong wildlife population. And it’s 

not just, Mr. Speaker, the individuals who are involved in 

hunting. 

 

It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. What we need to do is to talk to 

people. We don’t need to jam. We don’t need to bully. We 

don’t need to try to intimidate. What we need to do is to talk to 

those people who are involved in the industry, Mr. Speaker. 

And I would urge that this government would have done it. It’s 

disappointing, Mr. Government, to see that this government . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Being near the hour of recess, 5 

o’clock, this Assembly stands recessed until this evening at 7 

p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 

 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4161 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4161 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4161 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4161 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4161 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4162 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4162 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4162 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4163 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4163 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4163 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4163 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4163 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4163 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4164 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4164 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4164 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4164 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4164 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4164 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4165 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Les Rendez-vous de la Francophonie 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4165 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4165 

 Honouring the Memory of Clayton Gerein 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4166 

 Student Wellness Initiative Toward Community Health 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4166 

 Gas Plant Expansion 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4166 

 Party Tactics 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4167 

 Employment Statistics 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4167 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Poster 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4167 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4168 

 Supply of Health Care Workers 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4168 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4168 

 Medical Education 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4169 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4169 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4170 

 Forthcoming Budget 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4170 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4170 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Enhancement to Wildlife Damage Compensation Program 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4172 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4172 

POINT OF ORDER 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4173 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4173 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4173 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 



 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 125 — The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2009 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4173 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4174 

 Bill No. 134 — The Opticians Act 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4175 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4175 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 117 — The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4176 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4181 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4183 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


