




















































Hansard: November 10, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 9A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 2010, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5967 

 November 10, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

privilege and my honour to introduce to you and, through you, 

to all members of the House members of Canada’s Armed 

Forces Reserves who are seated in your gallery. I would ask 

that all members join me in welcoming them to their Assembly. 

 

They are Major Brad Hrycyna, commanding officer, 

Saskatchewan Dragoons; Lieutenant Commander Corey 

Thiemann, commanding officer, HMCS [Her Majesty’s 

Canadian Ship] Queen; Lieutenant Don Mitchell, executive 

officer, HMCS Queen; and Captain Andrew Curr, adjutant, 

Royal Regina Rifles. 

 

Later today, Mr. Speaker, I will be introducing The 

Commissioners for Oaths Amendment Act, 2010. It is a 

necessary part of the duties of an officer in the Armed Forces to 

administer oaths, but until now, Saskatchewan has only allowed 

permanent members to administer oaths for their members of 

their force. So this will put reservists on the same footing as 

regular members of the force. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we recognize the contribution of all members of 

our military, and we feel it only appropriate and fair that we 

have our reservists placed on the same footing as regular 

members. And this Bill will enable us to do that. We recognize 

and thank them for their contribution. They give up their time 

for training and other duties. They may be called up for active 

duty. Some members have lost their lives, most recently in 

Afghanistan, and I think it’s a small recognition that we can 

give them for the work that they can do and the contribution 

that they make to our democracy. Thank you and I would ask 

that all members join in welcoming them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 

the Minister of Justice in welcoming our guests here today. As 

members of the Assembly know, my son is a reservist and 

served in Afghanistan in 2008. And I want to assure our guests, 

through you, Mr. Speaker, that every member of this Assembly 

understands the important work done by our reservists in 

Canada, in Afghanistan, and throughout the entire world and 

that the government can expect the co-operation of the entire 

Assembly on the recognition that they want made. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, seated in the east gallery here today, I’d like to 

introduce to the Assembly a community leader here in Regina, 

a gentleman by the name of Steve Ryan. And Steve has been 

born and raised and educated here in Regina. He has a degree 

from the University of Regina. He was a student athlete, a 

member of the Regina Rams, a phenomenal football player in 

fact, and always a very good supporter of community activities 

in that role as a student leader throughout that time as well. 

 

He currently is employed with Ranch Ehrlo Society as a leader 

within that organization, supporting youth at risk and building 

brighter futures within our province. Him and his fiancée, 

Hayley, support many causes within our fine city. He comes 

from a fantastic family, Mr. Speaker. And I know his father, 

Bob — who I knew personally, who was a senior leader within 

Ranch Ehrlo Society, who made dramatic changes for the better 

within our community, who passed away just a few years ago 

— is remembered fondly within our province for his legacy of 

making a better future. His mother, Barb, is a phenomenal 

individual who leads within our community in so many ways. 

And he has fantastic sisters, Mr. Speaker, and a brother that’s 

pretty special himself, who’s a punter for the Seattle Seahawks. 

 

And I know it’s been said by our leader before, Mr. Speaker, 

that Steve entered politics for many reasons: to build a better 

community, to create better futures for young people, to build 

an economy. But he also ran, Mr. Speaker, I believe, to become 

more famous than his professional football-playing brother with 

the Seattle Seahawks. And he’s well on his way. He’s a hard 

worker. And I know that he’s running, Mr. Speaker, in the seat 

for the New Democrats in Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. He’s 

going to work incredibly hard to earn the respect of those 

voters. And I know if he’s privileged to serve, Mr. Speaker, he 

will do so with respect, with sincerity, and will work incredibly 

hard on their behalf, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in providing 

a warm welcome to Mr. Steve Ryan, community leader. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

would also like to welcome Mr. Ryan to the galleries, and I’m 

glad to see that we have young people that are choosing to run 

for elected office. 

 

At this point in time, I’m pretty much enjoying that role for 

Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, so I think that I will be giving him 

stiff competition. But I do not know all of Mr. Ryan’s family. I 

do know his sister, Jill, and her husband who is a Tory MP 

[Member of Parliament] who also happens to be a very good 

friend of mine and a supporter of mine. So I’m going to enjoy 

the competition quite a bit. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 

reintroduce a person who, although he doesn’t want to admit it, 

is my cousin — Major Brad Hrycyna is sitting in your gallery 

— and thank him for his work with the military. And I’d like 

the Assembly to welcome him to his legislature. 



5968 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2010 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are 

growingly concerned about the condition and the safety 

conditions of our highways. This particular petition pertains to 

Highway No. 10. And I’ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and 

the junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety 

of Saskatchewan’s motoring public. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from Fort 

Qu’Appelle, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty 

here in Saskatchewan. And we know citizens living in poverty 

have long identified affordable solutions. Recent national and 

provincial initiatives, including the Saskatoon health disparities 

report and the Canada Without Poverty, Dignity for All 

campaign, call for a comprehensive poverty elimination 

strategy. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Saskatoon, Regina, Fort Qu’Appelle, Melfort, Tisdale, and Star 

City. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition regarding the need for hospice and palliative 

care here in Saskatchewan: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that all Saskatchewan people deserve quality 

end-of-life and bereavement care; that hospice and 

palliative care is known to help enhance the quality of life 

for those facing advancing illness, death, and 

bereavement; that a publicly funded and administered 

hospice and palliative care system, including residential 

hospices, would increase end-of-life care options for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectively 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to enhance and increase 

publicly funded and administered hospice and palliative 

care, including in-home hospice services and residential 

hospices, in order to ensure that all Saskatchewan people 

have access to high quality end-of-life care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of occupational health and safety. 

Mr. Speaker, the true cost of human suffering or loss of human 

life cannot be measured in dollars and costs. And the 

government continues to allow fines levied against companies 

for violations of occupational health and safety to be treated as 

tax deductible expenses. And now the government also 

continues to allow companies to treat these violations as fines 

levied for them as cost of doing business. And the petition reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to amend the laws so companies will not 

be allowed to get a tax deduction for fines levied against 

them under The Occupational Health and Safety Act and 

regulations and remove the existing cap on fines levied 

against such companies. 

 

And it’s in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by residents of Warman, Delisle, and 

Saskatoon and I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned 

residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the 

unprecedented mismanagement of our finances by the Sask 

Party. They allude to the two consecutive deficit budgets, the 

billions of dollars of debt growth that’s accruing under the poor 

stewardship of the Sask Party as it relates to our finances — 

$4.2 billion, Mr. Speaker, in just the next four years. That’s 55 

per cent growth in our debt, Mr. Speaker, all at a time where 

revenues are at all-time highs and where that reckless and 

unsustainable spending has simply outstripped that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may condemn the Sask 

Party government for its damaging financial 

mismanagement since taking office, a reckless fiscal 

record that is denying Saskatchewan people, 

organizations, municipalities, institutions, taxpayers, and 

businesses the responsible and trustworthy fiscal 

management that they so deserve. 



November 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5969 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed, Mr. Speaker, by good folks 

and concerned citizens of Humboldt and Saskatoon. I so 

submit. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Diwali Celebration in Saskatoon 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday, November 5th, I had 

the great pleasure of attending the Diwali celebrations at the 

Sikh temple in Saskatoon along with Naveed Anwar, the NDP 

[New Democratic Party] candidate in Saskatoon Sutherland. It 

was a busy and festive evening at the temple as hundreds of 

Saskatoon’s growing Sikh community were in attendance. 

 

Diwali is the festival of light, a time when some of the world’s 

great faiths celebrate the triumph of good over evil, and I was 

honoured to share this important time with Saskatoon’s Sikh 

community. Mr. Speaker, the hospitality of the Sikh community 

is second to none. Following the religious rites in the upper 

level of the temple, we proceeded to the lower level and were 

treated to a wonderful meal. While the food was certainly 

delicious, Mr. Speaker, the highlight of the evening was the 

closing fireworks display. Everyone, young and old, 

enthusiastically cheered with each whiz, crack, and bang as the 

fireworks lit up the sky. Those fireworks reminded us of the 

symbolism of light shining through darkness. 

 

I would like to thank the leaders of the Sikh temple for their 

hospitality and ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

Sikh community for organizing such a successful Diwali 

celebration. To all Sikhs across Saskatchewan: Sat Sri Akal. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Valour, Hard Work, Determination, and Commitment 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise with 

great humility. The words that I’m able to say in this House 

were made possible by the sacrifices of the men and women 

that we remember today. Mr. Speaker, I, along with all 

Canadians, look back in awe at the sacrifices that a generation 

of Canadians made not only for our country but for the world. 

 

The battles of the past, like World War I and II, was where 

Canada came of age. They gave birth to Canada’s identity. 

Valour, hard work, determination, and commitment — all these 

qualities were on display amongst the Canadian men and 

women that served in the bloody battlefields all those years ago. 

These are the same characteristics the members of our Armed 

Forces are continued to be known for today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to express my deepest appreciation 

for the sacrifices of the men and women that served in the past 

and acknowledge a dedication of bravery of current soldiers 

stationed in places like Afghanistan and elsewhere around the 

world. I would like to offer my sincerest gratitude to all soldiers 

that paid the ultimate price for freedom and give my respects to 

their families. I, along with all Canadians, owe them all for the 

great quality of life that we have today. Lest we forget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Sacrifice and Remembrance 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, tomorrow we mark the 

armistice of November 11th, 1918. It brought an end to the 

hostilities that were called, tragically and ironically, at first the 

war to end all wars, later the Great War, and then World War I. 

Some now consider this the beginning of a long war, a war that 

started in 1914 and didn’t end for almost another 80 years, and 

it continued in many forms but was fought for one purpose — 

to secure the liberties of free peoples and to preserve if not 

advance government with the consent of the governed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, whatever the nature of our current conflicts, 

whatever the extent of our ongoing struggles, it is fitting to 

remember the sacrifice. But we must also always remember the 

purpose of that sacrifice, the only purpose that can justify such 

a sacrifice — to ensure, in the immortal words of Abraham 

Lincoln, that government of the people, for the people, by the 

people shall not perish on this earth. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Canadians Remember 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On November 

11th Canadians remember the men and women who have 

served and continue to serve our country during times of war, 

conflict, and peace. We honour those who fought for Canada in 

the First World War, Second World War, and the Korean War, 

as well as those who have served since, particularly now in 

Afghanistan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, more than one and a half million Canadians have 

served their country, and more than 100,000 have died doing 

so. We remember because they gave their lives and their futures 

so that we may live in peace. We remember those who served 

as they willingly endured hardships and fears so that we could 

live in peace. We remember those who faced difficult situations 

bravely and brought honour to themselves, to their loved ones, 

and to their country. 

 

We remember those ordinary Canadians who made 

extraordinary sacrifices. We remember the accounts of war and 

the observations of individuals who witnessed the true nature of 

conflict. We remember these accounts of war so that we work 

diligently to prevent them from happening again. We remember 

on this day by paying special homage to those who have died in 

the service of Canada. We remember by wearing poppies, 

attending ceremonies, and visiting memorials. We remember on 

this day lest we forget why we must work for peace every day 

of the year. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



5970 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

A Family’s Service 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to honour all 

Canadians and world citizens who have fought for freedom and 

democracy, especially over the last 100 years. These men and 

women, over two major world wars as well as countless other 

world conflicts, have protected democracy. And our 

peacekeeping efforts have always been respected. We must 

always also respect our peacekeepers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of some of the service of my 

family members, and I want to say that very openly today. I 

want to recognize them and tell them that I respect them and 

support them, and of course we love them: my brother, John, 

who was a machinist in the Armed Forces for 26 years; my 

older brother, Wally, who was a flight engineer and served 30 

years. My sister, Dawna, served three years. My daughter, 

Taylor, served at the Esquimalt navy program. My uncle, 

George, was a World War II vet and spent three years overseas 

and my cousin, Charles, also served. 

 

And we all learned from my father, who was a World War II 

veteran, that service is really, really important. Mr. Speaker, as 

a World War II veteran, he was very proud of his sons and his 

daughters and his families and their service. At one time he 

asked me, why didn’t you serve? You’re a hippie. And I told 

my father, Mr. Speaker, at the time, dad, I chose not to serve; it 

doesn’t make me a hippie. I’m very proud of my family and 

very proud of you. Mr. Speaker, I’m also very proud of my 

community. Our mayor, Duane Favel, and the council have 

always celebrated this very special day. 

 

I ask all members of the Assembly to pay honour to all those 

who served their countries and sought world peace. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

A Hero in Her Eyes 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

November we honour the veterans who travelled abroad to fight 

for our country and our freedom. 

 

She felt half her heart go with him as he waved goodbye. She 

prayed every day for him to return to where he really belongs 

— home. She knew that whatever happened, she would be 

proud. She is a soldier’s mother. She wanted to raise a son who 

would grow up to do great things, but she never wanted to 

imagine her life without him. Now she is forced to prepare for 

it. 

 

It seemed like only yesterday; he was just a small boy with so 

much hope, energy, and potential. She smiles as she 

remembers. He wanted to be a fireman or a police officer. He 

wanted to make a difference in people’s lives. He chose to be a 

soldier. He wanted to fight for his country, his family, his 

home. He would make a difference in people’s lives. 

 

She could not be more proud of the son she raised. He is a hero 

in her eyes. If she is lucky enough to see him again, she knew 

her heart would be whole and the world would be a better place. 

If he didn’t make it home, if she didn’t get to hold him again, 

she knew he would have made the ultimate sacrifice. She would 

have made the ultimate sacrifice, and the world would be a 

better place. Now the whole world remembers. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Supporting Our Veterans 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My dad is a veteran of 

World War II. He served as an airplane mechanic. He’s now a 

resident of Sherbrooke’s Veterans Village. He’s 88 years old 

and his fellow residents are much the same age. They cannot 

share their stories anymore, as they’re pretty fragile. And 

they’re not in the home for long, as most of the veterans of that 

war are sadly dying. My dad is well cared for and respected in 

his home, but what really upsets me is that not all the veterans 

of our armed conflicts are being cared for or given the support 

that they need after serving our country. 

 

We hear so many reports today of lack of financial support 

from the federal government for our injured soldiers and in our 

armed conflicts. Men and women who have lost limbs, 

eyesight, mobility, or have received other life-altering injuries; 

who have lifelong post-traumatic stress and the subsequent 

difficulties living with that disorder; families who have lost 

wives, husbands, sons, daughters, moms, and dads who have to 

fight for survivor benefits — all of these stories of struggling to 

live with the consequences of war and struggling to be 

compensated. 

 

Canada has proudly sent soldiers to war to defend democracy 

around the world. It is shameful to hear and see the lack of 

respect for men and women who were and continue to be those 

defenders. 

 

So on this, the 2010 Remembrance Day, I want us to remember 

our veterans and all of our soldiers past and present, but to also 

demand that they be supported financially for the damage that 

service has done to them and their families. I want all veterans 

to have what my dad has — dignity and pride. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Foreign Investment in Uranium Industry 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier, and it’s dealing with what most Saskatchewan people 

and Canadians believe to be one of the most strategic resources 

in this province, our uranium in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Yesterday the Premier indicated that he was in favour of Bill 

C-436, which would open up our uranium resources to foreign 

ownership to a greater degree than they are today. My question 

to the Premier is this: how is it consistent for the people of this 

province, who are urging us to have more control over our 

resources, potash and uranium, why do we choose now to open 

it up for more foreign ownership of the uranium in 



November 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5971 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the position is completely 

consistent. We said very clearly to the national government of 

the people of Canada and Saskatchewan, in the case of the 

potash takeover, that we welcomed BHP’s intention to build a 

new mine at Jansen Lake. We still welcome that new project. 

What we do not welcome is the takeover of the reserves of 

potash in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

That same logic would also apply to uranium. Mr. Speaker, it is 

a strategic resource. We have it in abundance. And while it’s 

important that we allow for foreign investment in individual 

mines, we don’t want foreign control of the reserves, Mr. 

Speaker. And the two things can exist together, just as they can 

in terms of the potash industry, Mr. Speaker. We want to 

continue to be open to international investment, but we want to 

maintain control of strategic reserves for the people of 

Saskatchewan and Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — But I think, Mr. Speaker, this clearly 

outlines why the public in Saskatchewan sees inconsistency in 

the Premier’s approach. Because on the one hand he argues that 

we want more control over resources, and I think probably 80 

per cent of Saskatchewan people believe we should have more 

control. Then on the other hand, flip-flop, now he wants more 

foreign ownership in an even more strategic resource, uranium. 

 

And even the CEO [chief executive officer] of Cameco is 

seeing this inconsistency. And I want to quote from today’s 

Leader-Post where he says, he said the provincial position of 

simply eliminating the current non-residency policy, and I 

quote: 

 

Just failing to understand that so much of the rest of the 

world regulate their uranium and nuclear industry in a 

much more closed way than . . . we do today. 

 

This is the CEO of Cameco saying we shouldn’t move to more 

open ownership by foreigners than other competitors in other 

parts of the world. Given that, why is the Premier choosing 

today to open up and sell off even more of a strategic resource, 

that being the uranium in Northern Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of 

Saskatchewan is not in favour of foreign control of the uranium 

reserves of the country and of our province. The Government of 

Saskatchewan is in favour of foreign investment, though, in 

uranium, Mr. Speaker, and in potash. 

 

Well the members opposite are laughing. Maybe they believe 

this is an inconsistent position. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes it is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well the hon. member for Athabasca says, 

yes it’s inconsistent. Funny that, because it is exactly the 

position held by the NDP when they were in office, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In 2007 Minister Cline wrote to the federal government and 

said we want the non-resident ownership policies — the same 

foreign ownership prevention he’s talking about today — we 

want them changed, Mr. Speaker. This letter clearly highlights 

that while he was in the cabinet in 1997, they didn’t agree with 

Mr. Grandey. They believed that foreign investment could 

occur in a new mine, Mr. Speaker, but the difference is on the 

control of the reserves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s what they believed in ’97 when he was in the cabinet. 

That’s what Minister Cline wrote under the NDP to the federal 

government in 2007. Mr. Speaker, there’s flip-flops going on 

on that side of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facilities 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in the last provincial election, the Premier and his 

colleagues promised to be the most accountable and transparent 

government in the history of the province. But on Monday, they 

responded to a freedom of information request by blacking out 

or censoring over 900 pages of the relevant information 

regarding Amicus. 

 

My question is to the Premier. My question is to the Premier: 

how can members of this Assembly do their job when the 

government that he’s in control of censors the relevant 

information? How are members of the public supposed to make 

informed judgments of the work of their government without 

the information? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

freedom of information request the member opposite’s referring 

to came from the health region, not the ministry. They have 

restrictions they need to live by. Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the 

House the member referred to the relationship with the Catholic 

Health Ministry . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Allow the minister to respond 

to the question placed by the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

Order. Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday in the House the member opposite referred to the 

relationship with the Catholic Health Ministry as cronyism. Mr. 

Speaker, the Catholic Health Ministry does many good projects 

around the province. We also have a good working relationship 

with the Lutheran church through Lutheran Place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if another faith-based organization or a non-profit 

organization would like to come forward with suggestions for 

new, innovative ways of providing long-term care, our 

government will be happy to sit down, talk to them, listen to 



5972 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2010 

them. Mr. Speaker, we’re not afraid to look at innovative ways 

of providing health care service, Mr. Speaker, unlike the 

members opposite who closed long-term care beds. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member believes 

the answer that he just gave this Assembly, he also believes in 

the tooth fairy, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, his Ministry of 

Health had all of the appropriate material redacted. 

 

Now, last spring we learned that Michael Stensrud, someone 

appointed by this government to the Saskatoon Health Region 

and also happens to be a major Sask Party supporter, had 

received the untendered contract to build the Amicus facility. 

We were assured, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Stensrud had recused 

himself from any discussions related to the Amicus deal. 

 

So to the minister: what assurances can he give us that Mr. 

Stensrud has kept that promise, given that the government has 

censored most of the relevant information in its response to my 

FOI [freedom of information] request? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can answer 

that question with a quote from Mr. Paul Ellis who is on the 

board of directors of the Catholic Health Ministry, Mr. Speaker. 

His quote is: 

 

Because we’re a private entity that will fully cover the 

capital costs of the facility [that’s fully cover the capital 

costs, Mr. Speaker] and assume any risks associated with 

its construction, the government was not involved in the 

tendering process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious the member opposite isn’t concerned 

about long-term care. What the member opposite is concerned 

about is smearing two well-respected families in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, what the member opposite is 

concerned about is going back to the dark old days of Grant 

Devine in this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mike Stensrud’s donated more than $16,000 

to the Sask Party. Then his company, Miners Construction, 

receives the untendered contract to build the Amicus facility. 

 

I’m interested that the minister refers to Paul Ellis because Mr. 

Stensrud was supposed to have recused himself from any 

discussions related to this deal. But one of the few pieces of 

information in the FOI that wasn’t completely blacked out 

reveals that on May 20th — the day there was a bad editorial 

regarding that government in The StarPhoenix — Mr. Stensrud 

emails to the Saskatoon Health Region staff and board members 

an advance copy of a letter to the editor written by Paul Ellis of 

the Catholic Health Ministry. 

So to the minister, to the minister: what other discussions 

related to Amicus did Mr. Stensrud participate in? Is there 

information related to other discussions included in the blacked 

out material? What is that government hiding, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

member opposite never met a conspiracy theory that she didn’t 

like. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will read another quote from Paul Ellis. And it 

says, “We take serious exception to any allegation that any 

political influence impacted the awarding of this contract.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a pilot project, going to be evaluated, and if 

it works out well, we’ll be looking at expansion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have news for the member opposite. She’s 

concerned about everyone that she says are Sask Party 

supporters. Well, based on a recent poll, the vast majority of 

Saskatchewan citizens are Sask Party supporters. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the government promised to be 

the most open and accountable government in the history of the 

province, maybe the history of the world. But what did we get 

on Monday? We got 900 pages of redacted material. They try 

and lay it on the doorsteps of the Saskatoon Health Region. 

Well I can assure the members: that’s not going to work 

because it was that government that had that material blacked 

out. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they said that this wasn’t a loan guarantee. I 

want them to answer this question. An email dated May 12th 

between the Saskatoon Health Region officials contained an 

attachment entitled, “Saskatoon Regional Health Authority loan 

guarantee.” This is followed by several pages whose contents 

were completely censored except for KPMG’s letterhead. 

 

So to the minister: given all this, how can the Sask Party claim 

that they didn’t sign a loan guarantee? And if this is not a loan 

guarantee, then why is the information censored, Mr. Speaker? 

What are they hiding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, as far as a loan guarantee 

goes, another quote from Mr. Ellis: “Any suggestion that the 

provincial government is providing a loan guarantee is false.”  

 

Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite is truly concerned about 

long-term care in this province . . . Mr. Speaker, what is our 

government doing for long-term care? An innovation project 

with the Catholic Health Ministry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also are providing $143 million for 13 new 

long-term care beds throughout the province, regardless of the 

opposition critic trying to mislead the communities in thinking 

those projects are cancelled. They’re not, Mr. Speaker; they’re 

going forward.  



November 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5973 

What was their record on long-term care, Mr. Speaker? One 

hundred and thirty-six beds cut, cancelled. Mr. Speaker, not 

under this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — A good segue, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 

Minister of Highways talked about the Sask Party record on 

long-term care beds. Well, Mr. Speaker, this year alone, 30 

beds were closed at Muskeg Lake, 5 beds in Wawota, 16 beds 

closing in Canora, 15 beds in Melville, 6 beds in Kamsack, 6 

beds in Esterhazy, and 10 beds in Carlyle that I have heard of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s 88 long-term care beds being closed 

because of the Sask Party’s deficit budget. That’s 88 seniors 

who need a long-term care bed and don’t have one and are 

being forced to move away from family and friends because the 

Sask Party is closing beds in their home communities. Mr. 

Speaker, half a year into this deficit budget, 88 long-term care 

beds are being closed. 

 

To the minister: how many additional beds will be closed 

because of the Sask Party’s financial mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I find it unusual that the 

member opposite is suddenly concerned about rural 

Saskatchewan, which they neglected for 16 years. Fifty-two 

hospitals closed, which she said in her Throne Speech debate 

the other day that people don’t want to talk about anymore. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, people in rural Saskatchewan do want to 

talk about that. 

 

Our record for long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker: 13 new 

projects announced, $143 million. We’re providing long-term 

care for our residents. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, not only has the Sask Party closed 

18 long-term care beds in this year alone, that’s six months of 

this year, they have broken their promise to build 13 new 

long-term care facilities in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve travelled to 10 of those 13 communities, and 

there are no new facilities being built. Those facilities and those 

people are being told that they won’t receive money until at 

least the fall of 2011. 

 

To the minister: with the new Amicus model, why can’t all 

these communities have their long-term care facility projects 

start right now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

member just said 13 projects cancelled, and yet my colleague 

from Arm River just informs me they just had a sod-turning for 

the project there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unlike the members opposite, when we have a . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the members to allow 

the minister to respond to the question from the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. The Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unlike the 

members opposite, when this government has a sod-turning, we 

follow through with construction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that member has toured the province, sent letters 

to all kinds of communities telling them that their projects are 

cancelled. That does a complete disservice to health care 

foundations, like in my community of Rosetown, who are 

trying to raise money. And then people read those things in a 

letter saying the project’s cancelled, which is not true, Mr. 

Speaker. Those projects are going forward. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, get the shovel in the ground. It’s 

freezing up, and people can’t live in a photo op. 

 

But it’s interesting the minister talked about Rosetown. I was in 

Rosetown, and the people in Rosetown did not know about this 

new Amicus deal. These communities, those 13 communities 

are out having teas and bake sales and putting on health levy, 

and they don’t know about Amicus and the new deal in town. 

So in the minister’s very own community, why isn’t he telling 

them about Amicus and what it means to that community and 

giving them that option? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

member talked about fundraising going on in the community. 

That’s absolutely right. The citizens of my community are 

working hard to raise money for that project. And that member 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member from . . . Order. 

Order. Order. The member from Prince Albert Northcote, the 

member from Prince Albert Northcote will allow the Minister 

of Highways to respond to the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, the member trying to 

convince people that project’s cancelled when it isn’t is not 

doing anyone any good. People of Rosetown recognize for what 

that is; it’s crass politics, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, her new-found care, concern for rural 

Saskatchewan is almost laughable. I’ve lived my life in rural 

Saskatchewan. I saw what 16 years of NDP neglect, in fact 

disdain, for rural Saskatchewan did. And that’s one of the 

reasons I chose to run for politics, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



5974 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2010 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the people in 

Rosetown would be happy to hear from this person, who chose 

to run because of the big record that wasn’t there for the people 

in rural Saskatchewan, why he hasn’t talked to them, why he 

does not talk to them. Why do they not know in Rosetown 

about the deal that Amicus got in Saskatoon? Why don’t they 

know in Kerrobert? Why don’t they know in Kelvington? Why 

don’t they know in Shellbrook? Why don’t they know in Prince 

Albert? Why don’t they know in Meadow Lake? Why don’t 

they know? 

 

Nobody on that side, nobody in that government is telling these 

communities that there’s a new deal in town. They don’t have 

to raise 35 per cent. If you’re in Saskatoon and you have friends 

in the Premier’s office, you don’t have to. So why can’t the rest 

of these communities have their money now and get their 

projects going? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

that member insinuates that somehow we’re hiding this. Mr. 

Speaker, it was in the Throne Speech. Mr. Speaker, the people 

of Rosetown are well aware of what’s going on in this province. 

They’re well aware of what the members opposite did when 

they were in government. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t need that 

member to tell me how to communicate with the good people of 

Rosetown. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, in October the Sask Party 

government directed SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] to change its policy so that as of January the 1st of 

2011, brokers who sell SGI motor licences and plates will no 

longer have to carry or sell products from SGI Canada. When 

asked about it, the Minister Responsible for SGI admitted that 

the primary beneficiary of this policy change will be private 

insurers like big banks and out-of-province corporations, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

My question to the minister is simply this: why would this 

government undermine SGI, the people’s-owned corporation, in 

order to benefit private insurers, and the profits go largely 

outside Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member 

opposite, I don’t want to say he’s misquoted me on the floor of 

the legislature, but the reality is, Mr. Speaker, that when we 

announced that the requirement that SGI licensing issuers 

would no longer be required to also sell property and casualty 

insurance from SGI, when we made that announcement, we met 

with IBAS [Insurance Brokers’ Association of Saskatchewan]. 

 

One of their first concerns was that the banks may not have a 

fair, may not be a fair competitor. Immediately, Mr. Speaker, 

the discussion was that that would be something that we would 

look at. Subsequent discussions, that they would probably not 

be allowed to sell . . . have a motor licensing issuer in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So for that member to make that 

assertion, Mr. Speaker, is not . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Saskatoon Fairview 

continues to want to answer the question when I had opened the 

floor to the Minister of Crown Investments. I ask the minister to 

. . . to allow the minister to complete the response. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — So, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have 

the opportunity to clear that up for the member. I think that one 

of the primary beneficiaries may be the company, the 

Co-operators. It was founded here in Saskatchewan. It wasn’t 

until the mid-’70s when those members outlawed the rights of a 

company from Saskatchewan like the Co-operators to offer this 

product line. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, this policy change which the Sask 

Party government made will take away a market share from 

SGI, and it will affect SGI’s bottom line, its financial viability. 

But there may be some hope, Mr. Speaker. There’s a quote 

from the minister in The StarPhoenix saying that the final 

decision hasn’t been made, he’ll revisit this policy change. He 

may even change his mind, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So my question is this: since the final version of this policy 

change has not been written, and since there is still time to 

reverse your decision, will the minister reverse his decision and 

not undermine SGI, the people’s corporation owned by every 

citizen of the province, and not force this change to occur? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 

opposite seems to be taking to paraphrasing my quotes, Mr. 

Speaker, and he does a rather poor job of it. I think if he’s 

concerned about the viability of SGI, I spent the summer 

touring Saskatchewan, to communities that were ravaged by 

flooding, Mr. Speaker. We heard repeatedly that SGI was a 

leader in Saskatchewan, that they were standing up for the 

people that had insurance policies with them, and really led the 

industry and ensured that the industry tried to get up to the 

standard SGI met. 

 

I’m confident that they will maintain market share. They will 

grow their market share, Mr. Speaker. For that member to talk 

about SGI losing ground, Mr. Speaker, if we look at the last 

time those guys were in government, Mr. Speaker, they felt that 

SGI needed these sorts of protections. They were looking for 

solutions where the government would step in to protect SGI. I 

know SGI is a strong company that will stand on its own. 

 



November 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5975 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, nothing prevented the Co-operators 

from also selling SGI products so they could obtain a licence to 

both issue motor licences and plates, Mr. Speaker. So we’re 

going to allow a company to sell only their own products, Mr. 

Speaker, where many SGI brokers, in fact the majority, sell 

various insurances from many, many companies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we now have a new Minister Responsible for 

the Crown Corporations in our province, but the government’s 

approach, Sask Party’s approach, hasn’t changed at all. The 

Premier continues to undermine our Crown corporations by 

cutting off little pieces of them one at a time, reducing their 

market share, and destabilizing their financial viability for the 

long term, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what’s most frustrating is that Saskatchewan’s people, who 

own these Crowns, are the ones who are going to pay a price, 

both now and in the long term, for this Premier’s ideological 

vision and agenda. Why is the Sask Party government so 

determined to undermine our Crown corporations, and why are 

they doing so by stealth and not being honest and forthright 

with the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, 

Mr. Speaker, doesn’t recognize that SGI is here to serve the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If that member thinks that our government doesn’t stand behind 

our Crowns, he is wrong. We have invested more in our Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker, in the first three years of our 

government than they have in several. In the last two years of 

government, Mr. Speaker, they spent $1.2 billion investing in 

our Crowns. This year alone, Mr. Speaker, we will spend $1.2 

billion on the Crowns. 

 

If, Mr. Speaker, they think that there is some agenda to damage 

the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, that agenda is from the early 2000s 

when those members made bad investments, Mr. Speaker, in 

Channel Lake, in SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company], Mr. Speaker. And if you want to 

know, Mr. Speaker, who was making those decisions, Mr. 

Speaker, he now sits six desks in on that side of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I just want 

to remind members and the member from Regina Dewdney that 

when placing questions or responding, to ensure that the words 

used are words that will really build up the character of the 

Assembly. And the comment about not being honest is, as I 

look at the words over the years, does not fit with what 

Speakers have ruled in the past have been words that are seen 

as really to be used in the Assembly to uplift the debate. So I’d 

ask members to be mindful of that in future questions. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 149, The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, 2010 be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 149, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be now read 

the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill No. 150, The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 be now introduced and read 

a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 

No. 150, The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 

Amendment Act, 2010 be now read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 151 — The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technologies Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 151, The 

Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies Amendment Act, 



5976 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2010 

2010 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Advanced 

Education and Immigration has moved that Bill No. 151, The 

Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies Amendment Act, 

2010 be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 152 — The Commissioners for Oaths 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 152, 

The Commissioners for Oaths Amendment Act, 2010 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 

No. 152, The Commissioners for Oaths Amendment Act, 2010 

be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 153, 

The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 

No. 153, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now 

read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 154 — The Provincial Court Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2010/Loi de 2010 portant modification 

corrélative à la loi intitulée 

The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 154, 

The Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010 be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 

No. 154, The Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 

2010 be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 155, The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be 

now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has moved 

that Bill No. 155, The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

be now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 



November 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5977 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 616 — The Bed Bugs — Right to Know Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill No. 

616, The Bed Bugs — Right to Know Act be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has moved first reading of Bill No. 616 . . . Order. The member 

from Saskatoon Massey Place has moved that Bill No. 616, The 

Bed Bugs — Right to Know Act be now read the first time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 39 through 83. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 39 through 83 are tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Gantefoer, seconded by Mr. 

Wyant.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker, and it’s indeed a pleasure to enter the 

debate on the Throne Speech. And I do want to just recognize 

and say thank you to a few people before I start my speech. 

 

First of all, I want to say congratulations to the new member 

from Saskatoon Northwest. I had an opportunity to work in that 

campaign, and I know that it was enjoyable. And I know the 

new member did a lot of work and has a very, very 

distinguished reputation in Saskatoon as a strong council 

member. And I wish him the best in the Assembly, and I know 

that he’ll do a good job on behalf of his constituents. 

 

I want to say as well that in working that riding I got to know a 

number of people very well. In fact coming once a week to the 

constituency, I think I know poll 12 in Saskatoon Northwest 

probably better than most of the polls in my own riding. So I’ve 

got to get back to work. But there are some special people I met 

while I was working in that riding, and if the MLA [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly] doesn’t mind, I will be back to visit a 

few of them because we actually got to know each other very 

well. But I do want to congratulate him on a job well done. 

 

I want to thank as well the staff here in the building, 

particularly our caucus staff for the work they do in helping us 

every day getting ready for speeches and question period every 

day and also to the staff in my office. Fred Kress, who has 

come to work for me recently, is doing a good job, as well as 

my former CA [constituency assistant] Pat Porter who worked 

for many years with the former member, Harry Van Mulligen, 

and did a wonderful job. I just want to thank both of them for 

the work that they have done and will do. 

 

The other thing, Mr. Speaker, it’s a special day for me because 

it’s my father’s birthday. He is 94 years old today, November 

10th, and I just wanted to recognize him because he . . . 

obviously one of the pioneers in Saskatchewan. And although 

he didn’t give the nine children very much money, what he did 

teach us is determination and hard work. And I just want to 

thank him very much for that on his 94th birthday and to say 

happy birthday to him. 

 

I want to say as well a special thank you to my family, my 

immediate family of Rubiela and our five children, who have to 

put up with the work I do and the many hours. And I know all 

members of the Assembly can agree on this thing, that our 

families, without their support and kindness when we go home 

at night, we wouldn’t be able to do our work. So I do want to 

thank Rubiela and the kids for all their work they do on a daily 

basis in getting things ready that normally the father or the dad 

should be doing that they have to pick up. 

 

The other issue that I would say is that without my many sisters 

that I have, who politic for me . . . And I know other members 

of the Assembly have the support of their work as well in their 

constituencies. They’re great organizers and I want to thank 

them also. 

 

But most of all, I want to thank the team here, the 19 members 

of the New Democratic caucus who have been extremely 

supportive and work with me on a daily basis. Thank you for 

your patience and hard work. As I said to the press after the 

recent poll came out, there’s a lot of work to do, and what we 



5978 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2010 

need is determination, smarter work. And I know that we’re all 

up to it. And as your leader, I intend to do just that. And with 

the right determination, the right amount of hard work, we can 

do a lot of good things for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I know that being Leader of the Opposition . . . I’ve talked 

to Allan Blakeney about the years that we spent together as 

desk mates. Allan had this desk, and I sat where the now deputy 

leader sits. And it was an interesting time because we had just 

been defeated by a young premier by the name of Grant 

Devine. 

 

[11:00] 

 

And Grant Devine was an interesting person because he was 

elected leader and didn’t have a seat in the Assembly. I believe 

that was in 1980, and the seat was opened up in Estevan, and 

the then leader of the opposition ran in late 1980. And Premier 

Blakeney invited me to go and help with the campaign and 

manage the campaign that the leader was running in, in 

Estevan. 

 

And it was considered a safe seat for the Conservative Party. 

And it was an amazing campaign. And it could be, Mr. Speaker, 

that you actually were involved in that campaign in one way or 

the other. Maybe not, never. But the issue is that in a safe seat, 

the leader of the Conservative Party lost that seat. And so you 

can imagine the devastation of the leader of the opposition, 

having won the leadership, then having a safe seat opened up, 

lost the by-election. And on the night of the election, it was a 

very quiet party at the Conservative headquarters in Estevan. 

And I remember going over to greet the leader who had just lost 

his seat. 

 

But what amazed me was the determination of two individuals. 

 

Grant Devine who then had no seat and was under considerable 

scrutiny by the press as to whether or not he had any chance of 

winning the election in 1982 . . . and he was written off by 

almost all political pundits as being a failure and no way his 

party could ever come back. But lo and behold, within 18 

months, not only did he win government but won 56 of the 64 

seats, and it was an amazing comeback. 

 

But even more impressive was the role of Allan Blakeney after 

the defeat of 1982. And I remember visiting him in his office, 

and he was there at work the day after the defeat, didn’t take 

any time off. I went to see him. And I couldn’t imagine how an 

individual who had just went from a majority government to 

eight seats could actually have the stamina and the moral 

courage to stand up in the House day after day because at that 

time there were 56 members of government and 8 members of 

the opposition. 

 

And we had more government members on this side than we 

had opposition. There were 8 of us and 15 Conservative MLAs 

on this side of the House, and it wasn’t easy. And people talk 

about the noise in the House now. I’ll tell you, at that time 

when Blakeney was asking his questions from this desk, most 

days you couldn’t distinguish his voice on the mike because the 

heckling wasn’t coming from that side of the House. It was 

coming from right here. And they were pretty good at it, and 

they did a lot of it. But Blakeney was determined, and he 

worked hard. And it didn’t get better right away. 

 

In fact one of our seats was contested in the Hammersmith seat 

in Prince Albert where there was a controvert. We had won it 

on election night, but a year and a half later or two years later, 

we actually lost the seat pretty convincingly. And we continued 

what looked like a downward slide, and it was not easy to be 

leader of the opposition then. In talking to Blakeney over the 

last few months and to Premier Romanow, they say this is not 

the most fun place to be, but it’s very important work. And 

that’s the attitude I take to this. 

 

And I really urge all of the members of the New Democratic 

Party and the members of the caucus to understand that life in 

politics, especially in opposition, can be discouraging. But we 

need to have strength. We need to have openness, honesty, hard 

work because the principles that we stand for and the principles 

that the party opposite stand for are important and the work you 

do is important. And with that in mind, I just want to thank my 

MLAs and urge their hard work, understanding, and we will do 

a great job in finishing off the last year. And with a little bit of 

luck and good planning, we’ll be very competitive when the 

election comes in November 7th of 2011. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, on the issue of the Throne Speech, 

and I don’t intend to speak long today, but I do want to add 

some comments about the speech. Obviously the speech had a 

lot of words but not very much substance, and this was 

certainly picked up by the media in Saskatchewan who called 

the new road or the new pathway for the government to be full 

of potholes. And I think it’s true because most of the Throne 

Speech was backward-looking. And I always have the idea that 

running a government down the road or running a vehicle down 

the road while you’re looking in the rear-view mirror isn’t a 

very good idea because you may end up in the ditch. And I 

think that there are many things in this Throne Speech that will 

take the government in that direction if there aren’t new ideas 

that come forward before the next election. 

 

One of the most discouraging things in the Throne Speech was 

the lack of any discussion or meaningful assistance for farmers 

in the province who have been really left out in the cold when it 

comes to getting assistance from the provincial government. 

 

And I want to say as well that the need for photo identification, 

the one piece of legislation that is referred to, I want to say that 

this opposition is going to be fighting any attempt to exclude 

people from voting in the next election by the use of photo ID 

[identification]. We’re going to fight as hard as we can to stop 

any kind of legislation that would do that from happening. 

 

And the reason that I want to make that public and make it clear 

is so that people don’t think we’re being negative about it. In 

fact it’s a very positive move to oppose this legislation, because 

it will exclude many of the pioneers like my father who, in 

long-term care, would find it very difficult to find their way to 

get photo ID. Many of them for 10, 15 years haven’t driven. 

Many of the elderly women never drove in their lives. They 

don’t have photo ID. They likely never will have photo ID. 

 

And if the thought here is to insist that every senior in every 

long-term care home has to have photo ID in order to vote in 

the next election, that there’s any intent to disenfranchise 



November 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5979 

people who have voted all their lives and built this province, 

and to take the right to vote away because they don’t have 

photo ID, this is wrong. And we will make a point of it and we 

will fight that legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I refer again to agriculture because I want to 

spend a little bit of time talking about the devastating flooding 

that occurred in this province. And many of my colleagues were 

out and involved with the farming community during this crisis. 

We met in many communities across the province, but 

particularly in the central part of the province almost from the 

centre of the province, or Saskatoon, all the way to Yorkton — 

a very, very large area of devastation. 

 

And then adding on to that, Mr. Speaker — and you will know 

because we’ve chatted briefly about it in your office — the 

terrible condition of many of the crops in the province. Then to 

overlay that with late seeding and late crops, with a frost that 

devastated much of the crop that was still green in the field, and 

we called on the provincial government, and municipal 

governments called on the provincial government, to make a 

payment of $100 per acre for unseeded, flooded, and those 

crops that were wiped out because of the terrible condition of 

the soil because of the rainfall and the terrible amount of water 

that was accumulating on the land. 

 

And the response from the provincial government was meagre 

indeed. Although most farmers thanked the government for the 

$12 an acre, everyone knows that the cost of combining in the 

province is at least $20 an acre. The cost of fertilizer is $20 an 

acre. And when farmers start adding up what their costs are, 

$12 an acre is not nearly enough from the provincial 

government. 

 

At a time when the resources of the province are booming, at a 

time when oil is getting back close to $100 a barrel, this is not a 

time to be treating farmers with this kind of disrespect. There’s 

many provinces that have gone through similar kind of 

circumstances. The auto industry, I take as an example, in 

Ontario. The Premier there went to Ottawa and demanded to get 

billions of dollars for the people of Ontario and for their auto 

industry, and we all shared in that. The money came forward. 

The money was paid to the auto industry and it survived, and 

the tens of thousands of jobs involved are still there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, our farming community is in that kind of a 

condition today. They need help. They need much more than 

$12 an acre, and I would urge the provincial government, 

before the session ends, to make a commitment that the $100 

per acre that is needed to see farmers, grain farmers, through 

this winter, is paid out so that they’re in some sort of a position 

in order to pay their taxes, pay interest, make land payments, 

pay for crop insurance premiums which are now coming due, so 

that indeed they will be around in the spring in order to seed 

next year’s crop. 

 

In the area of livestock, I know the government and the minister 

made an announcement yesterday. There has been a call from 

APAS [Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan] 

and the cattle producers in the province of a four-point 

program. And what has been called for is $150 per head for 

breeding stock, $75 a head for the yearling cattle that would be 

carried over, feed subsidy program, and also a reseeding of 

flooded acres. 

 

The program announced by the Premier and the minister 

yesterday covers off feed assistance, and that’s much 

appreciated. It also covers off $30 an acre for reseeding of 

flooded land, but it does not deal with the most fundamental 

part, and that is $150 a head for breeding stock so that feed can 

be purchased to carry the cattle through this winter. 

 

And most analysts predict that if, in fact, this kind of a payment 

isn’t forthcoming from the provincial government and the 

federal government, that the devastation we’ve seen in the red 

meat industry in this province since 2007 will continue. Beef 

production is down since 2007. In the area of hog production, 

it’s even worse. I think it’s now only 50 per cent of what it was 

in 2007. Half of the hog herd has disappeared, and this is a 

major part of the economy of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And so I’m urging the Premier and urging the government and 

urging all members of the Assembly to understand the 

devastation and hardship that there is in rural Saskatchewan, 

and that these kind of payments be made, and that they be made 

from the profits that we’re receiving from the resources that 

we’re blessed with right across this province, and urge them 

also to make sure that when farmers go to seed the crop next 

year, that they have the money to buy diesel fuel, to buy the 

fertilizer, to make the payments so that indeed the agricultural 

economy, which is fundamental to the province, is there for 

another year. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, while the non-renewable resources are 

important — potash, uranium, oil, gas, they’re very important 

to the economy — at the end of the day, we are still an 

agriculture-based economy. And while the percentage of the 

GDP [gross domestic product] may be smaller than it was 10 

years ago or 20 years ago, no one can tell me that if you allow 

the collapse of the red meat industry and the grain industry in 

this province, that we are going to have as meaningful a society 

and economy as we have with agriculture. And we need to get 

that kind of a payment in place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to health care, we all know that our 

health care is the best in the world. Canada has the medicare 

system that was created here in the great debates that went on in 

this Assembly during the creation of the medicare system with 

Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd. We are the inheritors of 

a great health care system. And what is sad, as I travelled 

around the province and the Health critic and Labour critic 

travelled the province, was the devastation that’s occurring and 

the unravelling of the health care system in many parts of the 

province. And this is true in places like Leader, where I 

attended meetings with hundreds of people who had come out 

to protect their system because they want their hospital and 

ambulance service to remain. 

 

And the fact of the matter is, because of lack of funding and 

lack of responsible action by the government, many of the 

health care systems and health care regions in the province are 

starved for money and they’re having to make tougher and 

tougher decisions. That means that ambulance service is 

cancelled. Projects to do long-term care facilities are on hold 

because they’re being forced to raise 35 per cent of the funding 

while Saskatoon, a new centre, untendered, is being built there 



5980 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2010 

without that kind of 35 per cent. 

 

And we’re asking for fairness. The same rules should apply in 

Saskatoon for the construction of a nursing home, a facility for 

long-term care as happens in the rest of the province. It simply 

isn’t fair that in the 13 communities in rural Saskatchewan they 

have to hold bake sales and do bottle drives and hold picnics to 

raise their 35 per cent while the residents in Saskatoon or 

Regina don’t have to raise the 35 per cent. 

 

So we’re urging for a level playing field between rural and 

urban Saskatchewan. And we’re going to be making a 

concerted effort over the coming weeks and months to make 

sure that every rural citizen understands that there’s a two-tier 

system when it comes to building long-term care homes. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Now others will argue, well that’s being negative, that you 

shouldn’t tell the truth about the funding system that’s in place. 

But the fact is that we will insist that this government, if they 

have one program for urban people which is fair, that they 

make a change that the resources of the province pay for 

long-term care. I don’t mind them making that change. I think 

they should make it. 

 

Our policy is that you had to raise 35 per cent, but as we get 

more money from resources and can afford more, we should get 

rid of the 35 per cent. But what isn’t fair is that you do it for 

certain people in certain areas of the province, especially when 

you’re using untendered contracts to get there. It’s not fair to 

make rural communities to do something different, and we’re 

going to be making a point of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the finances of the province, I know 

that our critic commented a great deal on the fact that when this 

government was elected in 2007, the economy was booming. 

And we had record numbers of oil wells being drilled, record 

numbers of gas wells. Oil production was on the rise. Gas 

production was rising. Hog production was at a peak. Many of 

those things have changed and changed pretty fundamentally. 

 

As I mentioned, hog production in the province is half of what 

is was in 2007. That is not a good sign of good financial 

stewardship. Oil production is down, from 2007 to 2009, is 

down by 2 per cent. Now to hear the Premier speak, you would 

expect that it’s up by 20 or 30 per cent or some fantastic 

number. Oil production is down in this province between 2007 

and 2009. Gas production is down by 12 per cent. Gas 

production between 2007 and 2009, gas production has 

decreased. Oil wells and gas wells being completed in the 

province has dropped, between ’07 and ’09 from 3,500 to 1,500 

— half of what it was when Lorne Calvert was premier. 

 

Now these are interesting statistics, and they’re ones that the 

public needs to get to know. Because if they’re listening to 

speeches from the members opposite, they don’t hear these 

facts. And my members and the members of our party have to 

be ensured that the facts of the oil industry are better known so 

that we can have policy in place that will get us back to the 

drilling numbers that were there when Lorne Calvert was 

premier, and we get the gas production back and higher than it 

was when Lorne Calvert was premier. Because Lorne Calvert 

as premier took the economy of Saskatchewan to a peak that it 

had never been before and hasn’t been since, and he deserves 

credit for that and the team of MLAs and cabinet ministers 

deserve credit. 

 

The area of potash . . . We all know the contraction that 

happened in 2009, and I don’t blame that on the Premier or the 

members of the government. But my point is that they should 

have known that there was a very big problem when the 

economy of China and the United States were in a recession 

and agriculture prices dropped off the cliff. Everyone knew that 

we were going to take a hit on potash. And the reason we ended 

up with a deficit was because the minister of Finance at that 

time and the Premier and the Minister of Energy and Mines 

simply miscalculated and blew a huge opportunity to be ready 

for that storm that was appearing on the horizon. 

 

And we all know the result. We know that we were off on our 

projection of revenue from potash by 1.9 billion. In fact we 

ended up paying back to the potash companies $200 million for 

a net difference of 2.1 billion. That is a pretty big mistake. And 

I don’t know that any other Finance minister or any other 

premier has made that kind of a mistake and led very directly to 

a contraction of the economy, not a growth in the economy, but 

a contraction of the economy of over 6 per cent. The largest 

contraction of any economy in the country. 

 

Now that’s a pretty interesting record. And I never heard that 

mentioned by the Premier or the Minister of Finance, that the 

economy actually didn’t grow; it contracted by 6 per cent. That 

is an amazing feat. I’m not sure that if any time in our history in 

government — I will check the record — but I don’t think in 

any year that we were in government, CCF [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation] or NDP, that the economy 

contracted by 6 per cent. That is a new record, a new record 

held by the government, the Sask Party Government of 

Saskatchewan, and it’s one we don’t want to see again. 

 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to resources . . . 

And I want to talk for a few moments about the resources of the 

province and the importance of them to the future well-being of 

families in this province. It’s our opinion that the resources 

belong 100 per cent to the people of the province, 100 per cent. 

And our duty as a legislature and the duty of the government is 

to maximize the return from each and every one of those 

resources. 

 

Whether it’s potash, oil, gas, we need to extract as much as we 

can for our shareholders. All the oil companies and gas 

companies, potash companies, they will try to get as much 

money as they can for their shareholders. That’s how it works. 

That’s their responsibility. As boards of directors, their 

responsibility is not to the general public of Saskatchewan. 

They’re on the board of directors because they want to 

maximize profits to their shareholders. So let’s understand that 

the role of companies is not to look after the good folks here; 

their job is to maximize profits. 

 

The role of the Premier and the government of the day is to 

maximize profits and returns from resources for the people of 

this province. And what the New Democratic Party is saying is 

that during this debate around potash, several things have 

become clear. First and foremost is that regardless of who owns 



November 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5981 

the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, we need to get a 

better return and a better deal. 

 

And what I want to say, and what we are urging the government 

to do in this 30-day period before the federal government 

makes a final decision on whether or not the sale to BHP goes 

through or not, is that we are clear and consistent in what we’re 

expecting from companies coming to this province. And that 

certainly isn’t clear in the last two days, where we’ve seen the 

Premier go from being . . . wanting control over resources and 

going to Ottawa and around the country giving the speech about 

control of resources, to now today in the House saying that the 

uranium of the province is open for foreign ownership. 

 

That is very confusing to the people of Canada, the people of 

Saskatchewan, and for companies in Australia and other parts 

of the world to know what is our policy. Because there is a 

Member of Parliament from Australia, I understand, in Canada 

today talking to the press about how confusing it is for 

investors from his part of the world to know what the policy in 

Canada is on foreign investment. Because at the same time as 

they’re having members of parliament — Brad Trost I 

mentioned yesterday — travelling to Australia indicating that 

all the resources of Canada are open for investment, and I know 

the Premier, doing a good job in terms of selling Saskatchewan 

in China, I don’t think explained to them that certain elements 

of our resources weren’t open for foreign investment. 

 

This comes as a surprise to many people who wanted and 

thought the province was open for business, that they could 

come and buy and sell and trade shares and invest in the 

province. Now we’re being told that that isn’t the game plan. 

And I agree with that, that we should have control on our 

resources. So just when I understood that the Premier had come 

to that position, we now have a press release saying no, we 

want to sell the uranium. And the public is naturally confused 

as to what our position is as a province. 

 

Now you can sell either one of those positions, but it’s really 

hard to sell both at the same time. And we need a consistent 

message to the public of Saskatchewan, our shareholders, on 

the resource development and foreign ownership. And we need 

it for the investors — whether they’re from Alberta, whether 

they’re from China, whether they’re from Brazil. What is the 

policy of the Government of Saskatchewan on foreign 

ownership? They have to be open, transparent, and that’s the 

way it works in many parts of the world. 

 

I had the great opportunity to work for a company in Calgary, a 

Canadian, one of the largest international energy companies in 

Canada. And we had the opportunity to go to Norway to open 

offices and get a project started similar to what BHP was trying 

to do here in Saskatchewan. And it works this way. You get 50 

or 60, probably BHP had 200 people here trying to figure this 

deal out. What do you do? How does it work? And in Norway, 

you go there. You read the law. You go to the government and 

you ask for a lease to drill oil wells offshore. And the same 

rules applied to Nexen as applied to Petrobras — a state-owned 

oil company in Brazil — or the Chinese oil company, Sinopec. 

Everybody plays by the same rule. 

 

There’s no shakedown in a back room where you go in and, 

will you give me $1 billion? Well you can’t do that, Mr. 

Speaker, because giving a $1 billion upfront payment to do a 

project would be unheard of in Norway. It would be unheard of. 

And it’s embarrassing. It’s embarrassing for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And it’s embarrassing for the companies 

involved because that’s not the way they should be treated. If 

you’ve been there and say we’re open for business, and then 

they come with their money to invest, you don’t then call them 

in and say, well by the way, there’s an extra $1 billion you have 

to pay. You need transparent rules. 

 

And in Norway, the rules are that if you meet their standards of 

labour law, if you meet their standards of human rights, if you 

accept without question their royalty structure, then you can 

come in. And some companies aren’t allowed in. Some 

companies have a bad human rights record in some African 

country. The Norwegian government won’t let them in. Or 

they’ve had too many accidents on a platform in the Gulf of 

Mexico. You can’t come in if you have bad labour record. Or if 

you’re an anti-union company, you can’t go to Norway. They 

don’t want companies there that will fight unions because the 

platforms in the North Sea are unionized. And companies know 

that. And do they run away from Norway and say, well we’re 

not going there because they have unions and they have lots of 

royalties to pay and they have to pay high taxes? They line up 

in the queue to get into Norway. That’s what happens. And only 

the very best companies in the world in the energy industry are 

allowed into Norway, even though they have strict union 

regulation, strict labour regulation, strict environmental law. 

 

And why do companies line up to go there? Because you can 

make money and it’s secure and it’s predictable. And there isn’t 

someone shaking you down for $1 billion. That’s not the way to 

do business. It’s not the way to do business here, in Norway, or 

anywhere in the world. It should not be done that way. 

 

That’s why, that’s why when we are asking on a daily basis for 

clarity in what our investment strategy is in this province, it’s 

hugely important. Because I agree with many people who say, 

if you don’t have those regulatory structures in place and 

transparent, then you do lose investment — not because you 

have tough rules but because you have inconsistent rules. And 

you have different tiers for different people, different levels of 

investment rules for different people. That’s not the way a 

jurisdiction should work. 

 

And what we’re urging the Premier and the government is that 

during this 30-day period, while we wait for the decision from 

the federal government on whether or not Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan can be sold or not, is to get our house in order, to 

make public statements about what the rules of engagement are. 

 

And as of today, I think there’s even more confusion to the 

CEO of Cameco and the CEOs of other corporations of what 

the rules are around investing and foreign ownership of 

uranium. Well we now know that the Premier believes it’s open 

for business with uranium. Well that’s different than it was with 

potash. And he’s now saying today, well even on potash, I now 

invite foreign ownership wherever it wants to happen in potash. 

That’s a very different story than we were hearing a week ago 

while the poll was going on that the Leader-Post did. 

 

So it will be interesting to see how this plays out, because I 

think companies and the people of Saskatchewan want a 



5982 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2010 

consistent policy when it comes to energy and investment in the 

province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are many other areas that I want to 

talk about. The other, on potash and resources, is it’s my belief 

that because we’re blessed with so much of the resource of 

uranium and potash and oil and gas, that we need to have a 

level of return that maximizes the number of dollars we get in 

royalty and taxes. And that should be reviewed on a regular 

basis, and that some of that money, a small amount of it, a 

small percentage, should be saved for future generations. Not 

for this generation, not to be used if cattle prices go down or if 

we get some flooding, but we need a fund for future 

generations. 

 

[11:30] 

 

And again I go to Norway for the example. The sovereign 

wealth fund in Norway now has $450 billion. It’s a small 

country — I think about 4 million people — not greatly 

different than Alberta, a similar amount of resource, oil, as 

Alberta. Alberta now has 14 billion in their Heritage Fund. 

Norway, who have been working on this project about the same 

length of time, have $450 billion in their sovereign wealth fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that as a society we have a responsibility 

to future generations that a small stream of money from 

royalties . . . and whether this is an increase, which I would 

think it should be because I think there’s room, because I know 

that because the board of directors at the Potash Corporation 

have granted the CEO of their company . . . They can do what 

they like because it’s their money. They have granted the 

equivalent of $450 million in share options to their CEO. And I 

understand it that their senior executive, if you take their total 

package, it’s about $1 billion, that there’s a little bit of extra we 

could take for the people of Saskatchewan. And I would take 

that extra money and put it into a fund for future generations. 

Call it whatever you like. 

 

But the reason I wouldn’t leave it in a rainy day fund is because 

every once in a while you elect a government — like the Sask 

Party — who take the rainy day fund when it’s not raining and 

spend it all. Nobody knows what they spent it on, but they spent 

it all. The 2.3 billion that had been saved for a rainy day is all 

gone. We don’t have a heritage fund. We don’t have a savings 

plan anymore. It’s all gone. So all of the resources . . . The burn 

rate on the money is incredible over on the other side of the 

House, but nobody sees the result of where the money has been 

spent. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m urging the legislature over the next 

months and over the next year or two to establish a fund that 

would take the stream of increased royalty that we’re able to get 

from potash, uranium, whatever resource it is — after we do 

that kind of a review — and save it for future generations. And 

I think that’s a responsibility that we as legislators have to 

future generations, and I want to urge members to accept this 

kind of a concept. 

 

Finally I want to say to the Assembly and just say in closing, 

Mr. Speaker, that because of the lack of consistency in this 

Throne Speech, the lack of a vision for the future, so much 

looking back through the rear-view mirror and backslapping, I 

find it very much impossible to support this Throne Speech. 

 

And I want to close on the note that . . . Because it lacks any 

support for environmental renewal in this province when it 

would come to things like CO2 sequestration, clean coal, 

reducing CO2 emissions, a permanent monitoring of potential 

damage done from the oil sands from Alberta — none of those 

things are included in this Throne Speech. 

 

It doesn’t deal with the need for child care and early learning. 

They’ve done some, but when I go to the University of 

Saskatchewan in Saskatoon — and my members opposite will 

know what I mean — 500 names on the list for daycare at one 

institution, the University of Saskatchewan. For a booming 

economy and a rich nation it’s an embarrassment and we should 

fix that. Nothing in the Throne Speech. 

 

When it comes to northern Saskatchewan, barely a word 

mentioned about the terrible situation of housing and roads and 

the youth suicide rate. Nothing mentioned about this tragic 

situation that our Lieutenant Governor has spoken to us about at 

functions. We have no response for that. 

 

It does not deal with the plight of farmers where the 

government, in the last budget, ripped away $93 million of 

support out of AgriStability. That money is not returned and 

we’re worried about that. 

 

It says nothing as well about the whole area of university 

funding as it would relate to the needs of tuition, housing for 

students. And there are many other reasons, Mr. Speaker, that I 

will not be supporting the Throne Speech. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour to enter the Throne Speech debate at this late hour 

knowing that a vote on the amendment and a vote on the 

original motion are pending, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to say that it’s important for us on each occasion I 

believe, at the time of the Throne Speech debate, to 

acknowledge those who make it possible for us to serve in this 

particular Assembly. And I do so now, both the . . . Well most 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, my family for the support that they 

provide to me and the patience that they have with the vocation 

that I’ve chosen. I want to just say on the record again, Mr. 

Speaker, how much I appreciate them for their support. 

 

I want to thank the people of Swift Current, the constituents of 

Swift Current, for the honour that I have to represent them at 

the beginning of another legislative session here in Regina, and 

we’ll work hard to do that, Mr. Speaker. We have a number of 

priorities in Swift Current as well, as exists across the province. 

In terms of capital projects, we’re needing some education 

capital projects in our community because it’s growing. The 

number of students, the enrolment in Swift Current is 

increasing, and that’s putting pressure on old facilities that 

really haven’t had the attention of government, certainly for a 

number of years prior to our government taking office, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Also long-term care in Swift Current is an issue. And I’ll be 



November 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5983 

talking more about long-term care during the course of the 

debate. Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this, that the people of Swift 

Current are very interested in the Throne Speech’s commentary 

on long-term care. It was interesting to hear — and I’ll get into 

this a bit more — but it was interesting to hear the Leader of the 

Opposition in his speech talk about how he does not support the 

funding divide that exists for long-term care, 65/35 — 65 from 

the province, 35 from the local area where the long-term care 

home will be. 

 

He also said he doesn’t . . . I would assume then he doesn’t 

support the fact that a similar divide exists for acute care in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, a policy that was implemented by him 

and his government or certainly carried out when they were the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if he now doesn’t support that kind of a formula, 

if it’s the position of the Leader of the Opposition, if it’s the 

position of the Health critic, the member for Saskatoon 

Eastview, that all communities ought to have the same access 

that our tertiary centres have in terms of provincial funding or 

at least ought not to have to raise their own money, then that 

side opposite should stop with the attacks that we’ve seen in the 

last couple of days on the Catholic Health Ministry and on the 

model that we’ve unveiled for Saskatoon because if we can 

expand that model to other places — maybe with the Lutherans, 

maybe with Mennonites, maybe with other faith-based groups, 

maybe with other non-profit groups — if we can expand that 

model to places like Swift Current, to places like . . . to rural 

communities, to places like Rosetown, to places like 

Kelvington, if we can expand that model, do you know what it 

means, Mr. Speaker? It would mean that those communities are 

not required to raise their share, Mr. Speaker. That’s one of the 

advantages of that program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s difficult perhaps for members to realize that if 

they say something, if they say something in the Legislative 

Assembly, if they raise a question in the Legislative Assembly, 

someone’s writing it down, Mr. Speaker. Someone will write 

down the things that they say about long-term care in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And they’ll note that on one hand 

they say we need a model in the province where local 

municipalities don’t have to raise their share, and then on the 

other hand, they will oppose the very models that are 

introduced, the innovations that will introduce, that may well 

achieve that very, very laudable goal, all the while providing 

better long-term care, Mr. Speaker, for our seniors. 

 

Allowing our seniors to age with dignity, allowing them to age 

together, Mr. Speaker — this is what we’re seeing from the 

Catholic Health Ministry model. This is why this side of the 

House supports it. This is why that side of the House should 

also support the model and stop their attacks on the Catholic 

Health Ministry, where yesterday I think they referred to them 

as cronies of the government. Well, Mr. Speaker, we may also 

do a deal with Mennonites and with the Lutherans and with 

other faith-based organizations, Mr. Speaker, and those 

members will stand up and say, I guess they’re all cronies of the 

government too, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are going to turn around what has been a dearth of 

long-term care facilities in this province. We’re going to turn 

around a situation where those members opposite refused to 

build long-term care facilities, closed long-term care beds, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s our intention through partnerships, through 

innovation, to deliver for our seniors what they deserve — the 

dignity of long-term care in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And it is an issue in Swift Current as well, so again I want to 

acknowledge the constituents of Swift Current for the honour 

that I have to represent them here in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech painted two pictures of 

Saskatchewan. It painted a picture of the new Saskatchewan 

which has been built principally by the people of 

Saskatchewan, by the business community here, by a brand new 

attitude that they have in Saskatchewan. It painted a picture of 

that new Saskatchewan, one that’s growing, one that’s leading 

the nation in growth, one that’s experiencing greater population 

growth than we have in 50 years, Mr. Speaker, one that 

chartered banks will say it will lead the country again next year, 

not second or third or in the middle of the pack but will lead the 

country next year in economic growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that new Saskatchewan that the Throne Speech 

speaks of then — a growing Saskatchewan with a broader tax 

base because more people are moving in than ever before — 

that new Saskatchewan then can provide a better quality of life 

for our residents because the tax base is broader. It means that 

new Saskatchewan can provide the long-term care beds we 

need. It means that new Saskatchewan can say we have to fund 

more training seats for doctors because there’s been a decade’s 

long . . . a shortage of doctors and shortage of residency 

positions in the province that have led us to the position we’re 

in today. Well that new Saskatchewan with a broader tax base 

and a growing economy can make investments in front-line 

workers, can actually achieve the goal of hiring 800 new nurses 

one year ahead of schedule, something that members opposite 

said was impossible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in that new Saskatchewan that the Throne Speech 

references, we can actually improve emergency care for 

Saskatchewan people. We can work with Alberta, with the 

Alberta STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] initiative, 

Mr. Speaker, to bring STARS [shock trauma air rescue service] 

to this province as well. Mr. Speaker, in the new Saskatchewan 

we’re going to have the capacity and companies are going to 

have the capacity to support something that’s long been needed 

in Saskatchewan, an alliance with a great road ambulance 

network, an alliance with rotary winged emergency care. And, 

Mr. Speaker, the people of the province of Saskatchewan are 

very much looking forward to this, and I’m very grateful that 

the former minister of Finance, the member from Melfort, is 

going to be leading our efforts in this regard. 

 

I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, I think he’s already ahead of 

schedule. He’s had some great meetings with companies. We 

know that Crescent Point has stepped forward with a very 

significant commitment to support STARS. I think certain 

mining companies are going to be very interested in wanting to 

support STARS. We’re going to see broad-based fundraising 

initiatives. 

 

And by the way, you’re also going to see the Government of 

Saskatchewan support this as well. Mr. Speaker, we are going 

to co-operate in the delivery of STARS with the existing road 



5984 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2010 

ambulance network, with the existing fixed-wing ambulance 

service which provides an outstanding service to the people of 

the province. And I want to say on behalf of the government 

how much we appreciate the work, the work of those public 

servants, public sector workers, public sector professionals that 

provide the fixed-wing ambulance services to the people of 

Saskatchewan. It’s going to be even better, Mr. Speaker, that 

. . . [inaudible] . . . augmented with helicopters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the new Saskatchewan, because of the fiscal 

capacity that is here, because of our growing tax base, we can 

invest in more child care spaces in Saskatchewan because we 

know that parents need more child care. And we’re going to be 

doing that, Mr. Speaker, in the months ahead. 

 

We can invest in more affordable housing units, Mr. Speaker, 

through Sask Housing. And we’re going to be able to do that. 

And then through some innovation, we’re going to be able to 

bring about — and this was also referenced in the Throne 

Speech — a brand new initiative to create more housing 

opportunities in this province, to create a greater opportunity 

for people to move from being renters, thereby freeing up those 

accommodations, Mr. Speaker, but to give them the chance in 

an affordable way to become homeowners in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We look forward in the months ahead to laying 

out the details for that plan. 

 

With a housing shortage, you can attack that problem at a 

number of points in the continuum, Mr. Speaker. For example, 

if the government were to attack this challenge at that point on 

the continuum where student housing is an issue, that will help, 

Mr. Speaker, because of course it frees up rental 

accommodations in Saskatoon, Regina, Moose Jaw, P.A. 

[Prince Albert], where we have a large number of 

post-secondary students coming every year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this point — and this is very, very important 

— on this point, for the first time in 30 years maybe, there is 

brand new student housing being built in the province of 

Saskatchewan. It’s been needed for a very long time, and it’s 

happening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve had people tell me that the official bird of 

Saskatoon should be the crane, the construction crane, because 

of the facilities that are being built on the east side, not just the 

student housing but the Academic Health Sciences centre as 

well. Mr. Speaker, we’re making the important investments in 

housing that is going to free up rental accommodations. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, just earlier this week this government, on-reserve, 

I think in an unprecedented way, announced together with 

Chief Bear and the people of the Whitecap First Nation a brand 

new housing project on Whitecap First Nation, Mr. Speaker. 

And of course this is going to help with respect to the 

continuum as well. I believe this is precedent setting, Mr. 

Speaker, because in the past, in the past when First Nations 

would come — as they would have come from Muskeg Lake — 

and said let’s do a long-term care facility in Muskeg Lake 

on-reserve, we can help First Nations people and we can also 

relieve some of the pressure points in terms of long-term care 

needs in non-First Nations communities around there, when 

they came to the previous administration with that, the 

government said no, it’s the federal government’s jurisdiction. 

Go see them. I’m sure when First Nations have come in the past 

to the previous government to say let’s do a housing project on 

a First Nation, no, that’s a federal jurisdiction. Go see them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, First Nations people in this province cannot and 

ought not have to wait for that kind of deflection, Mr. Speaker. 

They ought to be able to go to the provincial government who 

will work with the federal government to try to deliver these 

things together. If it’s important for First Nations to have that 

long-term care, to have accommodations, then the Government 

of Saskatchewan said we’re going to be there. We’re going to 

be a part of that. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s also part of our housing 

plan that was referenced in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are some other things that we’ll be able to 

do because of this new Saskatchewan’s growing economy, and 

I hope because of the will and the effort of members on this 

side of the House and . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . and 

maybe with the support of the member from Regina Rosemont 

who’s shouting from his seat again. 

 

We hope that all members in this Assembly will say, look. In 

this new Saskatchewan, where we have increased fiscal 

capacity, where we have great post-secondary institutions, 

engines of research in the province, where we have a public 

health care system . . . In that Saskatchewan, we can say that 

those who have MS [multiple sclerosis], that unlike any other 

jurisdiction in North America that we’re aware of, we are 

prepared to lead in the development of the research around 

liberation treatment to at least get questions answered for the 

residents of this province. 

 

And I have neighbours and friends — I’m sure every member 

in the House have family members, neighbours, and friends — 

who are part of fundraising. There’s bake sales going on. 

Churches are raising money for people because, born of hope, 

they’re wanting to travel far away, spend thousands of dollars 

of their own money to try this liberation treatment. They’ve 

seen the same anecdotal evidence that we have seen. It’s mixed, 

Mr. Speaker. But in almost every anecdotal case, there’s signs 

of hope. There’s some symptom relief. In some cases, there’s a 

lot of symptom relief. So in this new Saskatchewan, we’ll look 

at that issue and say . . . You know, unfortunately we have the 

highest incidence of MS in Canada, probably on a per capita 

basis on earth. If not here, then where, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 

answering the research questions around liberation treatment? 

 

Well the Government of Saskatchewan is working hard with the 

Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation to answer that 

question. We believe it should happen here. We are prepared to 

lead. And I’ve had people in the media ask me, well how do 

you feel about the fact that no other province is going to join 

with you in this research? How do you feel about the fact that 

you’re alone in this? Mr. Speaker, we are not alone. We have 

doctors. We have researchers who have stepped forward who 

want to work on this. We have proposals coming in, Mr. 

Speaker. Most importantly we have the family members, and 

we have the friends of those loved ones who are afflicted with 

MS. And we have, most compellingly of all, MS patients who 

are standing with the Government of Saskatchewan. We are not 

alone on this new road in terms of MS research and will carry it 



November 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5985 

through, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this new Saskatchewan, with a growing 

economy and an expanding tax base, there’s some other 

important things we can do. We’ve worked hard as a 

government, as a new government, to try to keep the promises 

that we made in the election, Mr. Speaker — over 100 already 

kept. But there’s a couple that are left remaining. Mr. Speaker, 

the Throne Speech lays out what those are and commits that we 

will keep the promises that we’ve made in totality, all the 

promises that were made to the people of Saskatchewan. Two 

of the major ones that remain are phase 2 of property tax relief, 

education property tax relief, Mr. Speaker, and phase 2 of 

municipal revenue sharing. Those will be big items in the 

budget upcoming. 

 

But I want to say for the record here, as His Honour read the 

Speech from the Throne for the record that day and as we’ve 

indicated by ministers and MLAs in the months, in the weeks 

previous, I want to say unequivocally, those promises will be 

kept by this Assembly. 

 

And when they are, and when they are, I have hope, I have 

some hope that members opposite, maybe the member from 

Regina Rosemont will stand in his place and say, you know, we 

believed in a long-term plan for municipal revenue sharing too. 

We were trying to put it together in the dying days, in the dying 

days of our administration. And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that that 

member and other members in this Assembly will stand up on 

that day and say — notwithstanding partisan politics — they 

kept a promise. The municipal sector needed it. SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] wanted it. 

SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] want 

it. They want fair revenue sharing. Just like, you know, 

obviously the provinces want it from their national government, 

Mr. Speaker. And I hope they will say we acknowledge that the 

government has done the right thing. I hope they do. 

 

When we deliver on the final phase of meaningful education 

property tax relief in this budget, I hope we’ll hear the same 

kind of generosity and common sense from members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. In the election campaign, I 

remember the two competing property tax plans. Members in 

this House ran under different property tax plans, but both of 

them wanted to provide some property tax relief. Members 

opposite had a plan for some long-term property tax . . . Well it 

wasn’t really long term, it was more rebates, which we know 

are very temporary and a bit of an administrative problem, 

frankly. In the long term, they’re pretty cumbersome. But that 

was their plan, and they had some property tax relief in their 

platform. 

 

Something was missing though from that plan. I’m not sure if 

members know what was missing from the plan, but that plan 

didn’t include the group that’s hardest hit by education property 

tax. It ignored them completely. And those are the farmers, 

those are producers, those are ranchers, the people of rural 

Saskatchewan who pay a disproportionate share of education 

funding through this tax. Mr. Speaker, that was their plan. 

Mercifully, it wasn’t the plan that was selected by the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The plan they chose was a longer term solution, Mr. Speaker, 

which is not an easy thing to do, to replace basically the 

education property taxes system with a province-wide mill rate. 

But we made that decision, we chose to do that, to implement it, 

and it has been the right thing. It has meant tax relief for people 

whether they live in the city or the country, north or south.  

 

And phase 2 is coming. And again maybe it’s naïve hope, but 

I’m clinging to it, that the members opposite, the member for 

Rosemont will say, you know, we don’t agree with everything 

the government does, but boy they’ve done a good thing by 

farmers and by the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I’m not sure . . . The hon. member has asked from his seat, can 

we pay for it, Mr. Speaker? I can assure the members opposite 

that what will come forward in the spring budget is a balanced 

budget, another balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. In just a few 

more sleeps, we’re going to have the mid-term report of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. In just a few more sleeps, that 

member who’s chirping from his seat is going to see the 

mid-term financial report for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I don’t want to give that report away. All the work’s not 

done yet, Mr. Speaker, but I have a feeling his question as to 

whether or not we can continue to have fiscal probity in the 

province and balanced budgets and keep promises will be asked 

and then answered when that mid-term report is tabled here in 

the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of specific issues I want to 

address. And I know we’re anxious to get to the vote. I’m 

anxious to get to the vote. There’s a little bit of suspense as to 

who’s going to win, Mr. Speaker, and I want to find out what 

happens with the Throne Speech vote and the amendment here 

in a moment. But I do want to touch on some important things 

in terms of the Speech from the Throne and this new 

Saskatchewan, this new road that we’re on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know the economy of Saskatchewan is 

obviously perhaps the most important part of the analysis of 

this new road, the most important part of the temperature taking 

that sometimes speeches from the throne will do as to the state 

of the province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this — and again it’s not from 

me, it’s from others; it’s from economists, it’s from the 

economists of chartered banks, it’s from different groups across 

the province and business groups — the state of the economy of 

the province of Saskatchewan is strong, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 

already touched on it a bit. We have unprecedented population 

growth in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker. In so 

many different categories we continue to lead or we’re in the 

top three in the country in terms of wholesale trade, in terms of 

building permits issued. Mr. Speaker, in job creation, we rank 

amongst the top tier of the provinces with the lowest 

unemployment rate in the country, Mr. Speaker, and month 

after month, more jobs created. 

 

In fact this economy, you know, it wasn’t the government but 

this economy set a job creation or an employment record when, 

Mr. Speaker, in August of 2009, in the middle of the 

bash-your-teeth-in recession that the rest of the world was 

facing, this new Saskatchewan set its employment record. 



5986 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2010 

By the way, at that same time, Mr. Speaker, there were 

billboards being paid for by the taxpayers, erected by the NDP 

caucus, that decried Saskatchewan’s future, that said that the 

economy was in a bust, that said the economy was in a free fall. 

Those are the words of the Leader of the Opposition. At the 

same time that he was saying that, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

happily ignored what they were saying and went about setting 

their employment record — the highest number of people 

employed ever in the history of the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the state of the economy is strong, but we 

need to continue to do more, Mr. Speaker. And our growth 

agenda is going to continue unabated. That’s certainly part of 

the vision that we have for the province and for our 

government. And that means that we have to continually look to 

reduce taxes, and again more on that in the budget upcoming. 

 

Of course the education tax is a capital tax, and there isn’t much 

more insidious on an economy than a capital tax, so we’ll 

reduce that a little bit more and replace it with funding from the 

General Revenue Fund, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think we need to start having a debate in this province 

about other taxes — personal income taxes, even corporate 

income taxes — where we’re not as competitive as we could be 

with provinces nearby. We should start having the debate now 

about whether or not there is room to improve our 

competitiveness in terms of these taxes. I think it’ll be an 

interesting debate because what we’ve heard from members 

opposite is their plan now for royalties, for example. The most 

important tax in terms of the ongoing development of our 

resources and the job-creating effect of investment in these 

resources; their plan is to increase royalties. They’ve been very 

clear about that. They’re going to increase royalty taxes for the 

province. 

 

I think in the months ahead, we’re going to hear from women 

and men who are in business in this province and others who 

want to be in business in this province to a greater extent. 

We’re going to be happy to tell the people of Saskatchewan 

that, should those folks ever get their way; if they ever become, 

heaven forbid, the Government of Saskatchewan, and they jack 

up the royalty rates of this province and they create royalty 

instability like we saw in Alberta, Mr. Speaker . . . I think, I 

think that debate’s going to happen. And they’ll want to 

categorically reject that plan from those members opposite 

because they’ll understand that those kinds of job-killing 

initiatives that we’ve seen from the NDP in the past have no 

place in the new Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition continues to talk 

about increasing royalties. He did it again today. Increase 

royalties in potash — also nationalizing; that would be good for 

the economy — and increasing royalties in the oil industry. But 

you know, Mr. Speaker, he didn’t always believe that. He 

didn’t always believe that. 

 

He used to be a junior assistant VP [vice-president] at Nexen, 

and he would work with governments on their own royalty 

structures. And the Leader of the Opposition, in his previous 

role at Nexen, at a large oil company which used to be, by the 

way, a Crown corporation . . . And that Crown corporation, 

when it was privatized there was a golden share for it, Mr. 

Speaker, by the way. And it was held in this legislature. And 

the golden share said, the golden share said, the head office 

can’t leave Regina. That’s what it said. 

 

And then the Leader of the Opposition, by the way — and this 

is a bit of a digression, but I’ll get right back to the issue of 

royalties and the Throne Speech — the Leader of the 

Opposition then leaves government and takes a job with what 

used to be that Crown corporation. It became Nexen. Then he 

comes back, and he lobbies his NDP government, old 

government friends. I bet the member for Lakeview was 

lobbied, Mr. Speaker. And he says, we need to release Saskoil, 

Nexen, of this obligation of having a head office here. We need 

to change the golden share. 

 

So there was a debate in the House. And our very good friend, 

Ben Heppner, stood up and asked the minister of Justice at the 

time, Mr. Axworthy, and said, does this legislation mean that 

the head office for Nexen will leave for Calgary? It’s a matter 

of record again with Hansard. The point, Mr. Speaker, is that 

they write everything down that’s said in the Assembly. And so 

the answer came: no, no, the head office will stay. 

 

What happened after the Leader of the Opposition, then with 

Nexen, lobbied the government to gut the golden share? There 

was promises that the head office jobs wouldn’t leave, 

including his job, the Leader of the Opposition’s job he had at 

the time with the oil company. What happened, Mr. Speaker? 

Those offices were packed up in boxes — including the Leader 

of the Opposition’s office — packed up in a box and moved to 

Calgary because the legislation had been gutted. 

 

So now let’s fast-forward to a time when the Leader of the 

Opposition was engaged quite rightly in the discussion of 

royalties. And the Speech from the Throne is all about the new 

road and the prosperity we want for the province and the debate 

that’ll be pending in this session about the royalty structure in 

Saskatchewan. You know, Mr. Speaker, I think the Leader of 

the Opposition used to provide very good counsel to 

governments on the issue of royalties. 

 

[12:00] 

 

I think it’s changed a little bit based on what I’ve heard in 

speeches, because we’ve gotten a hold of, we’ve gotten hold of, 

it’s a PowerPoint presentation from Nexen to the government of 

Alberta for their royalty review in 2007. I expect — I don’t 

know for sure and maybe he can confirm it — I expect the 

Leader of the Opposition himself made this presentation 

because that was his job in government relations. And his view, 

by the way, in terms of potential changes, any changes in the 

royalty structure was this recommendation, and I quote, “The 

existing regime is working as intended and should be 

preserved.” Mr. Speaker, that’s what the hon. member advised 

governments then, and I think wasn’t bad advice. I think the 

government’s actually returned back to its previous regime in 

that province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we think that that same advice should be heard 

today, should be heard in benches opposite and in the benches 

here because, Mr. Speaker, what industry needs the least today 

— what the men and women working in the oil and gas sector 

need least today, what the families employed in the potash 



November 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5987 

sector need least today, what companies supplying the uranium 

mining industry in the province need least today — is talk of 

royalty shock, is talk of you just wait for a year. We’re going to 

get elected, and your royalties are going to go up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nothing could be more damaging to our economy. 

Right now we can say to the world, unlike almost any other 

jurisdiction, that we have royalty stability. And it’s paying off 

for us, Mr. Speaker, in oil and gas land sales and in job 

creation. And we’re going to fight any move by the NDP to 

increase royalties in Saskatchewan . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Mr. Speaker, so the member’s hollering restructure. Now he 

likes it, because by asking rhetorically, well whose structure do 

we have right now, he’s saying it’s his structure. Then he ought 

to send a memo to his Leader of the Opposition saying, stop 

advocating that we change our structure. He might want to do 

that, if that’s what he believes. Or maybe he should just skip the 

formality and come sit over here if he believes that the royalty 

structure shouldn’t change . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Speaker, once again the member for Lakeview is 

anticipating the mid-term financial report of the Government of 

Saskatchewan.  

 

And I’m looking forward to him having a chance to read it as a 

Member of the Legislative Assembly because I think he’s going 

to appreciate the fact that . . . I’m betting, I don’t know, I’m 

betting though that the balance in the Growth and Financial 

Security Fund will be up, Mr. Speaker. The general debt of the 

Government of Saskatchewan will remain down almost 40 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Will there be a surplus? Will there be a surplus? I don’t know 

that. We can’t know that. But I am looking forward to an 

opportunity for all members to hear from the mid-term financial 

report when Finance officials . . . And then the worry that’s 

plaguing the member for Regina Lakeview can kind of 

dissipate. He can stop worrying about it and know that, as has 

been the case for three years, the fiscal health of this province is 

in better shape than almost any jurisdiction in North America. 

And I think it’ll move up. If it’s not number one, it will be 

number one in the months ahead, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve touched a little bit about the economy. I did 

want to talk about health care and have done that in the context 

of our own constituency. But I do want to return, if I can a little 

bit, to the member or to the Leader of the Opposition’s speech 

and the debate we should have in the House. I think we’re 

actually in agreement on this one. 

 

But he referenced the fact that the current system of local 

communities having to raise money for their health care 

facilities is two tier. And right now in the province of 

Saskatchewan, we know for tertiary centres in Regina and 

Saskatoon, 100 per cent of the funding comes from the 

government. That’s always been the case. 

 

We also know that, for example, when a new hospital was 

announced for Swift Current — something that I congratulated 

members opposite on and the then minister of Health, the 

member for Lakeview — we know that when that was 

announced, money had to be raised in Swift Current. There is a 

fee on my tax bill every year and the tax bills of everyone in 

Swift Current because we have to raise our share of that. That 

two-tier system was their two-tier system, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again I want to repeat, I want to repeat that in the case of 

long-term care, I hope those members will put down the 

ideological blinkers and realize that partnering with faith-based 

organizations to provide long-term care, better long-term care 

where couples can stay together, I hope those members will 

vote in favour of a model that in all likelihood will afford those 

communities who want long-term care the chance where they 

will have it completely funded by that partner and not have to 

raise money locally, Mr. Speaker. It’s one of the advantages of 

this model we’re pursuing. It’s a potential advantage, and it’s 

something they should be speaking in favour of and supporting. 

And I expect that they will. Again I have great hope that they 

will in the weeks ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so in terms of health care, I’ll perhaps leave that 

subject right now except to say that we’re going to see 

continued work. And the Throne Speech highlighted the fact 

that front-line health care workers are very important obviously 

to the system, to us to reduce wait-lists for people in 

Saskatchewan. We’re going to continue to invest in training 

seats for doctors. We’re going to continue to invest in new 

residency positions. We’re going to continue to say you don’t 

just have to do residency training in the two major centres. We 

can take that out around the province. 

 

There’s residency training happening right now in Swift 

Current. And it gives us — and I met those young doctors, Mr. 

Speaker; a couple of them are from Atlantic Canada — it gives 

us a better chance to keep those doctors here when they’re 

done. That was my first question when we chatted at the 

announcement of the residency program, and the Minister of 

Health was there. 

 

Those young residents were asked by myself would we have a 

chance to keep you because you’re a long ways from home? 

And you know what they said, Mr. Speaker? They said what so 

many others have said. Newcomers to our province have said 

yes; we’re a long ways from home, but we kind of like it here, 

Mr. Speaker. And now we have a chance to keep those doctors 

there, so we’re going to continue to make those investments in 

front-line health care. 

 

And we’re going to continue down the road of our surgical wait 

times initiative, Mr. Speaker, that was also referenced in the 

Speech from the Throne. The NDP will continue to oppose it. 

They have said quite clearly that they believe the public system 

should do all the delivery. Even if you have some private 

clinics that can help with the backlog within the public system, 

even if you can make sure that nobody can use a credit card to 

jump the queue, if you can do all of those things and it can be at 

least at the same or perhaps a lower cost to the public, Mr. 

Speaker, even if you can do all of that and deal with the wait 

list and give people the surgery they need — they’re going to 

oppose it, Mr. Speaker. We will continue with that initiative. 

 

I can tell you of a great exchange I had at an event in Yorkton. 

The member for Yorkton will remember this and so will the 

Minister of Advanced Education because he was there to hear 

the story. A gentleman came up to me after the evening was 

pretty much concluded and said, you know, and I might have 

my timelines wrong here, but he said I had an accident in 



5988 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2010 

January — I think it was — and hurt my knee badly and knew 

there was something pretty wrong with it. But finally went into 

the doctor and finally got in to see a specialist. I think sometime 

in September he saw the specialist. And the specialist looked at 

his knee and said you need surgery; you’re going to need 

arthroscopic surgery. 

 

And so the gentleman, aware of the decade’s-long history of 

wait times in our province, the gentleman asked, “well when?” 

expecting quite a late date. And the doctor, the specialist, said 

we think we can do the surgery in November, sometime in 

November. And the gentleman said okay November 2011. He 

was convinced that it would be, you know, 14 months hence 

because that’s how long wait lists have gotten to be because of 

. . . Well we won’t get into that right now, Mr. Speaker. And he 

was shocked when the doctor said no, no, no — not November 

2011. 

 

He said, because of the Omni clinic, because of the fact that we 

have private partners delivering health care in a public system, 

because of the fact that they can come in and use facilities here 

and to help us take care of the wait lists, he meant November of 

this year. I expect just in a few weeks he’s going to get his knee 

scoped. He’s going to get the knee surgery that it would have 

taken 12 months, 14 months to get under the previous 

ideological regime. In a new public system, with new private 

partners, he’s going to have it done in a couple of months. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? He’s not really interested in 

ideology from those members opposite. He’d like to get an 

operation, and we’d like him to get it too. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how they’re going to build 

support for their position. I don’t know how they’re going to 

tell that gentleman and others like him that — oh, by the way 

— because we ideologically believe that nothing but the public 

system can deliver that surgery, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well now the member from Rosemont is 

saying that’s not true. Have they changed this position as well? 

His Health critic has come out opposed to our wait times 

initiative. The Health critic has said only the public system 

should deliver these surgeries, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 

they’ve said. 

 

What will they say to those people who are being told they 

don’t have to wait 12 months anymore, Mr. Speaker? They can 

wait one or two or three . . . and they can have the pain relief 

they want. And they can move around like they want because 

those surgeries and child dental surgeries, for which there’s a 

long wait list, are happening in a much, much shorter period of 

time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We will continue to deliver that kind of surgical care for the 

people of the province. We will achieve our objective because 

we are a goal-setting government. We will achieve our 

objective of reducing surgical wait times, Mr. Speaker, so 

people aren’t waiting more than three months. We’ll achieve it 

within four years. If the past is any indication of the future, 

we’ll get there ahead of schedule, Mr. Speaker, partly because 

of the Throne Speech and the budget that’s coming out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what about rural Saskatchewan? The Speech from 

the Throne, obviously to the extent it talks about education 

property tax, it’s obviously weighing in pretty significantly on a 

rural issue. And again it’s worth pointing out that members 

opposite can talk about agriculture, but the proof for producers, 

the proof for rural Saskatchewan is in the question, what did 

you do when you had a chance to help? And what did you say 

in a campaign when you had a chance to present a plan for 

education property tax? 

 

The New Democratic Party was pretty honest. I give them full 

credit, pretty upfront when they said our education property tax 

plan does not include farmers, Mr. Speaker. Well here again . . . 

and I’m covering some ground I’ve already covered, but in the 

Speech from the Throne, we’re saying something else, that in 

the new Saskatchewan, education property tax relief from this 

government most assuredly includes farmers and ranchers in 

Saskatchewan as it does people in the city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne made reference to the 

flooding this year to up to — and the final numbers I don’t 

think are in yet — but up to 12 million unseeded acres in the 

province. Mr. Speaker, in an unprecedented way, in terms of 

the time for it took for governments to react, the federal 

government and the provincial government came together, put 

together a plan, and delivered that plan to those producers, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we had calls for much more assistance from members 

opposite; that’s true. But, Mr. Speaker, again those calls fell a 

little short in terms of credibility because again, when they were 

the government and they had a chance to do something, 

sometimes they’d be there with their share of a per acre 

payment for those same flooded farmers, but sometimes they 

wouldn’t. It just depended, Mr. Speaker. I guess it depended on 

— what I don’t know — who the minister of Agriculture was at 

the time or maybe how close they were to an election. 

 

I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell you this, that as for 

this government, as for the members on this side of the House, 

we don’t look at, we won’t look at a calendar to decide when 

we help farmers who need it. We won’t necessarily look only at 

financial considerations when we have to consider to help 

farmers who need it, Mr. Speaker. We won’t look at the 

political implications of helping farmers. Mr. Speaker, if they 

need help, we’re going to help farmers when it’s needed, Mr. 

Speaker. And that is also dealt with in the Speech from the 

Throne. And I want to acknowledge the leadership of the 

Minister of Agriculture in delivering that prompt assistance to 

the farmers in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s other important rural Saskatchewan issues 

that we need to deal with. I’ll deal with them very quickly if I 

can, and again they’re referenced in the Speech from the 

Throne. One is Highways, Mr. Speaker. I know there’s a lot 

more projects to go. We hear about the projects that are still 

needed from MLAs a lot because that’s their job: to make the 

case for important projects in their area. But even as they make 

the case and even as their mayors and reeves make the case that 

we need to do more in Highways and it’s the right case to 

make, even as that case is made, there is an acknowledgment 

that we are seeing highways investment and construction in this 

province like we have never ever seen it in the past in our 

province, Mr. Speaker. In this government, again there is a 

government determined to deal with the deficit that we 



November 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5989 

inherited. 

 

The CAA [Canadian Automobile Association] said the deficit 

in terms of road construction, our highways in our province, the 

automobile association said it was a billion-dollar pothole. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s a pretty big pothole, and it takes more 

than three years to fill it and fix it. But, Mr. Speaker, we’re 

getting there and there’s going to be more, not less, of that kind 

of work across our province. And I want to acknowledge all the 

members for making their case on behalf of their constituents, 

on behalf of their mayors and reeves. And we’ll see in the 

budget more commitment to highways in the province. 

 

And in rural Saskatchewan, health care is pretty important, Mr. 

Speaker. And we know there are challenges out there with 

doctor recruitment and retention. We know there are challenges 

out there with long-term care, and I’ve covered that ground 

already. But, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of rural 

Saskatchewan understand that again they have a government 

that’s listening, Mr. Speaker, a government that’s willing to 

pursue innovative solutions, a government that is prepared to 

fund, a government that is prepared to say that closing 52 rural 

hospitals, as members opposite did, is probably not going to 

help health care in rural Saskatchewan. And so we are seeking, 

together with them, solutions. I know that we have challenges 

out there, and we will meet those challenges together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to conclude, if I can, by just touching on 

the potash debate that we’ve had in our province. It too was 

referenced in the Speech from the Throne. Mr. Speaker, we had 

incredible news come to this country and this province from the 

Minister of Industry nationally when the federal government 

agreed with Saskatchewan’s position to say no to the hostile 

takeover attempt of BHP Billiton. 

 

And beyond that, Mr. Speaker . . . because we’re not done the 

process yet. There is a 30-day waiting period we’re in the midst 

of. But beyond that 30-day wait period, we’ve also signalled to 

the country that Saskatchewan wants to lead in the debate that 

we have as a country as to what changes should happen to 

Investment Canada rules for these takeovers. We’ve said, Mr. 

Speaker, that we think Canada has some resources that are very 

strategic, both in the supply of them that we have and in the end 

use of those resources and that we’ll be coming forward quite 

publicly with our plan and our vision for the country and for 

our province as to which resources are strategic, as to which 

resources might require of government a bit of a different 

approach than what we would otherwise. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we make that case, though, we’re going to 

continue to make the case that Canada and Saskatchewan is a 

great place to invest, whether you’re a company from Australia, 

whether you’re CNPC [China National Petroleum Corporation] 

from China — with whom we have an MOU [memorandum of 

understanding] on oil and gas development and potentially oil 

sands development — whether you’re Mosaic headquartered in 

Minneapolis, Minnesota, whether you are the PotashCorp 

headquartered in Saskatoon, that we welcome investment. We 

welcome new investment in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

There’s been some debate on uranium here recently in this 

Legislative Assembly on the issue of resource ownership. And I 

really think it’s important we have that debate because, Mr. 

Speaker, when the Leader of the Opposition was in the cabinet 

in 1997, he called on the federal government — he did; his 

government called on the federal government — he called on 

the national government to relieve the province of the national 

government’s non-resident ownership policy. 

 

And then in 2007, after the Leader of the Opposition had helped 

move the head office of Saskoil to Calgary so he could get a job 

there, Eric Cline was the minister, the NDP minister, again on 

this issue of resource ownership and protection. And Eric Cline 

sent another letter, similar to the one they sent when the 

Opposition Leader was in the cabinet, sent another letter to the 

federal government. Let me tell you what the Opposition 

Leader used to say about uranium investment when he was in 

government. 

 

He said this: “The Government of Saskatchewan . . .” This is 

the NDP now. This is the New Democratic Party, the same 

party that the member for Dewdney, who is shouting from his 

seat now, is running for, maybe the last time he’ll run for them. 

I don’t know, but he’s certainly going to run for them one more 

time. Here’s what the letter says: 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan remains strongly 

opposed to a policy that impinges on its ability to develop 

mineral resources and promote economic development 

through further processing of those mineral resources in 

the province. 

 

The Government of Saskatchewan has raised concerns 

over the non-resident ownership policy numerous times 

since its establishment in the 1970s. More recently, the 

Government of Saskatchewan promoted its elimination in 

1988, [that’s the previous government, and then when?] 

and, again, called for its elimination [not an amendment to 

the NROP; the Leader of the Opposition called for its 

elimination] in 1997, supporting concerns expressed by 

uranium mining companies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the letter goes on to say, “The impacts of this . . .” 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the member from 

Regina Rosemont to just allow the Premier to continue his 

comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP used to believe, just 

before the election in ’07 . . . In this letter it says, “Foreign 

companies such as AREVA,” who are currently vested in the 

province — I assume the members welcomed them here — 

that: 

 

Foreign companies such as AREVA, are unwilling to 

make a long-term commitment to Saskatchewan when 

they do not feel they have a long-term assurance of access 

to uranium resources . . . 

 

This was the case that the Leader of the Opposition forgot he 

made in 1997 and that members opposite forgot they made in 

2007 when they stood up in question period today. 



5990 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2010 

Because, Mr. Speaker, this is not what they’re saying today. 

Again today on the issue of resources, and let’s be very clear, 

the Leader of the Opposition stood up and said that in addition 

to royalty hikes, in addition to nationalization by stealth, they 

also now support a position where there is no foreign direct 

investment in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Interesting that, Mr. Speaker, because I remember the Leader of 

the Opposition, and the Resources critic, the member for P.A. 

Northcote said . . . We were at the Husky Oil announcement 

when Husky unveiled its new building. I had the good fortune 

to attend there too, and the Leader of the Opposition was 

meeting a lot of people and talking to oil executives, Mr. 

Speaker. He was talking to them . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Yes, they did forget to introduce the MLA for P.A., but I 

wanted to make a point of doing that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Husky of course is controlled principally from 

where, from what country? Right, from China. But he was at 

that press conference, to welcome that new foreign investment 

to the province. Today he said in the House he opposes foreign 

direct investment in the province. That means he opposes mines 

that Mosaic has built. That means he opposes Areva’s 

investment. That means he opposes oil investment in the 

province of Saskatchewan. He wants to jack up their royalty, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can tell you this. I can tell you this: that those folks are never 

going to get a chance to implement those ruinous policies in the 

province because of the new road we’re on, Mr. Speaker, 

because of what’s in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. And this 

side of the House will make the case for a growing economy, 

for royalty stability, for a competitive economy, because we 

know it pays for the quality of life that we seek for the province 

of Saskatchewan. I believe that’s why people across this 

province have made their choice. They’re saying we like where 

we are going now, and we don’t want to go back to that old 

road where we’ve been. We choose this government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue. Through the plan 

mapped out in the Speech from the Throne, we’re going to 

continue to work very hard to earn the support of the people of 

the province, to provide service to the people of the province 

and to create a growing, dynamic province that is the pride of 

the Dominion of Canada, that is a leader in North America, Mr. 

Speaker. The Speech from the Throne keeps promises we’ve 

made and paints the vision of a new Saskatchewan on the new 

road. That’s why I’ll be opposing the amendment, and I’ll 

support the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The question . . . Order. Order. The question 

before the Assembly is the motion moved by the member from 

Melfort, seconded by the member from Saskatoon Northwest: 

 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor: 

 

To His Honour the Honourable Gordon L. Barnhart, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

May it please Your Honour: 

 

We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative 

Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in session 

assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious 

speech which Your Honour has been pleased to address to us 

at the opening of the present session. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:22 until 12:26.] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The question before the 

Assembly is the motion by the member from Melfort. Those in 

favour of the motion please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 34] 

 

Wall Morgan Bjornerud 

Norris Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles Cheveldayoff 

Duncan Huyghebaert McMillan 

Harpauer D’Autremont Harrison 

Hickie Reiter Hutchinson 

Brkich Elhard Hart 

Stewart Allchurch Weekes 

Ross Wilson Gantefoer 

Michelson Wyant Ottenbreit 

Chisholm Bradshaw Tell 

Heppner   

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 

 

[Nays — 19] 

 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Harper Trew Higgins 

Junor Atkinson Nilson 

Forbes Vermette Broten 

Furber Yates Iwanchuk 

Taylor Quennell Wotherspoon 

Chartier   

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 34; those 

opposed, 19. 



November 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5991 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly will adjourn until 

Monday afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:29.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5967 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5967 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5967 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5967 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5967 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5968 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5968 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5968 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5968 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5968 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Diwali Celebration in Saskatoon 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5969 

 Valour, Hard Work, Determination, and Commitment 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5969 

 Sacrifice and Remembrance 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5969 

 Canadians Remember 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5969 

 A Family’s Service 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5970 

 A Hero in Her Eyes 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5970 

 Supporting Our Veterans 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5970 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Foreign Investment in Uranium Industry 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5970 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5971 

 Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facilities 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5971 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5971 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5973 

 Saskatchewan Government Insurance 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5974 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5974 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5975 

 Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5975 

 Bill No. 151 — The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies Amendment Act, 2010 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5975 

 Bill No. 152 — The Commissioners for Oaths Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5976 

 Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5976 

 Bill No. 154 — The Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010 

 Loi de 2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5976 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5976 

 Bill No. 616 — The Bed Bugs — Right to Know Act 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5977 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5977 

  



 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5977 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5982 

 Recorded Division (main motion) ............................................................................................................................................. 5990 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


