




















































Hansard: November 04, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 6A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 2010, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5841 

 November 4, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s indeed a pleasure to introduce a wonderful group of 

students from one of the brilliant high schools in Moose Jaw, 

seated in the west gallery. These are the students from A.E. 

Peacock Collegiate, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to mention the 

principal, Mike Boyes, and all of the staff who provide a very 

positive learning experience for all of the Peacock students. In 

the west gallery today are 20 students from grade 12, the 

students of teachers Carrie Kiefer and Adam McInnis, along 

with their bus driver, Elma Kaus. And I would ask all members 

to make them welcome to their Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’d also like to recognize 

somebody special to me in your gallery, Denise Arnold. Denise 

is my constituency assistant and does a great job in my office. 

And I’d ask all members to also welcome her to her Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure today to introduce three important people from my 

office here in the legislature. We have Jackie Burchi, Chantelle 

Coderre, and Megan Armstead. And what makes today 

particularly special is, it’s the second last day for Megan. She’s 

moving on in her career. She’s contributed to Saskatchewan 

and shared her time with us, and now she’s embarking on an 

adventure with the Public Service Commission. So if all 

members could welcome her to her legislature and thank her for 

her time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join with the member from Moose Jaw North in welcoming the 

class from Peacock. While Peacock may officially be in the 

member of Moose Jaw North’s constituency, it’s pretty darned 

close to the boundary. And I know it’s a great high school that 

attracts many people from across . . . Many of the students are 

from across the city. So it’s always a pleasure to have students 

that are here, interested in the democratic process and taking the 

time out of the busy school year to come and join us here. So I 

would ask that all members join . . . The class from Peacock. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are 

concerned over the safety of our highways. And this particular 

petition pertains to Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle 

and No. 1 junction. And Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and 

the junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety 

for Saskatchewan’s motoring public. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from Fort 

Qu’Appelle and Katepwa, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. And we know citizens living in poverty have 

long identified affordable solutions. Recent national and 

provincial initiatives, including the Saskatoon health disparities 

report and the Canada Without Poverty, Dignity for All 

campaign, all call for a comprehensive poverty elimination 

strategy. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, people signing this petition come from 

Saskatoon and Melfort, Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

more petitions on behalf of the people of Wawota and area who 

are opposed to the closure of the beds in Wawota’s Deer View 

Lodge. Many of the family members have had members of their 

families put in places outside of their home community and 

have difficulty getting to them and supporting them in their last 

days. They’re finding it unfair and actually very dangerous. The 

petition reads or the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to stop the closure of these beds. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This is 150 more signatures to add to the ones I previously 

presented this week, and these signatures are from people in 

Kennedy, Kipling, Windthorst, Wawota, Whitewood, Manor, 



5842 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2010 

Regina, Kenosee, Kenosee Lake, Maryfield, and Langbank. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan 

university students, a petition that calls on the expansion of the 

graduate retention program. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to present 

a petition with respect to the future of Saskatchewan’s potash 

resource, considering that Saskatchewan has a 1,000-year 

supply of the world’s highest quality potash and that the people 

of Saskatchewan are the owners of this strategic resource and 

deserve to receive the maximum benefit from its development, 

mining, processing, and sale. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Saskatchewan Party government to publicly demand 

the following terms and conditions on behalf of the people 

of Saskatchewan of any owners bidding to take over PCS: 

to ensure that Saskatchewan people receive the maximum 

net benefit, a golden share and preferred shares so that the 

public participates in both the corporation’s future 

decision making and its profitability; public guarantees on 

a strengthened head office presence; support for Canpotex 

and long-term targets for potash production and 

employment; Saskatchewan representation on the board of 

directors; public agreements to ensure no loss of royalties; 

public commitments to meet world-class standards of 

corporate and social responsibility; and an independent 

potash review commission with the power to monitor and 

enforce all of these terms and conditions. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by folks from 

Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 

government ministry has directed SaskWater to cut off supplies 

of water for domestic use to Furdale customers, and the same 

government ministry has directed that customers may no longer 

treat non-potable water using methods approved by Sask 

Health. Now these residents, in dealing in good faith with 

SaskWater for over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their 

domestic systems and in-home treatment equipment. And the 

alternative water supply that was referred to by the government 

ministry is a private operator offering treated, non-pressurized 

water at great cost with no guarantee of quality, quantity, or 

availability of water, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Furdale. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise and 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan on a matter that’s of great concern to them, and 

that’s the financial mismanagement of the Sask Party 

government. Since coming to office, the Sask Party has 

squandered a historic opportunity provided to them, historic 

highs in revenues, and where we are, Mr. Speaker, is back into 

two years of deficits and billions of dollars of debt growth, Mr. 

Speaker. This is of huge consequence to Saskatchewan people, 

and of concern. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Now these petitions today are signed by good folks of Regina, 

Air Ronge, Swift Current, North Battleford, Carnduff, and 

Buchanan. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Reaction to Potash Decision 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday was a good day for 

Saskatchewan. The Premier summed up yesterday’s events in 

two words: Canada works. 



November 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5843 

Canada works because our Premier and our province presented 

a clear and reasoned argument that spoke to the heart and minds 

of Canadians. Canada works because it is strong enough to be 

both a free market, free trading economy, and protect its 

national interest. Canada works because Canadians from coast 

to coast supported Saskatchewan’s position — business leaders 

and working people. 

 

Canadians barely knew what potash was a few short weeks ago. 

Canadians of all political stripes — a Conservative premier 

from Alberta, a Liberal premier from Quebec, an NDP [New 

Democratic Party] premier from Manitoba — all supported the 

position taken by a Saskatchewan Party premier. Heck even the 

tired, old Saskatchewan NDP came on board, begrudgingly. 

And Canada works because this time, unlike some federal 

governments in the past, this time our federal government 

listened to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the Premier said in Toronto last week, it’s not 

about choosing between Canada and Saskatchewan; it’s about 

standing up for Canada and Saskatchewan. That’s why both 

flags fly over our legislature. That’s why yesterday was a good 

day for Saskatchewan and Canada. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

National Diabetes Month 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November is National 

Diabetes Month. Nine million Canadians live with diabetes or 

pre-diabetes. Pre-diabetes refers to a condition where a person’s 

blood glucose levels are higher than normal, but not yet high 

enough to be diagnosed as type 2 diabetes. The growth of 

diabetes in Canada is at epidemic levels. 

 

November is the time to be reminded that there is no cure yet 

for this widespread disease. Diabetes can be well managed and 

it’s considered a chronic disease, Mr. Speaker. However the 

disease brings with it additional risk factors for those affected, 

which can compound the problem. If left untreated or 

improperly managed, diabetes can result in a variety of 

complications including heart, kidney, and eye disease to just 

name a few. 

 

The first step in preventing or delaying the onset of these 

complications is recognizing the risk factors as well as the signs 

and symptoms of diabetes. Mr. Speaker, this is especially 

important here in Saskatchewan where diabetes is significantly 

higher in the First Nations population. First Nations people 

across Canada continue to struggle with diabetes prevalence 

rates that are among the highest in the developed and 

developing world. Among the First Nations people, diabetes is 

not uniformly distributed across the population but more often 

it affects women, the elderly, and the obese. 

 

We need to work together to have an effective strategy to 

combat this disease. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join 

me in recognizing those who fight the battle against diabetes, 

encouraging people to reduce their risk factors and to get early 

and consistent treatment as they live with the disease, and that 

we fight for a cure. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Estevan United Way Telethon 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is with 

great pride that I rise in the Assembly today to honour my 

constituency of Estevan. I feel truly fortunate that the great 

people of my constituency continue to give me the privilege of 

representing them in Regina. 

 

[10:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, last month the Estevan and District United Way 

held their 34th annual telethon. The organization set a lofty 

goal. They wanted to raise $300,000. Mr. Speaker, at the end of 

35 hours the generous people of Estevan and surrounding area 

surpassed the goal and raised $350,000, all of which stays in the 

community, servicing the local member agencies. It is truly 

astonishing what the hard-working people in my constituency 

can do. Estevan has been the first community in Canada to 

reach their targeted goal 33 out of the last 34 years. 

 

I would like everyone to join with me in congratulating James 

Trobert, Chair of the telethon. I would also like to congratulate 

all the volunteers that contributed to the success of this year’s 

United Way campaign. And, Mr. Speaker, it goes without 

saying, another important part of each successful telethon are 

the donors. Their generosity is what makes these campaigns 

flourish. I am proud to say that Estevan is number one again. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Television Appearance 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. CTV 

[Canadian Television Network Ltd.] compared the Premier’s 

staged celebration of Tony Clement’s statement last evening to 

the speech of an Oscar winner accepting an Academy Award. 

Not surprisingly, Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s enthusiastic thank 

yous to the Harper government on Saskatchewan’s behalf 

almost outnumbered the Sask Party extras who had been 

stage-managed to stand behind him and clap when he walked 

before the cameras. 

 

Once there, he gave a bow of thanks to the Harper minister 

who’s given BHP 30 days to sweeten its takeover bid for 

PotashCorp. Then he eagerly praised Tony Clement and the 

federal Conservatives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the last thing this province needs at this crucial 

time of decision on a major natural resource is an acting 

Premier. We need someone in the lead role who knows how to 

deliver a better deal to the people of Saskatchewan, no matter 

who owns the company that develops mines, exports or sells 

our potash. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people deserve more than an actor 

that governs by polls, grandstanding with a script. They deserve 

a leader and a team that not only believes in what it says but has 

a plan to deliver. 

 



5844 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Snowbirds Celebrate 40th Anniversary 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

year marks the 40th anniversary of the Canadian Snowbirds 

aerobatic demonstration squadron. Based out of 15 Wing 

Moose Jaw, the Snowbirds are comprised of 85 Canadian 

Forces members, both regular and reserve force, who come 

from various military backgrounds and experiences. 

 

The Snowbirds are the only air demonstration team in North 

America to perform with nine jets flying in very close 

formation. Canadians share great pride with the Snowbirds in 

their tradition of excellence for these past 40 years. They’re one 

of Canada’s most recognized and treasured national symbols. 

 

During this 40th show season, the Snowbirds completed 60 

performances at 35 different locations around North America. 

The Snowbirds have given Canadians great shows over the 

years, and in turn Canadians have given their support. Their 

acrobatic grace has remained fresh and continues to inspire awe 

in audiences all across the continent. Canadians are proud of 

their first-class air demonstration team. 

 

The Snowbirds are also outstanding international ambassadors 

for Canada. And I would like to congratulate the entire 

Snowbird team, as well as the air force, for their long-standing 

tradition and aviation excellence and showmanship. I ask all 

members of this Assembly to join in congratulating the 

Canadian Snowbirds on their 40th anniversary. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Potash Workers Acknowledged 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier thanked many people last night as he celebrated BHP’s 

stay of execution. He took time to thank his MLAs [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly] for standing behind him, his 13 

Conservative MPs [Member of Parliament] for their quiet 

support, and the federal Industry minister for his act of 

clemency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one thank you he forgot. And that was the 

workers, the people who pull the potash from the ground and 

who staff the facilities that produce Saskatchewan’s prosperity. 

It was a glaring omission, Mr. Speaker, since miners and other 

potash workers have been leading the fight against the hostile 

BHP takeover from the beginning. 

 

Long before this Premier discovered his social democratic 

conscience, they were speaking out about the need to protect 

the people’s resource and to get a better deal for 

Saskatchewan’s people. 

 

The Premier’s response was to ignore their voices until they 

resonated so loudly with the public that the Premier started to 

plagiarize the workers’ press releases in his speeches to the 

chamber of commerce. After all they’ve done for the province, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s sad that the Premier didn’t take the occasion 

of BHP’s stay of execution to call a truce in the war on working 

people and to say a thank you to the miners and other workers 

who are the real leaders in the potash debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan see this lack of 

gratitude from the Premier, and that is why their answer to him 

in 2011 will be a polite, firm thank you, but no. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Television Appearance 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Moments after 

Tony Clement made the announcement all of Saskatchewan had 

been waiting to hear, the Leader of the Opposition appeared on 

television. He was standing behind Jack Layton and he looked 

absolutely heartbroken. I thought he was going to burst into 

tears. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you would think that he would be happy. This was 

a great day for Saskatchewan. But for the NDP leader, it was 

never about Saskatchewan. It was about him and about scoring 

political points. It was clear as he spoke. 

 

In a moment that called for some graciousness and thoughtful 

reflection, the NDP leader played his only card — a bitter, 

angry rant. Mr. Speaker, it was embarrassing as he made a fool 

out of himself. Not only that, he didn’t even know what he was 

talking about. At one point, he talked about a potash mine at 

Kamsack. And I can assure the NDP leader there is no potash 

mine at Kamsack. The member from Douglas Park could have 

embarrassed Saskatchewan, but fortunately, as one CBC 

[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] reporter tweeted, most of 

the reporters didn’t even know who he was. 

 

Still, Mr. Speaker, we want to thank the Leader of the 

Opposition for supporting the Saskatchewan Party position. 

And I have a gift for him, Mr. Speaker. It’s a map of all the 

potash mines in Saskatchewan so he doesn’t embarrass himself 

on TV next time. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier. And I want to, before I start, thank all the people of 

Saskatchewan including the miners, the potash miners, who 

were some of the first people off the mark two months ago 

urging the provincial government to take the position of being 

opposed to the takeover, the hostile takeover of BHP of the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the game isn’t over yet because we know the BHP 

company has 30 days to sweeten the bid and to come forward 

with another offer. And, Mr. Speaker, while the people of 

Saskatchewan supported the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan very clearly over the last month, it’s now time 

for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to support the 

people. 



November 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5845 

My question to the Premier is this: during this debate, the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan made a commitment, a 

seven-point commitment, to the people Saskatchewan. Can the 

Premier guarantee that he has that commitment in writing and 

that things will start to happen where people will start moving 

back from Chicago before the 30-day period is up so that we 

can sweeten the deal for the shareholders here in the province 

of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in direct answer to the 

member’s question is, obviously we’re going to be working 

very carefully with PotashCorp to make sure that the pledge 

they’ve recently made is kept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that when that member was the minister 

responsible he actually oversaw the dilution, the gutting of what 

was a golden share that Saskatchewan people had, allowing for 

foreign ownership of the company and removing a provision 

that would require that the government approve any sale. Well 

they’re hollering now, Mr. Speaker, because that’s their record. 

 

The only bad thing that happened, the only unfortunate event 

yesterday, Mr. Speaker, is that the Leader of the Opposition 

found his way to a microphone, Mr. Speaker. Because in those 

two minutes at the microphone, Mr. Speaker, he didn’t do the 

province any service at all. He was talking about nationalizing 

the industry. He talked about changing royalties, Mr. Speaker, 

that are today creating jobs and resulting in expansion in the 

province. Thank goodness that CBC reporters nor few people 

there knew who he was. 

 

We want to assure the country today, he’s not with us. He does 

not speak for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. 

The Premier may forget that he was working in the 

privatization department of the Devine government at the time 

the Potash Corporation was privatized in 1989 and actually 

wrote the press releases. His name is on the bottom of all the 

press releases about the privatization of the Potash Corporation 

back in 1989. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: can he guarantee to the 

people of Saskatchewan that the seven-point pledge made by 

the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan will be given to the 

people in writing during the 30-day period leading up to a final 

decision by the federal government on the hostile takeover of 

the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan by BHP? Has he got 

that in writing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this member is desperately 

trying to change the subject. And do you know why, Mr. 

Speaker? Because in the late moments of the battle that we 

were waging, that the province was waging, that workers were 

waging, that the government was waging to prevent this 

takeover, do you know what the member was saying, Mr. 

Speaker? He was saying that the effort had failed. He had 

thrown in the towel. He had raised the white flag. And then he 

said to CTV that he was . . . Mr. Speaker, and then he said to 

CTV that he was going to go to . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, he said he was going to go to 

Ottawa because “There’s a huge opportunity with the number 

of seats that weren’t open for the NDP last week.” Can you 

believe that, Mr. Speaker? When the battle was still being 

waged, he ran out of the ring. He left the battlefield and he went 

to see after his own political interests, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 

the people of this province categorically reject that kind of 

leadership, that kind of leadership says to the people of the 

province he’s interested in his own interests, in his party’s 

interests. 

 

We’ll continue to fight for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, again the question to the 

Premier. The one way that the province of Saskatchewan and 

the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan can fend off the hostile 

takeover that is still in play is to improve the net benefit to 

Saskatchewan in the next 30-day period. That, we can do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the way you fend off the deal is to raise net 

benefit. And the way you do that is to implement in writing and 

implement the move of people from Chicago back to 

Saskatoon. If that’s done over the next 30 days, net benefit to 

Saskatchewan, the bar will rise and the takeover will be refused 

again by the federal government. Can the Premier guarantee 

this pledge is in writing and that the people are now in a 

position to move back to Saskatoon from Chicago? Can he give 

that guarantee? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — By the way, Mr. Speaker, if I may, if that 

member went down to Ottawa for political reasons to find out 

how the NDP can win more seats as a result of a potash issue, I 

hope . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the members to allow the 

Premier to respond as the members of the government allowed 

the Opposition Leader to place the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that his party 

who paid for the airfare and not, and not the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the written guarantee that that member wants 

existed in the province. Here’s what it used to say . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the member’s question was on 

a written guarantee. Here’s what it used to be, the guarantee 



5846 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2010 

with respect to PotashCorp. There used to be a law in the 

province that said the government could direct PCS [Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.] to sell securities of a 

purchaser corporation on any terms or conditions, and therefore 

the government could block a sale, Mr. Speaker, of any of the 

assets. The provisions used to say that a purchaser corporation 

was required to have its head office in Saskatchewan. This 

written guarantee used to say that Canadians had to hold a 

majority of the company. 

 

That doesn’t exist today in the province, and maybe we have to 

revisit the chance to see if this is possible again. But you know 

why we’d have to revisit it? Do you know why it doesn’t exist 

anymore? Because that member changed it, Mr. Speaker. That 

member put us in the state that we’re in today and, like so many 

other things, we may actually have to clean up another mess 

that he’s made, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier believes 

that it’s mission accomplished, but we still don’t know his plan 

to ensure that PCS keeps the commitments that they’ve made to 

the people of Saskatchewan. And the Premier himself has said 

that companies don’t keep promises. 

 

So, simply, to the Premier: how does he intend to ensure that 

PCS keeps their promises? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and mines. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 

was quite a spectacle yesterday when the Leader of the 

Opposition went down to Ottawa. He stood behind the leader of 

the NDP, Jack Layton, trying to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I ask the Leader 

of the Opposition to allow the Minister of Energy and mines to 

respond to the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While he was 

ducking in and out of the camera shot, the only saving grace . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Well it appears the opposition 

members are not prepared to ask a lot of questions today. I’d 

ask the Minister of Energy and mines to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, while he was ducking in and 

out of the camera shot, similar to what he used to do on the 

football field before the grade 8 student Roger Aldag flattened 

him, the only saving grace in all of that was Kady O’Malley, a 

CBC reporter, tweeted that while the Leader of the Opposition 

was speaking, she tweeted, “I know I wasn’t the only one who 

was confused into thinking he was a NDP backbencher I’d 

never seen before.” 

 

So that was at least one saving grace, Mr. Speaker, that the 

people all across Canada knew that he didn’t speak for the 

province of Saskatchewan, and the Premier of this province 

does speak for Saskatchewan. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well, there you have it, Mr. Speaker. They 

treat the future of the potash resource of the people of 

Saskatchewan like it’s a joke in this Assembly. It’s absolutely 

shameful. It’s absolutely shameful. It’s not good enough, Mr. 

Speaker. They don’t answer the question. 

 

But we need a plan to ensure that Saskatchewan people receive 

the maximum benefit from their strategic resource. The Premier 

has had two and a half months to develop a plan. We now have 

30 days before a revised bid to buy PCS might be received. We 

still don’t know what combination of legislation, regulatory and 

taxation changes or other policy measures the Premier has in 

mind. 

 

So, simply, to the Premier: what’s his plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in addition to the fact that it isn’t a joke — you’re 

right — in addition to that fact, Mr. Speaker, it was very, very 

unfortunate . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the members to allow the 

minister to respond to the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

unfortunate that the Leader of the Opposition didn’t take a bit 

of a geography lesson before he went down to Ottawa to speak 

about this very important issue of potash. When you look at . . . 

I have a few pictures of the good community of Kamsack. A 

beautiful sunset. Here’s one with the picture of a nice elevator. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I ask the minister to 

respond directly to the question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — A beautiful church. What you don’t see in 

any of these pictures is a potash mine. So while he was on the 

national stage, he embarrassed the entire province of 

Saskatchewan by indicating that he had vast knowledge of the 

potash industry. In fact the truth is known now, Mr. Speaker, he 

didn’t even know where it’s located. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — I’ll tell you what’s embarrassing, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s embarrassing that in the Assembly of the province of 

Saskatchewan, the Legislative Assembly where we come here 

to debate ideas, they treat the future of the potash resource of 

Saskatchewan like a joke. That’s the minister responsible, treats 

it like a joke.  

 

But it’s painfully obvious why they have no plan. The Premier 

had no plan for forestry; it went in the tank. He had no plan for 

the province’s finance; they’re in the tank. He had no plan for 

health care; he put it in the tank. He had no plan for the 



November 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5847 

economy of Saskatchewan, and it shrank by 6.3 per cent last 

year. It’s all because they had no plan. 

 

So we want them to tell us today what their plan is for potash. 

We created a potash review commission, a commission that 

would determine whether PCS lives up to its commitments to 

the people of the province, and it would be able to impose 

financial penalties if they do not. But with two and a half 

months and all of the resources of government, we still don’t 

know how they intend to enforce PCS’s commitments. 

 

So, simply, again to the Premier: I hope he stops treating it like 

a joke today. Do they have a plan at all to ensure that PCS lives 

up to their commitments? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

indeed this is a very important issue for the province of 

Saskatchewan. In the next 30 days we will be making it very, 

very clear indeed, to the people of Saskatchewan and the 

country of Canada, that our position will not change. That it 

will remain no, given all of the evidence of concern about jobs 

and concern about revenue to the province of Saskatchewan and 

of course the strategic interests of potash . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Energy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — All of those things will be taken into 

account, Mr. Speaker. We will continue to engage with the 

federal government to ensure that they understand that our 

position is not going to waver, not going to change one bit. 

 

On direction from the Premier yesterday, I had a conversation 

with PotashCorp people, discussed with them the importance of 

living up to their pledge to the people of Saskatchewan that 

they have made. I think they understand very, very clearly. 

They have indicated already in writing, they’ve put it in 

newspapers all across Saskatchewan, their pledge to 

Saskatchewan. We fully intend, on this side of the House, to 

hold them to the commitments that they have made. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

State of the Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. So no real plan for the 

economy. No real plan for resources. Is it any wonder, Mr. 

Speaker, that yesterday the Canadian Federation of Business 

survey released here in Saskatchewan indicates business 

confidence is up across Canada, but it’s down here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are near the bottom of the pack. Small 

business owners are a great barometer of the economy, and the 

Sask Party has been taking them for granted. Why doesn’t the 

Saskatchewan Party understand or value the knowledge shown 

by the small business community in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise and Trade. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Let’s look at the facts. The facts are that the 

population of the province of Saskatchewan is at an all-time 

high — over 1.045 million people, the highest the population 

has ever been in the history of Saskatchewan. Sixty-three 

hundred more people are working today in the province of 

Saskatchewan than were working only one year ago. We have 

nearly 10,000 jobs posted on saskjobs.ca as of today, Mr. 

Speaker. We have the second lowest unemployment rate in the 

entire country at 5.5 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we’re projected by 

private sector forecasters to be leading the country in economic 

growth going into the next year, and it’s because of this 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. It really must be a 

surprise to the Saskatchewan Party that Saskatchewan business 

owners have lost confidence and have lower confidence than 

most other provinces. After all the Sask Party predicted our 

economy would grow by 2.1 per cent last year. It actually 

shrank 6.3 per cent and business owners know that. Only 

Newfoundland and Labrador saw its economy shrink more than 

Saskatchewan’s. Doug Elliott of Sask Trends Monitor said, and 

I quote, “We just lost all the gains we made,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we know that the Saskatchewan Party has no plan for the 

economy. No plan to manage the debt. No plan for resource 

revenues. So, Mr. Speaker, for small business owners, what is 

the plan to turn this around? How do we ensure that 

Saskatchewan business owners once again have confidence in 

Saskatchewan’s future? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Again, Mr. Speaker, all we hear from 

the members opposite is doom and gloom. We hear talking 

down of the economy. The facts are, Mr. Speaker, that the 

economy of this province is doing better than it has ever done 

before . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Again, all we hear from members 

opposite is talking down of the economy. Even from 

opposition, they’re trying to drive people out of the province, 

Mr. Speaker. The fact is, we have the highest population in this 

province we have ever had in the history of this province. We 

have the second lowest unemployment rate in the entire 

country. We have the third highest increase in housing starts in 

Canada in 2009. 

 

With respect to the CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business] survey that the member is citing, 19 per cent of 

Saskatchewan businesses plan to increase full-time employment 

in the next three to four months; only 12 per cent nationally, 



5848 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2010 

Mr. Speaker. Business owners know that this province is 

moving ahead. They know it’s moving forward. 

 

Those members want to look in the rear-view mirror and go 

back to a past which the rest of the people of this province do 

not want to go back to. And it’s due to the leadership of this 

Premier, this government. And that’s why we’re going to keep 

moving forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. The numbers come from 

the Canadian Federation of Independent Business, Mr. Speaker. 

And when you look at the barometer of business confidence in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, when was it at its highest in 

Saskatchewan’s recent history? Spring and summer of 2007, 

Mr. Speaker, business confidence at its highest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is the Premier inherited a 

massive surplus which he turned into a massive deficit. Now 

business owners open up documents from the Minister of 

Finance, and they see that the Sask Party is adding 4.2 billion to 

our provincial debt by 2014 — a 55 per cent increase in debt, 

Mr. Speaker. Of course that’s going to affect business 

confidence in Saskatchewan. Deficit budgets, a growing debt, a 

threat to our future, and Saskatchewan’s business people know 

that. 

 

To the minister: what’s he going to do to turn this debt train 

around and restore business confidence in Saskatchewan, at 

least to the point where it was prior to the election in 2007? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 

opposite cites the summer of 2007 as being the high point of 

confidence. What was happening in the summer of 2007? There 

was eager anticipation, Mr. Speaker, of getting rid of the NDP. 

And what happened, Mr. Speaker, in November of 2007? We 

got rid of the NDP, and our province has moved forward in a 

way we haven’t seen at any time in our history, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see the, as I indicated, the highest population growth of any 

time in our history, the highest population that we have today at 

any point in the history of the province. People are coming 

back, Mr. Speaker, to Saskatchewan after the NDP drove them 

out. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Support for Preeceville School 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the people living in Preeceville 

are looking for some real leadership on an issue in their 

community. To the minister: why are elementary school 

children in Preeceville spending the winter in classrooms with 

no central heat? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m well 

aware of the situation in Preeceville. And of course nothing is 

more important than the health and safety of the students. I met 

with the school board yesterday. The ministry officials are 

working . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Allow the minister to respond to the 

question. I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — The school board has had the situation 

assessed, and they’re looking at what the answers can be. They 

have made one application for some repairs, but they will be 

coming forward with another one. We are welcoming their 

assessment of what needs to be done. They are also holding, I 

believe it is tonight, a community meeting to inform the parents 

of their situation. We have offered to have officials at that 

meeting, but the school board has said no, they have it well 

handled at this time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, it has been known for some 

time that there is mould in the ductwork in the Preeceville 

school. The Good Spirit School Division presented an 

application to the ministry in June of 2010. It is now several 

months later, and nothing has been done by the Ministry of 

Education. This is a government that took away school boards’ 

ability to tax and school boards are using their reserves in order 

to fund ongoing operational costs. 

 

The school board has made a request to the ministry, and when 

can we expect the Sask Party government to give them the 

money to repair this unacceptable situation? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Again I’ll repeat my former answer. 

We are working with the school board. The school board put in 

an application. They do not fully know yet the extent of the 

repairs. There will be another application, to my understanding, 

coming forward. The school board met with me yesterday. This 

was not their number one concern yesterday. However, that is 

because we are working with them. They’re going to hold a 

meeting tonight with the community to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Saskatoon Fairview 

will allow the minister to respond. I believe the minister was 

giving a direct answer. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — They are satisfied so far with the 

response from the ministry officials on this particular situation. 

We’re aware that as they have more testing done, they are 

doing air quality testing. They have shut down certain parts of 

the system, and we will continue to work diligently with this 

school board to try to address this problem. 

 

What the school board is going to do tonight is to meet with . . . 

They’re holding a public meeting in the community to help 

inform the parents better as to what’s happening. 



November 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5849 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, parents in the Preeceville 

area do not find the Ministry of Education’s response 

acceptable. It is unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. It’s completely 

unacceptable when you have younger children attending 

classrooms with space heaters to keep them warm. It’s not safe. 

It’s a fire hazard. It’s noisy. And if you have a special needs 

child that requires calm and quiet, Mr. Speaker, they don’t need 

ambient background noise. This is not exactly a good learning 

environment. 

 

So my question is very simple. When is the Minister of 

Education and her officials going to give the Good Spirit 

School Division the money they need to repair this 

unacceptable heating system? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I’m going to make one more attempt, 

Mr. Speaker, to explain to the member, the money is not the 

issue. We need to know exactly what needs to be done. So is 

she suggesting that we should ignore the school board? Should 

we ignore the school board and ignore working with the school 

board? 

 

My understanding is that the school board is working very hard 

to assess the situation. We’re working with the school board. 

And I guess she needs to clarify if we should ignore the school 

board and go to a parent and start repairing this without doing 

the proper assessment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 

given the magnitude of the announcement yesterday, I would 

request leave of the House to make a statement about the 

historic decision by the Industry minister yesterday. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave to respond to 

yesterday’s announcement. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

Proposed Sale of Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

thank you to all members of the Assembly for leave to just 

make a very brief statement. The Leader of the Opposition may 

also want to make a statement, and certainly we’d want to 

provide leave for that to occur. 

 

Yesterday was an historic day for the province of Saskatchewan 

and for the country. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very 

important that we take this opportunity in the Assembly to send 

some strong signals from this Legislative Assembly on behalf 

of the people of Saskatchewan that would include the 

following. 

Number one, it would say thank you to the Industry minister, 

Tony Clement, and to the federal members of parliament from 

our province, to all 14 who have been making the case within 

the guidelines of Investment Canada that we wanted to be 

made. We also want to acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, the support 

of opposition members in parties in Ottawa. We want to thank 

the opposition party here, Mr. Speaker. We want to thank 

everybody involved with the industry, the people of the 

province . . . And I went through a bit of a list yesterday. But, 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the first important signal that we need to 

send from this legislature today. 

 

This was a bold decision that was made by the federal 

government because under different parties in power, this kind 

of a decision has never happened. Sixteen hundred or so 

proposed takeovers — one denied for national security reasons; 

none ever denied on a net benefit test similar to this. This was 

very historic and maybe, Mr. Speaker, maybe it signals a new 

phase for our country, and especially for Western Canada 

where so much of the natural resources of Canada are located. 

 

Maybe that new phase is a Canada that says to the world, we 

will continue to be a free trading country. We will continue to 

be an open market country. We will continue to welcome 

foreign investment, foreign direct investment. We will continue 

to approve takeovers when they happen, Mr. Speaker, but we 

will also be strategic in terms of serving the long-term interests 

of our country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we send that signal from the 

legislature today to the world that has been watching what’s 

going on in our province, and to the nation and to the rest of 

Saskatchewan. And that signal is this. This province remains 

open for business. This province remains absolutely focused on 

a growth agenda that is resulting in population growth, that has 

resulted in a nation-leading job creation record over the last 

number of years, that is resulting in, Mr. Speaker, our province 

leading in so many categories and chartered banks from across 

saying we’re going to lead the country again next year. 

 

We need to send a signal today that this decision doesn’t 

change the fact that Canada remains a strong economy, stronger 

than almost any other of the G8 [Group of Eight] countries, Mr. 

Speaker. We need to send a signal that Canada can, like other 

free trading, free market countries, stand up and say that while 

we welcome foreign investment, while we approve takeovers, 

there may be some deals that are different because we happen 

to have 53 per cent of the world’s potash in this case, not just in 

the country but principally just in one province, Mr. Speaker — 

30 per cent, as we know, of the reserves at stake in this 

particular deal. 

 

This is a balance that other nations have struck. Mr. Speaker, I 

would note, I would note for the record today, and as we send 

this signal to the rest of the country, I hope they note that in 

Australia in 2001 when their government said, no to Royal 

Dutch Shell’s attempt to take over Woodside in a natural gas 

play — not yes with conditions, but when they said no, Mr. 

Speaker — what happened to investment in Australia? It 

increased, Mr. Speaker. Australia continued to welcome other 

takeovers and foreign direct investment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these two principles can coexist. They do in 



5850 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2010 

nations around the world, whether it’s the United States of 

America or Australia or New Zealand or Spain or France. These 

two principles exist together and they should. And today 

because of the decision the federal government has made, they 

exist in our country as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also need in our province to remain focused on 

another very important part of the message that speaks to our 

economic future. And that is that private companies, private 

mining companies, private oil companies are welcomed in this 

province. They create jobs for Saskatchewan families. They 

create wealth. They provide a tax base that allows us to provide 

every single public service that we want to be able to provide 

for our citizens. And so we offer those messages today. 

 

Thank you to the federal government for this decision. Thank 

you to Canadians for their support of Saskatchewan. Thank you 

to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And finally this decision changes nothing about this, what I 

would say, economic anomaly that has been Saskatchewan over 

the last three or four or five years where we have been an 

engine of growth, not just for our country, for our continent. 

This decision changes nothing of that. This is the province to 

be. Whether you are an investor or whether you are a worker 

looking for opportunity, looking to fulfill the Canadian dream, 

there’s no better place to do it than the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave to make comments 

on the statement made by the Premier. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has asked for 

leave to respond. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Premier 

for his comments, and while we agree and have agreed on this 

position for some time, I just want to say as well that the work 

that has been done by members of this Assembly and the staff 

on both sides in positioning Saskatchewan and the position of 

the government and the opposition, I think has been brilliant. 

 

And I really mean this when I say, thank you to all members of 

the Assembly who have spoken on this issue. And while we 

may disagree on nuances or going forward positions, the fact of 

the matter is, Saskatchewan people won. Now we can argue 

who can take credit for that, but in a way it doesn’t really 

matter because at the end of the day, controlling resources and 

getting the right deal for the people of Saskatchewan should 

and does go beyond the political toing and froing that we do 

here in the Assembly. 

 

And I honestly believe that the toing and froing on politics is an 

important part. I never apologize for that. But the fact is there 

are occasions when there are bigger issues at stake, and I’m 

proud to be part of this occasion where, along with the Premier, 

on his motion, we supported; we made our statements. And 

while we disagree on many things, on this we fundamentally 

stood together. And I think it made a difference. 

 

And I want to thank the unions and the workers who came to us 

early on with their position that this wasn’t good for working 

people who mined the potash. And I think we can win on this 

over the next 30 days. But again I think there’s more work to be 

done. 

 

Where I do disagree with the Premier is that everything is the 

same in the world when it comes to resources and resource 

control. In the last three or four years, in the last five years, and 

especially since the collapse to the world economy, the world 

banking system, there has been a fundamental change in 

Canada’s psyche about control of resources and about proper 

management for the future of resources and proper royalties and 

taxation. 

 

And how I get there is the fact that if you look at many modern 

countries in the world, the role of corporation, public, private, 

and co-operative, is fundamentally different than what we were 

preaching when the Mulroney government was in power, where 

it was wide open globalization — get out of the way; let the 

free enterprisers do their thing. And then every country who 

allows that, everything will be satisfied. 

 

Believe me, the position we have taken here today and over the 

last few weeks is fundamentally different, I believe, than it 

would have been two years ago or five years ago because I 

think things have changed. And if I look at the next federal 

election, my bet is, is that control of resources at the provincial 

level is going to become a major issue in the next federal 

election and the next provincial election. 

 

I say that because the people of this province and right across 

Canada believe, going back to the days of the national energy 

program when the Liberal government of the day tried to claw 

back the 1930 transfer of resources from the province back to 

the federal government, was rejected, and rejected by mainly 

Saskatchewan under Allan Blakeney and Alberta under Peter 

Lougheed. And again at that time we closed ranks, even though 

we were of different political persuasion, and we won that 

battle. 

 

Today the world is changing again to the point where I think 

control of resources — not only energy but steel and copper, 

magnesium, uranium — the day of just wide open free 

enterprise, I don’t think that’s on today. I think things have 

changed and are changing. And I think there is a will that not 

only should the federal government be more open and 

transparent about how they make these decisions because I 

think the Premier would agree with me that this process doesn’t 

make any sense. The fact that the corporation finds out the 

decision before the Premier does shouldn’t be allowed to stand. 

That doesn’t make very much sense. We own the resource. 

How is it that an Australian company finds out the decision of 

the government before the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

So there’s many things. And the motion that the federal NDP is 

debating in the House of Commons today about a new process 

. . . And I was pleased that in question period yesterday Prime 

Minister Harper said, and to his credit, that he agrees that this 

whole process needs to be reviewed about how decisions are 



November 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5851 

made about resources that belong to the province. How is it that 

a committee in Ottawa, appointed by Ottawa, makes the final 

decision about how we manage our resource? 

 

So I believe that parties that get it right in the next federal 

election about control of resources, following examples of 

countries like Brazil and Norway who don’t hesitate to say that 

they need to maximize royalties, taxations; they have to have 

restrictions on companies coming in . . . If you go to Norway, 

there’s a long process of how you get into the offshore oil. You 

have to prove that your human right record is impeccable and, 

if it isn’t, you can’t come in. And that’s why many companies 

don’t drill for oil in Norway. Your labour record. Do you 

support unions? 

 

[11:00] 

 

And some people would argue, well if you’re forced to do your 

business in Norway with its state-owned oil company, no oil 

company is going to come. They’ll all run away. Well the fact 

is the oil companies worldwide are lined up in the queue to do 

business with Norway with all of the government regulation, 

high royalties that are in place. Why? Because they have the 

resource. 

 

Now nowhere is it more true that people have to live by what 

the people of Saskatchewan want when it comes to the 

management of our potash. And I say clearly, if we want higher 

royalties, they’re not going to run away and go somewhere else. 

The reason I know we can have a little higher royalty, because 

if the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Potash Corporation 

has $500 million in share options, then I know there’s a little bit 

more we can take in royalty. Because no manager of any 

company that I know of — oil, gas, banks — get $500 million 

in share options. That’s our money. That was our resource and 

we’re giving too much of it away. 

 

Should we own a piece of the potash mining and operation in 

this province the way the people of Norway or the people of 

Brazil or the people of many other countries do? My position is, 

quite clearly, I think we should. I think we should have an 

earned interest in potash in Saskatchewan. I think the royalties 

should be somewhat higher and should be reviewed on a 

regular basis. I disagree again that you leave royalties the same 

way for 16 years. And I’m not being argumentative. I just don’t 

agree that that’s the way you should manage a major resource. 

 

So today is a day to celebrate, and we’ll all try to take credit. 

And good for the member from Swift Current. And we’ll take 

what credit we can take. That’s how politics works. But it’s a 

day to celebrate. But it’s also a day to review and reflect on the 

way we go forward with all the resources of the province, not 

only here, but right across Canada because I think that is going 

to be one of the fundamental issues that people in Canada vote 

on when they go to the polls in a few months here in Canada 

and for sure here in the province of Saskatchewan in the next 

election. 

 

So my final concluding comment is again to thank all the 

members of the Legislative Assembly, but most of all the 

people of the province, who were behind us and kept pushing 

us to this conclusion. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Gantefoer, seconded by Mr. 

Wyant, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Broten.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it was a bit disconcerting yesterday to be in the midst 

of a Throne Speech when a historic development was 

happening in our province. And I do want to congratulate all of 

the citizens of our province, along with all of the politicians and 

the people who work in the potash industry, for the work that 

they did that led us to the historic decision yesterday by the 

Government of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to say that I appreciate very much the 

comments that came from our Premier today as well as our 

Leader of the Opposition because I believe, along with the 

Leader of the Opposition, that the world has dramatically 

changed since the collapse of the financial markets of a couple 

of years ago and that people are starting to think more 

strategically about their resources, not only in this province but 

across the country and indeed internationally, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In my remarks yesterday, I talked about some of the people that 

have come to my constituency with real issues, real issues 

around housing in particular, Mr. Speaker. And this is a 

province that while there are some people that are doing very 

well in terms of the economy, there are other people that are 

having a difficult time making ends meet. 

 

And I certainly am of the view, and have been for a very long 

time, that one of the public policy jobs of the people who come 

to this Assembly is to try and make life better, not only for 

some people in the province but for all people in the province, 

Mr. Speaker. I think our strategic resources, whether it’s potash, 

uranium, oil and gas, those resources give us an opportunity to 

enhance the lives of our citizens, particularly those that are 

struggling, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In this Throne Speech, the government has talked about taking 

the road less travelled. And when we talk about taking a road 

less travelled, we need to acknowledge that in this province we 

have one of the highest labour force attachments of women 

with children five years of age and younger. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I think it’s fair to say that we have some ways to go as a 

province to ensure that children who are five years of age and 

younger have a place to go that is safe and secure and of high 

quality. 

 

Now the government has indicated in this Throne Speech that 

since November of 2007 they have created 2,900 new licensed 

child care spaces and all of these spaces will be in place before 

the end of March, which is the end of this particular 2010-11 

fiscal year. I want to report to the legislature that there are 



5852 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2010 

literally hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of children 

waiting — and their parents — waiting for child daycare spaces 

in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had an opportunity to go through some 

of the press releases that the government has issued — I may 

not have all of them — but at the moment, the 2,900 just 

doesn’t add up. And I’ve asked the government in a written 

question to tell us where those spaces are located because I 

know this: that if you are a student going to the University of 

Saskatchewan and you have small children, that the likelihood 

of you getting your child into one of their two child daycare 

centres is very remote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The students’ union has made it a priority for the students’ 

union at the University of Saskatchewan to dramatically 

increase the numbers of spaces, of their child daycare spaces in 

order that parents who attend the university can have their 

children in those spaces. And, Mr. Speaker, they put in 

submissions but they have not yet been successful with the 

Government of Saskatchewan. And I would encourage the 

government to think carefully about how we continue to 

support parents, and their children, who are trying to either 

attend post-secondary education or are trying to keep their job 

and don’t want the hassle of trying to figure out how they are 

going to have their children looked after in a safe and secure 

and quality environment during the day. 

 

And we know that there are people that have come to the city of 

Saskatoon. The city has grown, and yet we have not seen the 

accompanying growth in the number of child daycare spaces in 

the city of Saskatoon. And this presents a real problem. So 

while we talk about resource revenue in the province of 

Saskatchewan, it’s obvious the government wants to have a 

lower tax system for citizens in the province of Saskatchewan. 

We still need to enhance programs to support citizens, and one 

of the ways that we are able to do that is through resource 

revenues. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s clear that not only did the 

people of this province push back BHP Billiton in its endeavour 

to take over the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan — and we 

should all view that and what happened yesterday as a success 

— I really do think we need to rethink how we treat our 

resource revenues and how much we get from our resource 

revenues in order to support our citizens because we know we 

have some significant infrastructure issues in the province of 

Saskatchewan and we have some significant social problems in 

the province of Saskatchewan. And we need to figure out how 

we’re going to address those problems in the long term, not 

only through public policy measures but also through financial 

instrument, as the Premier likes to talk about financial 

instrument measures, in order to have the revenue to pay for 

those important programs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that this has been a very difficult 

year for people on the farm in Saskatchewan, and I note that in 

the Throne Speech they’ve indicated that there’s already been a 

quarter of a billion dollar payout in crop insurance, with many 

post-harvest claims to be processed.  

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this is one of the areas that presents a real 

challenge to the provincial budget. And at the end of the day 

it’ll be interesting to see what the deficit and debt looks like at 

Crop Insurance given the huge issues that rural Saskatchewan is 

facing, particularly in terms of flood in the spring and frost in 

the fall. And I think that’s one of the vulnerabilities of the 

provincial budget, that we will see a significant increase in the 

deficit and debt at Crop Insurance. And I think probably the 

quarter of a billion dollars that the government refers to in its 

Throne Speech will be small in comparison to what we’re going 

to be looking at once the mid-year report comes out in 

November. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that is becoming increasingly 

troubling in the province is that while the government says that 

it has reduced the amount of government debt, they do not take 

into consideration what’s happening in the Crown sector. And I 

think it’s important for citizens to understand that when the 

former government talked about debt, we talked about GRF 

[General Revenue Fund] debt and we talked Crown debt, the 

total debt of the province. And while it’s true the GRF debt has 

been reduced, the Crown debt has not been reduced and in fact 

is going up. 

 

So I think instead of having billboards around the province 

indicating that government debt has been reduced by 40 per 

cent, I think we need to be very, very honest with the citizens of 

our province indicating that in fact Crown debt is part of 

government debt and Crown debt is going up in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And when you look at the summary financial 

statements that the government’s presented, they indicate that 

government debt is going to go up as well. It’s going to go up 

another $4 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this Throne Speech, the government says that 

life is still affordable in Saskatchewan. I just want to say to the 

members opposite that life is not very affordable for a number 

of our citizens that are on fixed incomes or work in the service 

sector.  

 

And I noted that the minister of I think it’s Enterprise 

Saskatchewan indicated that there are all these jobs on the 

SaskJobs website. And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of those jobs are in 

the service sector. We need to have people who work in the 

service sector, but those are not higher paying jobs, Mr. 

Speaker. Those are jobs that are a little bit above minimum 

wage. And the members opposite need to know that when you 

freeze minimum wage for a three-year period while the cost of 

living is going up, that there are a lot of people who get a little 

bit above minimum wage but their incomes are tied to what the 

minimum wage does. And when minimum wage goes up, their 

wages go up. So I really believe that the government needs to 

rethink, rethink the minimum wage in the province because it’s 

so important for those people in the service sector who are 

making a little bit above minimum wage, but their wage is tied 

to that minimum wage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that the government is quite 

proud of is the number of nurses, registered nurses that they’ve 

increased in the province of Saskatchewan. They’ve increased 

the number of seats in our nursing education program. But I 

want to state to the government that there are a number of 

nursing students who are graduating, and they are having a 

difficult time getting full-time employment. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, we have a situation where health regions have not 



November 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5853 

received the budget that they expected to receive in this fiscal 

year. They are ratcheting back services and programs. They are 

not filling positions, and that has implications for those new 

grads that are coming out of the nursing education program not 

getting jobs. 

 

[11:15] 

 

And so I think that this is an important public policy discussion 

because the minister has said he doesn’t want to affect 

front-line services. But the reality is that if you’re a health 

region and you’re not getting enough money to cover your 

costs, one of the ways you manage those costs is by not filling 

positions in the health region and ratcheting back services in 

order to deal with the reality of not having enough money, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has said that they’re pleased that 

they’ve been able to increase the number of seats, spaces for 

children in the pre-kindergarten program. And I note that the 

Minister of Education got to go to I think it was Russia and 

represent the ministers of Education in Canada because of early 

learning and care. And one of the reasons why, I guess the 

reason why she was invited was because Saskatchewan was the 

first place in Canada to move child daycare over to the Ministry 

of Education. And Mr. Speaker, there were some very 

important reasons why that public policy decision was made 

under the Calvert government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to have an early learning and care 

strategy in the province of Saskatchewan. And that early 

learning and care strategy needs to be not only for children who 

are 5 years of age and younger — and so that would be child 

daycare; it would be pre-K [pre-kindergarten] — but it would 

also be for children that are 5, 6, 7 years of age, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the province of Saskatchewan did develop the strategy 

when we believed that the Martin government was going to 

send $150 million to Saskatchewan. But with the election of 

Prime Minister Harper, that program was cancelled, and we’re 

in the, I guess, dubious position where we’re now trying to put 

together an early learning and care strategy to support children. 

 

And we know all the research and all the science shows that it’s 

important. We know that children’s brains are basically wired 

by the time they’re 5 years of age. And there are a lot of 

supports that can be put in place to support young children and 

their families, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would really encourage the Government of Saskatchewan 

to bring forward an early learning and care plan for the 

province of Saskatchewan in order to support children and their 

parents in the province of Saskatchewan. And we also need to 

think very carefully about going to a full-day kindergarten 

program in Saskatchewan because we know that the sooner you 

can get supports in place for children, the better the learning 

outcomes for children in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech also said that they have 

addressed long-standing concerns by doubling the seniors’ 

income plan for seniors. Well, Mr. Speaker, they may have 

doubled it, but it’s not enough for those seniors, particularly 

living in larger centres, to deal with escalating rent increases. 

And I would say to the government that there are low-income 

seniors that are struggling to make ends meet because they 

simply, through the old-age pension, the Guaranteed Income 

Supplement, and the Saskatchewan Income Plan, they simply 

don’t have enough money to make ends meet. And we need to 

think very carefully how we can support seniors in the province 

of Saskatchewan, given the context that we live in and given 

that there are seniors that are seeing their rents go up and in fact 

double in some cases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that the Government of 

Saskatchewan dealt with in the last session was the decision to 

change The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and take over 3 

million acres out of protection. Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Martensville had the dubious task of trying to shepherd that 

legislation through the Assembly. And I have to tell you this, 

that I find it very difficult to understand why a younger woman 

that came to this Assembly representing the people of 

Martensville was given the task of being very, I guess, harsh. 

She was one of my harshest critics when I sat on those benches, 

but she was an effective critic. 

 

She then was put into cabinet by the Premier to be the 

Environment minister. And while we disagree on many fronts 

in terms of the government’s environmental policy, this was a 

woman, a female cabinet minister, that was given this role. And 

when the wildlife protection Act came into this Assembly, the 

amendments . . . I know how this works. This was not her Bill. 

This was the Bill of the Government of Saskatchewan. And 

shortly after this House adjourned, she was put out of cabinet. 

 

But I think the most disrespectful thing, Mr. Speaker, not only 

was this woman, this female member of this Assembly — and 

not many of us get to be here — not only was she put out of 

cabinet but she was shuffled off to the very far corners of this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And I find that disrespectful and not 

acceptable to one of our woman colleagues in this Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I want to put it on the record that I think the member from 

Martensville has been treated very poorly by this government 

and by our Premier, Mr. Speaker. And I think that it needs to be 

remedied, that she didn’t deserve this, regardless of the 

legislation that she brought into the Assembly. So, Mr. Speaker, 

I wanted to put that on the record. 

 

And I know that her family are friends with the Premier 

apparently. And the Premier took great pains to talk about her 

father, who she succeeded in this Assembly, but it doesn’t 

matter what happened over there. This woman didn’t deserve to 

be treated the way she has been treated, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in order to make up for this, the Premier is now saying to 

the people of Saskatchewan that he wants to introduce some 

more parks or protect more spaces, so he’s taken over three . . . 

And I will say he, the Premier, has taken over 3 million acres 

out of natural protection which, by the way, was brought in by 

the Devine government and Colin Maxwell who was the 

minister responsible at the time. But he wants to take that land 

away from protection, but he wants to create some more parks, 

I guess. 

 

And one of the areas that they’re looking at is the Great Sand 



5854 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2010 

Hills. And, Mr. Speaker, I was extremely pleased to be part of a 

government that brought in international scientists to really take 

a look at the Great Sand Hills and determine how we could 

protect that part of our province. And if the government decides 

to protect it, we’ll be looking very carefully to see which part of 

the Great Sand Hills is permanently protected by the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was interesting that this Throne Speech spent 

very little time on the future of the Potash Corporation and the 

potash industry. And we all know the results of yesterday. But I 

think that we ask some very important questions for the people 

living in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

I represent the east side of the river where a number of Potash 

Corporation people work, people who work in head office. In 

fact I’ve had the distinction of representing some of the 

vice-presidents that have recently retired — Betty-Ann Heggie 

and John Hampton, Betty-Ann in charge of corporate 

governance, and John was the vice-president responsible for 

legal work. Mr. Speaker, once they retired, those jobs, those 

positions were moved to the United States, Chicago. And in 

fact if you go along the Chicago freeway you will see a suburb 

of Chicago where PCS headquarters is located. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there has been a hollowing out of PCS in the 

city of Saskatoon, a hollowing out. And we can all take 

responsibility for that. I know my former colleague Eric Cline 

wrote letters to President Doyle about that hollowing out. 

 

But the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan made some very 

important commitments to the people of our province during 

this hostile takeover bid. I want to see, and the citizens of our 

province deserve to see, Saskatchewan people in some of these 

positions. The only VP [vice-president] left is Wayne 

Brownlee, whose brother also happens to work for the 

Government of Saskatchewan. But it’s the only VP position 

left. And they had Wayne out during this whole debate to talk 

about PCS, but all of the corporate VP jobs that have to do with 

our resource, with the exception of Wayne Brownlee, are 

located in Chicago, Illinois, the United States of America. 

 

And if we want to have our young people have access to some 

of these better paid jobs in the province of Saskatchewan, we 

need to see those jobs repatriated, not only to Canada, not only 

to Saskatchewan, but to Saskatoon. And so the questions that 

the Leader of the Opposition asked the Premier, the questions 

that my colleagues asked the Minister of Energy, are very 

important questions. And we do have the tools. We do have the 

tools. 

 

Now I understand this morning there were some pretty happy 

people in Chicago in their office because they don’t think they 

have to come back here. And in fact there are people in the city 

of Saskatoon that overheard some of the people who have been 

in this province in the last six weeks to two months talking 

about, they didn’t want to have to come to this hell hole called 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s unacceptable. 

Saskatchewan is not a hell hole. Saskatoon is not. And we need 

to make sure that the people who ran those full-page 

advertisings in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, the Regina Leader 

Post, they live up to the commitments that they have made to 

our citizens. Because our citizens made a commitment to them 

by going to bat for them so that this deal was turned down by 

the Government of Canada. 

 

And those citizens are workers. They’re members of the 

legislature. They are people who go about their daily activity. 

They’re our opposition Member of Parliament, I understand, 

our government Members of Parliament. All of these people 

went to bat. And the government of Canada made a decision 

yesterday that PCS should pay attention to. But we’re going to 

pay attention to them to see whether or not they live up to their 

obligations that they put in the newspaper. 

 

So not only do they need to repatriate head office jobs to 

Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, but they also need to be much more 

involved in donating to the community. Because that was 

another issue that certainly has been a problem for some time. 

While there were corporate donations, they weren’t as 

significant as the 36 per cent of the potash that they presently 

hold in the world, Mr. Speaker, and have access to. 

 

So we will be looking with some interest to see whether PCS 

lives up to its commitments, and whether or not the 

Government of Saskatchewan which does have the tools, they 

do have the public policy tools, to make PCS live up to those 

commitments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’ll be interesting to see how this Throne 

Speech meets its test when we see the next provincial budget. 

This is a government that has promised us, in this Throne 

Speech, that it’s going to take a road less travelled. There are 

some very compelling issues in the province of Saskatchewan 

that need to be addressed, and they need to be addressed sooner 

rather than later. 

 

There are people who do not have a place to live. There are 

people who do not have a place to live because they are HIV 

[human immunodeficiency virus] positive, or because they are 

in the depths of despair — alcoholism, drug addiction, and 

poverty, Mr. Speaker. There are people who are having a hard 

time making ends meet. And they could be our grandmothers. 

They could be our sisters. They could be our kids. They are 

having a hard time because they work in an area . . . or they’re 

on fixed incomes. They work in an area where there are lower 

waged jobs, service sector jobs, or they’re on fixed incomes. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would urge the government of this province to 

do something about housing. You know, all the churches in my 

area have now gotten together to have an ecumenical group 

whose job it is to work around the housing issue, because they 

know that housing is so important to people’s health and 

well-being. 

 

In fact, when the Red Tent group came through Saskatchewan 

talking about homelessness, the churches in my constituency 

were there. The Catholic church, the Anglican church, the 

United church, the Lutheran church, and others — they were 

there. They were there at city hall to talk about housing. 

 

And let me repeat again, I don’t come from the poorest part of 

Saskatoon. Many of the people in my constituency are doing 

okay. But there are some people who are not, and their kids 



November 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5855 

aren’t and their sisters aren’t and their brothers aren’t and their 

nieces and nephews aren’t or maybe their parents aren’t. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that we have a duty as legislators. We 

have a duty as legislators to think about people other than 

ourselves, to think about people other than who we may hang 

out with. Because we’re a pretty lucky group of people. We 

come here with good incomes. We have a good income relative 

to how others are in the province in Saskatchewan. Most of us 

own our homes, if not all of us. We’re not struggling, but there 

are people struggling in the reality that they face in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely awful to be in your 

constituency office when a 78-year-old woman, a senior woman 

comes into your office — having taken the bus because she 

can’t drive any more — she lives in a small apartment, and she 

brings in her 52-year-old son who is HIV positive, a recovering 

addict, obviously with mental health issues, mental health 

issues, and he has no place to go because no one wants him. 

 

And we need to do something about that, Mr. Speaker. We need 

to do something about that, and we need to do it sooner rather 

than later. Because all of the information is coming out that the 

numbers of people in our province who are HIV positive is 

increasing. It’s increasing every year, so we need to address 

that. But for those people who are HIV positive, they have to 

have some place to live. In fact it’s immoral if they don’t, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s absolutely unacceptable. 

 

So I will be watching very carefully in the next budget. Does 

this government have money for homelessness? Does this 

government have funding for people who require that kind of 

support? And I would urge the government, very clearly urge 

the government, with all of its attendant issues . . . and there are 

many. There are many issues that you have to deal with. I 

understand it. But there are people who are mentally ill, HIV 

positive, and homeless that absolutely need to have somewhere 

to go, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my colleagues for 

listening to what I had to say. I’m looking forward to next 

spring’s budget. I’m looking forward to the mid-year report. 

And I’m looking forward to seeing some work done, some 

progress made on housing and child daycare and early learning 

in the province of Saskatchewan. And we will see whether or 

not the Government of Saskatchewan that says they want to 

take a road less travelled truly will take a road less travelled 

that is for the people of the province and for those people who 

don’t have a voice in this Assembly. 

 

There are lots of people that have a voice in this Assembly 

through their members of the legislature. We represent various 

interests in this Legislative Assembly. But my test will be, my 

test will be whether or not this government does something 

significant and serious about housing in the province of 

Saskatchewan because they absolutely need to, because no one 

in the province of Saskatchewan should be without a home. 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I thank you for your attentiveness 

and I’ll take my seat. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 

privilege and a pleasure to speak on the Speech from the 

Throne. But first I’ve got some special thank yous I would like 

to make. First off to my wife Valerie, because on November 1st 

— just a couple of days ago — was our 35th wedding 

anniversary, and I spent it here at the shop. So thank you very 

much to her for her support. 

 

I’d also like to thank my CA [constituency assistant], Mary 

Anne. She’s invaluable and also a great friend. I’d also like to 

thank the guys and gals here in our office. Their support, their 

assistance, and their friendship is greatly appreciated. 

 

And I’d also like to congratulate the new MLA for Saskatoon 

Northwest. Good to have you on board, my friend. I’d also like 

to thank the people of Batoche, my home constituency, for their 

support and their friendship through the years. 

 

There’s a new sense of pride in Saskatchewan. People are now 

proud to be from Saskatchewan. We are seeing growth at an 

unprecedented rate — the highest year-over-year population 

growth since 1953, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the highest growth 

since 1953. That’s just phenomenal. It’s unreal. We’ve at last 

reached our time. Now our children are coming home. They’re 

building futures, building homes. They are now building 

Saskatchewan. We see business people starting new businesses 

at a rate we have never seen before. 

 

If you ask the average person about the new Saskatchewan, he 

will tell you he likes what he sees. He will tell you a new day 

has dawned for Saskatchewan. He will say it is finally, finally 

our turn. He will also say tomorrow has finally come for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I’d like to quote from former President Ronald Reagan, and I 

quote. He said, “We didn’t come here to mess with the controls. 

We came here to change the direction of the ship.” This is what 

is happening in the new Saskatchewan. We are finally reaching 

out for the dreams that our forefathers had when they settled 

this province. 

 

In 1905 when Saskatchewan was born, we were the fastest 

growing province in all of Canada, in all of Canada. We had a 

larger population than our sister province, Alberta. Now we hit 

1 million, and they are at over 3. We were the third largest 

populated province in Canada next only to Quebec and Ontario. 

We built the largest legislative building in all of Canada. We 

were proud, and we were reaching for our destiny. 

 

So what happened? The dirty ’30s hit like a hammer, and we 

were beaten into submission. Our economy was totally based 

on agriculture. Our crops failed; our businesses failed; and our 

hearts failed. We were beaten into submission, and we settled 

for mediocrity. 

 

No more hopes. No more dreams of grandeur. We became the 

wee province, the province of decline, the second-rate province, 

the province depending on the rest of Canada, the province 

whose biggest export was our sons and daughters — our 

precious sons and daughters leaving for the promised lands: 

Alberta, BC [British Columbia], Ontario, anywhere but here, 

the land of no hope. 

 



5856 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2010 

A sad story, but not the end. Some sons and daughters stayed 

— the strong of heart, the fearless. They worked and they built 

on the base of our forefathers. They would not accept that fate. 

 

So we stand here today, the proud sons and daughters of the 

people who stayed, who led us to today, who taught us, who 

pushed us, who helped us to be more than what they could be. 

Many of them had little to no education. They gave us the 

chance, they gave us the education, and they gave us the 

encouragement. All they asked in return was for us to reach for 

our destiny, to build, to grow, to dream, to make this province 

into what it rightly should be — a have province, a leader, a 

jewel in the crown of Canada. A place to be, not a place to be 

from. A world leader in resources, in agriculture, in science and 

technology. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will now mention some of the projects that I am 

most proud of. They are projects that were very important to the 

communities of Batoche. 

 

The water project at Duck Lake. The sewage project at St. 

Louis, key to their future. The bridge at St. Louis, key to the 

future of people on No. 2 Highway. The RO [reverse osmosis] 

water project in Middle Lake will allow the town to grow and 

develop. Highway 368, very big to the future of Saskatchewan; 

part of the iron triangle and needed muchly for our future. A 

new high school for Duck Lake. Three Lakes School roofing 

project. The paving of the main street of Cudworth. High-speed 

upgrade to Lake Lenore, Kinistino, St. Louis, St. Brieux, Duck 

Lake, Birch Hills, Cudworth. These are some of the items I am 

most proud of because they are for the people of Batoche. 

 

This year was the Year of the Métis, and it has been a very 

exciting year. I’ve been very fortunate to be part of the new 

initiative, Trails of 1885. This program is uniting all the 

locations of the 1885 resistance from Fort Walsh to Steele 

Narrows. It includes sites as Fort Pitt and the Humboldt 

telegraph. These are sites that are first now beginning the task 

of restoration. 

 

Trails of 1885 will enable tourists to see the whole story right 

from Fort Walsh to Steele Narrows. It will be the map that lays 

out the full picture — enables people to see what happened, 

when it happened, and where it happened. The tourists will then 

be able to pick and choose the route across Saskatchewan. In 

fact, it will also link up with the relevant sites in Manitoba and 

Alberta. 

 

The highway signs are up. Maybe you’ve seen them — 1885 on 

a blue background with a white border. The grand opening of 

the Trails of 1885 was held this spring at Prairieland Park in 

Saskatoon. The grand entry was done in a fine style. Leading 

the entry was the North West Mounted Police and their scouts. 

Our Premier and a federal representative entered in a beautiful 

horse-drawn landau. There were representatives of First 

Nations from Saskatchewan and Alberta riding in on horseback. 

I was privileged to ride in a Red River cart with my friend, the 

president of the Saskatchewan Métis Nation, Mr. Robert 

Doucette. 

 

Another event this summer that was a first in many respects 

was the live re-enactment of the battle of Cut Knife Hill. It was 

a huge success, with cannon fire, black powder, smoke, 

warriors in full battle dress. It was an amazing sight. A lot of 

the work was done by Poundmaker Reserve in partnership with 

Fort Battleford. I salute your efforts and look forward to next 

year’s production. 

 

[11:45] 

 

One of the biggest events of the year was Back to Batoche 

Days, held late in July. It was held in conjunction with the 

125th anniversary of the battle of Batoche. An emotional 

reconciliation service was held at the Batoche graveyard site. It 

was very rewarding to be there with our Premier and witness 

this event. Back to Batoche Days was a huge success. Mr. 

Speaker, total number of wristbands sold was an astounding 

22,000. Twenty-two thousand people came to a field alongside 

the Saskatchewan River to celebrate Back to Batoche Days, the 

heritage of our province. 

 

The feature entertainers were Michelle Wright, Donny 

Parenteau, and Andrea Menard. A huge success. 

Congratulations to our friend Robert Doucette and the gal who 

put it all together, Claire Belanger-Parker. 

 

Another of this summer’s events that has been ongoing for 

years, but was more prominent this year, was the Trial of Louis 

Riel. It was held at numerous locations this summer and even at 

the Batoche site. It was very moving and emotional for the 

Métis people who saw it for the first time. Thank you to the 

crew and staff that did the performance. It was truly, truly 

first-class. 

 

The world is hungry for new history. Through Trails of 1885 

opening the pages of the history of our province, we are 

showing the world what an exciting history we have. There are 

a lot of sites and places to touch history on the Trails of 1885. I 

would encourage each and every one of you to go see, taste, 

and smell the history and the wonders of our province. 

 

There are a lot of points made in our government’s Throne 

Speech that have been well addressed by my colleagues on this 

side of the House. They have been very well documented in 

great detail by our members. But there are a few issues that I 

feel I must personally address. 

 

The first one I want to address is our population. It is finally 

over the million mark. This is a number that mediocrity said we 

would never reach. The growth factor, when first proposed by 

our then leader, Elwin Hermanson, was laughed at. The left side 

said, impossible. Well who’s laughing now? The highest 

growth rate in all of Canada. 

 

The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, in her reply to the 

Speech from the Throne, said the Sask Party has created more 

Crown corporations than the NDP government of previous. Mr. 

Speaker, I say to that member, if that’s the case, why are all the 

members on that side of the House so worried and yelling all 

over the country that the Sask Party will sell the Crowns and 

that we will destroy them? Which is it? Are we building or are 

we destroying? You can’t have it both ways. You can’t suck 

and blow at the same time. 

 

I’m very proud of the government and Premier for stepping up 

to the plate on this controversial MS [multiple sclerosis] issue. 



November 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5857 

We are not only supporting the research, but we are funding it 

to the tune of 5 million. Now that’s talking the talk and walking 

the walk. We have taken action, not just because we have the 

highest incidence of MS in Canada but because it is the right 

thing to do. 

 

I’m also very proud of the future children’s hospital. The time 

has come. It fits well with the needs of new Saskatchewan. And 

I look forward with great anticipation to the grand opening. 

 

I am also thrilled to see surgical wait times finally being 

reduced. Mr. Speaker, the NDP party — the party that gave 

Canada medicare — this party, this NDP party gave 

Saskatchewan the longest surgical waiting list in all of Canada. 

What a quantum leap backward. The NDP was the party of 

social justice. They are no longer. 

 

The Sask Party has given Saskatchewan more social justice in 

three years than the NDP did in their entire 16-year reign. From 

surgery wait lists to doctor, nurse shortages, the Saskatchewan 

Party has addressed these issues and found solutions. We are 

now looking at the STARS [shock trauma air rescue service] 

program that would give us that much-needed time to get 

patients to the emergency room by helicopter and save lives, 

save many lives that are just too distant from the major 

hospitals to be saved. The Sask Party government is the new 

champion of social justice, and the people of Saskatchewan are 

very, very grateful. 

 

One of the final issues I would like to address in my reply to the 

Speech from the Throne is the education portion of property 

tax. For as long as I can remember, it has been an unfair burden 

on property owners. The previous government promised and 

promised to address this issue but never did. The Sask Party has 

addressed the issue, and the people of Saskatchewan agree, it is 

the right answer. The people of Saskatchewan are very happy 

with the new Saskatchewan, and I am very honoured to be part 

of this new government. 

 

The last issue that I would like to address is potash. Potash 

could prove to someday be the most valuable resource in the 

world. Feeding the world as the population grows will become 

more and more tied to this special resource called potash, and 

we, the people of Saskatchewan, have 53 per cent of the entire 

world’s supply. 

 

The case made by our government on the sale to BHP Billiton 

was flawless. They left no stone unturned. And as the world 

now knows, we won the day. I would personally like to say 

thank you, thank you very much, to our Premier and his team 

that made it all possible. 

 

This is a very exciting time to be from Saskatchewan. To our 

ancestors I say, rest easy. We have taken the high road. And 

Saskatchewan once again is looking to a bright future — a 

place where future generations will be proud to live, work, and 

play; a place they will call home. God bless Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting enthusiastically the 

Speech from the Throne. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from Arm River-Watrous. 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a pleasure 

to get up and enter the debate of the Throne Speech. I’ve 

entered many of them; this is going into my 12th year coming 

up. It hasn’t seemed that long at times and sometimes it’s 

seemed longer. But I always enjoy getting up and representing 

the views of my constituents. I still feel honoured that they see 

fit to send me down here to express their views. And I’m still 

humbled by that when I think about it, that when I go around 

and talk to them that they still see fit to send me down here. 

 

I also want to welcome our newest member, the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest. I know that he worked very hard to get 

here through his by-election, and I know that he’s going to 

work equally hard for his constituents, representing them. And I 

know he’s going to be here for many, many years. 

 

I also want to say a thank you to my constituency assistants. 

They’ve been here with me from the start. Mr. Clark Puckett 

and Donna Petit have worked very hard looking after the office 

when I’ve been up here in Regina bringing the concerns of the 

constituents. And we also have another girl working a little bit 

of part time, Lavonne Lyke, who’s doing very well working 

there. So I want to give a thanks if they’re watching — I don’t 

think they are; they’re probably on the phones talking to 

constituents or working — but I want to give a thanks for 

running the office very well and looking after all of my 

constituents as they’ve been for the 12 years that I’ve been 

here. They’ve addressed every concern, returned every phone 

call that has ever come into that office. And I’ve returned every 

call that anybody that’s ever requested, that talks to me. 

 

It’s very good to be . . . I always look forward to entering into 

debate on the Throne Speech. I’ve spoken to many of them, but 

this one and the last few in particular, this one talks about a new 

road. And when I’ve talked to . . . gone around in my 

constituency, we are on a new road. When I first got elected, a 

lot of my towns were losing population. They were struggling. 

When I met with mayors, the reeves, the biggest concern was 

loss of population, jobs — you know, how can we get this 

province growing? And the last few years it has been growing, 

and there’s a pride out there. 

 

There’s always been a pride with people from Saskatchewan, 

but the last years it’s really bubbled to the surface. I mean, 

we’re forefront. We’re getting to be a leader in Western Canada 

and a have province, and that’s what the people want of 

Saskatchewan. They want to be a leader. They want to . . . they 

take pride in what we have. 

 

And we have a lot here. We have many natural resources, one 

of the biggest agricultural bases in Canada, in Saskatchewan 

here, most arable acres. You know, very many natural 

resources: potash, oil, natural gas, heavy oil, diamonds, 

uranium, coal. There’s many, many natural resources here. This 

is, the potential for Saskatchewan is huge. It’s almost like when 

you talk to the constituents, they know that we’re just on the 

cusp of growing, like our future is just starting again. 

 

I know the members have talked about when they built this 

legislature. The member for Batoche and also member from 

Cypress Hills that talked when they first built this legislature, it 

was built for 4 to 5 million people. It was built because they 

expected this to be Saskatchewan, to be the leader of Western 



5858 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2010 

Canada, to be the leader of Western Canada. And now we’re 

stepping finally into that after many, many years, that the 

people now in Saskatchewan realizing we are going to be the 

leaders here in Western Canada. We are a leading province. 

 

And this Throne Speech speaks to the many things that we’ve 

led. We’re leading in, we’re growing in population, over the 1 

million mark. We’ve never, ever reached that mark, never had 

that mark for many, many years. If we did, it was I think maybe 

we may have touched it close to the early ’30s, I’m not sure, 

late ’20s. 

 

It shows that the promise of people coming home, the towns 

growing. The towns I’ve talked about — Kenaston, Hanley, 

Davidson, Watrous, Wynyard, Raymore — are all growing. 

They’re all adding houses. When I talk to the mayors there, I 

mean, the biggest concerns now that they have is working on 

subdivisions and new permits for housing. 

 

People coming home, commuting to jobs in Saskatoon, 

commuting to the mines in Allan and Lanigan, commuting. 

Also even still some going to Fort McMurray to work, but they 

want to come home. They want to live in Saskatchewan. This is 

their home, and they have a huge pride in that. 

 

And this Throne Speech talks about it. It talks about growth. 

And there’s been many growths. I mean, we can talk about the 

long-term care facility in Watrous. You know, the people there 

put together, started in ’91-92 raising funds. They had the funds 

in the early ’90s to build their integrated long-term care facility. 

The previous government said no to them, year after year after 

year after year as their facility deteriorated. 

 

We came to government. We went out. I know the Health 

minister came out. We looked at that facility, knew that it 

needed . . . talked to the people there that put many years in, 

and faith. And I’ll give congratulations to a man like Murray 

Westby, who was the Chair of the foundation there; Mayor Ed 

Collins who just kept pushing and pushing, saying, you know 

eventually the government of the day is going to listen to us. 

 

And we came into power. We listened to them, saying yes, 

we’re going to work with you. You have the money. We’re 

going to give you our share. Less than a month ago, I was at the 

sod-turning. Hundreds of people there, people that had worked 

for that for 20 years to see that coming. 

 

And that is, that’s part speaking to this government knowing 

that we have a vision and a future for Saskatchewan. We 

believe in this province. Same as the people in Watrous and 

area, they believed that that community was going to grow, that 

they were going to need that facility at that. 

 

Another one is the children’s hospital. There has been people 

raising money for many years. I want to congratulate people 

from Saskatoon, from all over the province have been raising 

money because they believed that this province needed a 

children’s hospital. Does this province need a children’s 

hospital? You bet it does. You bet it needs a children’s hospital. 

And the people of Saskatchewan knew it needed one. 

 

We as government, we stepped up. We put 200 million into 

that. And there’s still fundraisers going on. There’s been 

fundraisers for many years through raffles and telephones and 

charities and raffle tickets, and raised money right across the 

province. I think many, many organizations from the Elks to the 

Kinsmen to the Lions have all donated money, always had 

fundraisers, always going towards a children’s hospital. That’s 

a vision and speaks to this province and the future of it. 

 

And the people believe in this province, Mr. Speaker, and so do 

we, the Government of Saskatchewan. We believe that this 

province has a future that is growing. 

 

Another one is a vision talking about in the Throne Speech I’m 

proud of is our STARS program. The member for Melfort did a 

lot of work towards that. He worked, brought that idea forward 

years ago, travelled to Alberta, studied that. Will it fit into 

Saskatchewan? Yes, it will. I think we need, we need that in 

Saskatchewan. Will it be replacing things in rural 

Saskatchewan? No. It will be enhancing our health care to 

Saskatchewan. We owe that to the residents of any way that we 

can help the people in Saskatchewan. And that speaks to this, 

Mr. Speaker, speaks to this Throne Speech, speaks to the vision 

and the people of this province. 

 

[12:00] 

 

You know, business owners, I have many small businesses in 

my constituency. And the optimism is there now that this 

province is on the cusp of growing bigger, and it’s a good place 

to do business. And it is growing and it is growing. I can name 

. . . You know, every town there’s almost been a new business 

been growing where, under the NDP, it was stagnant. There 

was no businesses growing in rural Saskatchewan under them 

because, you know what? They didn’t believe in rural 

Saskatchewan. They wanted to work within . . . How can you 

work with a declining population? And we’re not . . . That’s not 

our program. Ours is we know this province is growing, as is 

the people growing. 

 

And that’s what they want. They want a government, Mr. 

Speaker, that believes in the growth of its province. And this 

province has a huge, huge, huge future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Talking about the potash. I had many calls, you know, that 

believe they don’t want the government owning it, but they like 

the stance we’re taking because we’re looking after the 

resources of this province for the people of Saskatchewan. And 

that is when I’ve had many calls. I was out in the coffee shops 

in the weekend talking to people. And the stance we took, our 

Premier took, of going to Ottawa and working with them and 

getting them to realize that they made the right decision, on that 

end of it, has gone . . . is the right stance. 

 

I haven’t had one person say, you know, no, what you’re doing 

is wrong. I’ve had many people, many constituents, and I don’t 

. . . [inaudible] . . . they voted for me or not. Just about 

everybody I talked to in Arm River-Watrous says, you know, 

what you guys are doing is good. You’re there protecting our 

resources for our future. It’s going to help grow our health care 

system, our education system, our highways. 

 

You know, one of the other targets we’d set out when we’re 

talking about health care, we talked about it, is hiring of 800 

new nurses in this province. You know, that is a goal that we’d 



November 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5859 

set out. We’d set out from the onset when we were first elected. 

We talked about it in our throne speeches. And we’ve hit that 

target. We’ve needed that target for a number of years. We 

needed to hire new nurses because there’s been a shortage of 

nursing in Saskatchewan. You know, those are targets that we 

set out as government, that we took to fulfill. And it was a 

challenge, but we did it. We fulfilled it because we believed 

that this province is growing. And it is on the grow. 

 

We’ve also, to grow that, we’ve added 170 new nursing 

training seats added on top of the other 30 that were previously 

added. That’s how you grow. We have faith in this province. 

We need to support our health care system, and that’s how 

we’re doing it. We’ve also created an additional 100 long-term 

addiction recovery spaces, you know. Those are things that 

we’re doing also to help everybody. 

 

I know that under housing units, we also put in 166 affordable 

housing units throughout the province. And there is, there is a 

housing shortage. But that comes when you have an economic 

boom. That comes when you’re growing a province. When you 

grow a province, there is some challenges. But you know what? 

We can stand up and face them. Those are the kind of 

challenges that I like to face because when I first got elected in 

’99, when the present . . . when the opposition was in power, 

the challenges they were facing was losing population. How do 

we deal with declining population, all of our people leaving? 

Poor highways. And how they faced it was how to try to 

manage the decline. 

 

Our goal was, how can we turn that around? How can we turn 

that around? How can we start growing this province? Keeping 

our people here. Making sure that there is jobs and job growth 

in this province. And it’s a challenge to do that, but we’ve 

stepped up to it in many different ways. 

 

We’re also bringing new programming in called Head Start on 

a Home which will see the construction of 1,000 new affordable 

homes over the next five years. Now those are things we’re 

doing to grow this province, to help the people of this province 

grow. 

 

You know, another promise we’d made when we were through 

different Throne Speeches is 120 new police officers. Right 

now we’re at 75 per cent complete of that, and I’m sure that we 

will have completed that by the time our term is up in 

November, you know. And the people of Saskatchewan, they 

remember things like that when they know that you’re trying to 

grow this province. And it is growing. It is moving in the right 

direction. 

 

Agriculture. We all know that it was a, you know, it was a 

trying time. It was a challenge for farmers this year, you know. 

We had excessive moisture. In my area and throughout my 

constituency farmers struggled to get the crop in, and most of 

them did. In my northeast part of my constituency, some of 

them just couldn’t. They had more rain. There was places that 

had as much as 45 to 50 inches of rain throughout the province, 

and they just couldn’t get their acres seeded, not all of them. So 

what did we do? We tried to help. We put out $30 an acre, you 

know. 

 

And then we’ve also enhanced crop insurance. And you know, 

they’re appreciative. They know that we’re trying to help any 

way we can to help them struggle through their times. And as 

the summer continued on, harvest was also a challenge. 

 

But the farmers, if you’re involved in agriculture, used to 

battling mother nature. You try to work with her, but it seems 

like you battle with her as much as you work with her, and this 

year it was a battle. We were lucky in October — the weather 

got nice and the crops were pretty well all in. Last reports 

checked, it was at least 99 per cent of the province was 

harvested. There was, you know, a small per cent that they just 

couldn’t get out. 

 

But I know the challenges they faced in some of the . . . 

especially my northeast part of the constituency of combines 

getting stuck, trucks getting stuck. That was almost not quite a 

daily occurrence, but at least a weekly occurrence of a farmer 

having to pull out a combine or a truck or a grain cart. And you 

know, that’s hard on equipment. It slows you down. You have 

to take your time. It’s a challenge. But they stepped up, you 

know. They met it. I want to congratulate the farmers, the 

challenges they faced this year. And we’re hoping next year 

will be a good year. 

 

But we’ve tried to help them anyway we can. We’ve enhanced 

crop insurance. We’ve laid out the $30 an acre to try to help 

them through them times. 

 

Another one is, you know, we’re looking to restore and repair 

irrigation infrastructure. Before the boundaries changed, I used 

to have Outlook, an irrigation district, and I used to meet with 

the farmers there. And you know what? There wasn’t a nickel, 

they told me, put into irrigation through the ’90s. All the work 

was done through the ’80s. It was like the NDP said, well this 

area is not going to grow. No, we’re not going to, like, spend 

any money there. Well we believe that irrigation can grow in 

Saskatchewan and grow in that area, so we’ve put in over $30 

million to restore and repair irrigation infrastructure. You 

know, that’s believing in agriculture. 

 

And one of the other irritants in the agriculture area was 

education property tax. We know that it had to be addressed. 

You know, we’ve had politicians talk about that for 30, 40 

years, that it’s getting to be more and more a burden on 

property owners, especially as the school districts got larger and 

as the farms got larger, as property got larger. We know there 

was a problem that we had to address, and we were willing to 

take that on. Was it a challenge? Yes, it was. And the people 

understand and are grateful, though, that we know that it was a 

problem and that we were willing to step up and address it 

instead of just saying, well, no, we’re not going to, you know, 

just talk about it. You know, we’re just going to talk about it. 

We’re not going to do anything like the last government did at 

that. 

 

So this is what this Throne Speech talks about. It talks about a 

future. It not only talks about a new road; it talks about a future. 

But it also talks about a government that is willing to step up to 

the challenges, the challenges that have faced this great 

province. And there’s many challenges that face this great 

province. And you need a government that’s willing to step up 

and meet them challenges head on, and I’m pretty sure that we 

did a very good job of it, the very best that we can. And it 



5860 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2010 

shows probably in the last by-election we had where we 

increased the vote there, increased the popular vote in a 

by-election, returning a government member. 

 

And I know when I’m out in my constituency and out in the 

area . . . I know that there’s been a couple of members on the 

other side said, well they toured rural Saskatchewan and they 

are hearing all this. Well so have I toured rural Saskatchewan, 

and I’ve toured my constituency. And I know what’s being 

said, and I know what’s being told to me. And the majority of 

the people are still believing in this government and the 

direction we are moving because we believe in this province. 

We believe that there is a huge potential, that there’s growth. 

We’re just on the edge of growing this province. We will be a 

leader of Western Canada some day, which we should be with 

all the resources we have. 

 

And just the people of this province when you talk to them, you 

know, there’s a whole new pride here. And it just doesn’t 

include Saskatchewan Roughriders which, you know, they’re 

something to be proud of too. They’ve been doing very well. 

But there’s a pride now when they talk about this province, 

when they talk about the Premier, of how he stands up for this 

province, how he pushes it across the country. How he stands 

up, works with the business leaders. How he’s been to the 

States. How what he did for . . . standing up for our industry, 

our potash industry. People understand that and they respect 

that. And they respect our Premier. And they respect the 

government for the stance they’ve been taking on working 

towards growing this province even to make it even a better 

place to live. 

 

And it is an excellent place to live. I know that in Arm 

River-Watrous, I’ve heard one MLA here say, you know, 

everybody says that they have the best constituency. And in the 

statement he said, if you don’t believe that, you probably 

shouldn’t be here as an MLA. And I do. I believe that Arm 

River-Watrous is a great place and it’s a great constituency. But 

I believe this province is a great place — the cities, the small 

towns, the farms, the rural area. 

 

Some of the other things we’ve talked about in this Throne 

Speech is the tourism, a new program for high-performance 

athletes. Because as this province grows, we’re going to have 

more athletes coming here. We already have many athletes 

coming out of here. Many top line, some of the best athletes in 

the world competing, whether it be at the Olympics or on the 

NHL [National Hockey League], junior hockey, football, 

baseball, or the many other, many, many other sports that are 

on the international, national level, also on the provincial level. 

So we need to work and help them perform better, to work with 

them. Because when they go on the world stage, they’re 

representing Saskatchewan when they go there. 

 

You know, I know that we’ve also talked about protecting — 

which we are — some of our beautiful areas. And we have 

some of the best areas in this province. You know, you’re 

looking at the Great Sand Hills, doing more protection, because 

this is a beautiful, beautiful province. You know, it is. There is 

many, many places — lakes, the rivers, the scenery. We almost 

have it all. And even in my constituency, we have probably the 

only mountain, Mount Blackstrap, in all of Saskatchewan. So 

my constituency I think has it all. We have the rivers and the 

lakes, and we have the mountain. 

 

And we also, is another business that’s coming in, is tourism. 

Like we just had a reception there. And tourism generates as 

much money as any other business in Saskatchewan. And I 

know a growing business in my constituency is outfitting. 

We’ve had a couple of new outfitters come up, and hunters 

from the States come. And I know that when they come, you 

know, they spend money. 

 

When people come on a holiday and they combine a holiday 

with a sport, and whether it’s your hunting, fishing, or just 

basically camping, I mean it’s a holiday. When you go on a 

holiday, you spend money. You spend usually more money 

than you do at home. You eat out. You buy souvenirs. You go 

to all the local attractions. You spend money. And the spinoff 

from that has been huge for my area. 

 

I have, you know, many lakes, many tourist spots. And I know 

that there is . . . That is a growth industry that our government 

is looking to explore. And I know that we’re working any way 

we can with Tourism and Culture to keep coming the tourists 

here, to keep . . . This is a, the province, I would say, is a 

hidden jewel when it comes to tourism. There’s lots of people 

in this world don’t even realize how great of a place this is, and 

how many sites and things to see from the North down to the 

most southern part of the province. I mean we have the forests. 

We have the Plains. We have, like I say, everything when it 

comes to offering in tourism — great skidooing in the winter, 

great winter sports, and great summer sports. And you know, 

there is huge potential there. And that’s something that we’re 

looking to expand in any way that we can. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Another thing, another one that we’ve, a leader we’ve been in, I 

would say right across Canada we’ve been, is the MS liberation 

clinical trials. You know, that’s huge. And that, Mr. Speaker, 

that goes across political boundaries. I mean that should be . . . 

to explore that says something of our government willing to put 

$5 million in because what that does, it may . . . And there’s 

been many, many reports of people that have gone for the 

treatment have come back and their life is better. 

 

Any time you can look to improve the quality of a person’s life 

or the length of it, it’s a good thing to explore that. And I’m 

proud of my government, that it’s stepped up and put $5 million 

into that. And I’m not sure where the opposition . . . I’m hoping 

that they think that’s a good idea because I think it is. To me 

that’s across party lines. It’s something that should be explored. 

And if it’s any way that we can help, you know, the people, and 

we do. And there is many, many people that suffer from MS 

through the province. And you know, I’m very proud of this 

government for stepping up for that. 

 

You know, that speaks to the Throne Speech, and it speaks to 

what this government has . . . when you talk about going down 

a new road, you know, a new path. And that’s what the people 

of this province are looking for. They’re tired. They were tired 

of the old road. They were tired of the way this province had 

been run. They want to take a pride in this province. They want 

to take a pride in the growth and the agenda of this government, 

which is growing this province, and to be a leader in Western 



November 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5861 

Canada. 

 

And that’s what we’re working with. We’re working with First 

Nations. We’ve stepped up the plate there. I know that there’s 

many meetings going on. I have two reserves and I’ve been to 

them. And at Kawacatoose, they’ve been at a couple of 

partnerships that they’ve signed . . . [inaudible] . . . there on 

different things they’re doing. They’re looking at a big tourism 

area, working with the surrounding RMs [rural municipalities] 

and surrounding towns. They know that they were looking at 

growing that province or working with the province to grow 

their reserve and provide people work for their people. And 

they’ve been doing an excellent job. And I want to hand it to 

the chiefs of both Kawacatoose and Day Star for stepping up 

and the work that . . . They’re willing to work with the 

government. And us as a government, we’re willing to work 

with them. We’re willing to work with partners with them. 

 

You know, we’re willing to . . . That’s one thing about this 

government. It’s willing to work with every level of 

government — municipal governments across the board, towns. 

Some of the programs we’ve installed over the years to help 

them with their infrastructure was a huge boon. Where we’ve 

got . . . A lot of my towns benefited from that. It improved their 

water infrastructure systems, their sewer systems. Much needed 

money. You know, as these towns are growing, they’re going to 

need that. They’re going to need the help that we’ve been 

providing them and especially as they are growing. 

 

Like I talk about Arm River-Watrous. I think at just about every 

town in my constituency has seen some population growth of it 

across the board. There’s many new houses, like I mentioned, 

in Davidson and Kenaston and Hanley, Watrous, Wynyard, 

working . . . growing. I know that I have about four towns have 

actually had to put in new subdivisions. And that’s been spoke 

very well to the faith that the people have in Saskatchewan. 

 

And the show that we put on at the Winter Olympics, you 

know, that was mentioned, I think, right around the world, and 

also another thing that put us on the international stage. You 

know, people are just starting to recognize Saskatchewan in 

Canada and outside of Canada. And we need to promote that 

more. We need to show the world what’s here for potential, for 

economic growth. For economic growth, how they want to 

come here for businesses or if you just want to come here and 

live. 

 

In my constituency I’ve had quite a few people from eastern 

Canada move here. You know, just loving, loving it, and just 

saying, I wish I’d have known more about Saskatchewan 

earlier. You know, read about some of the ads in the paper we 

had, some of the forums we had, maybe seen a pavilion in 

Vancouver at the Olympics. And that’s how they got to find out 

Saskatchewan. Didn’t realize was a potential here, and the 

beauty and the opportunities here. They didn’t realize it. 

 

You know, they were just going from the old Saskatchewan 

when it was the old NDP, when the population was dying, your 

businesses were leaving. The only thing they ever talked about 

Saskatchewan was if there was a disaster here or just talking 

about our population loss under the last government here. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve turned that around. We’ve turned that 

around. We’ve hit over 1 million people in this province. And 

we’re only going one way, and that is up. Our business 

opportunities, our jobs — I think the last sector, we’ve created 

6,300 new jobs in this province last time. You know, those 

speak to the policies and the programs of this present 

government. 

 

It also speaks, it speaks to the failure of the last government that 

was in power. And that is why, that is where they’re at. That’s 

what happened in the last by-election. It showed there that the 

people still do not have faith or do not even believe the 

previous administration. 

 

Because when they talk about . . . They still are negative about 

Saskatchewan. And I don’t know why they’re so negative about 

Saskatchewan. I’ve never heard any of them, I’ve never heard 

any of them ever really, you know, talk about some of these 

programs that we’ve initiated. 

 

I mean you can argue about some of them and whatever, but I 

mean you take like the MS trials, the STARS program. To me 

that’s across political lines. I mean you should just say, you 

know what? That’s a good idea. Maybe we couldn’t implement 

them at the time because maybe we didn’t have the money or 

whatever. But you know, they should be able to at least say on 

some of the stuff that we did that these are, that’s across 

political lines. This is going to help some, going to help people. 

 

When you’re looking at growing this province, one of the main 

things you should be looking at is the quality of life for your 

people, and how can you make that better. And as an elected 

official, I’ve tried to do that for the many years I’ve been here 

as I’ve been representing Arm River-Watrous constituents. 

 

You know, anything that comes across our caucus and our 

committee meetings with our ministers, you know, you always 

want to ask the main question: will this make the quality of life 

better in Saskatchewan? And I believe that we’ve improved 

that. We’ve tried our best. 

 

And I know next election we’ll see what happens. But I’m 

willing to bet that after the next election we will still be here, 

and we will still be growing this province and still working for 

the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I support the Throne Speech but I 

cannot support the amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise today to speak to the Throne Speech and to provide some 

comments about Saskatchewan. And I think following my 

friend across the way from Arm River-Watrous, who actually is 

the MLA for many of my relatives, I would strongly disagree 

with his comments about the fact that on this side of the House 

we don’t say positive things about Saskatchewan. 

 

I think that we are all in this legislature elected to be leaders, to 

be providing the ideas, the programs, all the work for the people 

of Saskatchewan. And so we all come here with a sense that we 

are going to do good things for the people of Saskatchewan. 



5862 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2010 

And so I take that as my task when I come here. I think all of 

my colleagues on this side of the House do that, and that is our 

goal. 

 

Now before I start, I want to thank the people of Regina 

Lakeview, and I probably would include Regina South and all 

of the neighbourhoods that I’m part of in the southern part of 

Regina. Because the people of this part of the city — and I 

guess maybe the whole city of Regina — continually provide 

me with support, ideas, information that allow me to do my job. 

And it’s important that we recognize that that’s where we get 

our strength. 

 

One of the factors about representing a part of Regina is that we 

have many seniors living there. We have many young people. 

We have many civil servants who provide good service to the 

people of the whole province, and we have many retired civil 

servants. And I want to say a special thank you to all of those 

people who have been doing a good job, not just for one year or 

five years, many of them for decades. And we don’t always 

acknowledge how important they are to making sure that the 

people of Saskatchewan are properly being served. 

 

Now I also want to thank my wife, Linda, for continuing to 

provide support. My daughters, Ingrid and Solveig, continue to 

be amazed about how this whole place works. Especially proud 

of Ingrid who is a student at UBC [University of British 

Columbia], but she’s also in Regina this month to perform at 

the Golden Apple Theatre in the Jacques Brel show. So I 

encourage anybody who has a chance to come and see her 

show, the kinds of things that our young people have brought 

forward. Our other daughter, Solveig, is a student at University 

of Regina and she’s studying hard, doing many things. But her 

high-profile task is playing on the University of Regina 

volleyball team, and they are presently on their way to the 

University of Manitoba to play this weekend. 

 

I also want to thank a special person who died in September. 

My constituency assistant, Bernie Yakimchuk, died in 

September, and he had worked with me for about four years in 

that kind of a role. But over many years he had served the 

people of Saskatchewan at SaskTel and in various aspects of 

the political process as well. And I think it’s important that we 

honour people like Bernie, who had a strong love for 

Saskatchewan and who were very interested in making sure that 

problems got solved on a daily basis. I’m pleased that his wife, 

Conni Yakimchuk, is now working with me and continues that 

role for me in my constituency office. 

 

I’d also want to congratulate especially the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest. As I told him the other day, it’s very nice 

to have another lawyer to provide a bit of stability to this place. 

And I’m looking forward to the kinds of contributions that he 

can provide where our legal training, combined with our 

political savvy, allows us to solve some problems no matter 

which side of the House that you’re on. And it’s quite 

interesting that his long service in the city of Saskatoon I think 

will serve him well as he comes to represent his constituents 

here. So congratulations and I look forward to working with 

him. 

 

And as the member from Saskatoon Nutana said the other day, 

we know his brothers and have worked with them in various 

ways, and my wife says that she worked with his father. And 

his father was a special person as well that served the people of 

Saskatchewan. So congratulations, and we look forward to 

working with you. 

 

Now I’m tempted — and I think maybe I will — adopt my 

friend’s comment, the member from Athabasca, the other night 

where he said, the best thing about this Throne Speech is that 

it’s the last one of this government. And the reason that I say 

that is that I was singularly unimpressed with the fact that there 

didn’t appear to be a long-term vision in this particular Throne 

Speech. 

 

[12:30] 

 

And I know that our friends at Tourism Saskatchewan, earlier 

this week or in the last little while, were presenting us with 

information about how we need to portray the province of 

Saskatchewan. And one of the quotes that caught my eye was 

something that was on their pamphlet which said, “Inspired 

leaders keep their eyes on the horizon.” And I think that speaks 

to all of us, but especially to the government. You need to keep 

your eye way out there. And unfortunately too much of what 

this speech is about is looking back at a lot of things that aren’t 

that helpful. 

 

Now it’s interesting to be part of a legislature that has a role of 

providing the governance in a province under a constitution 

which recognizes different aspects of how our constitution 

works. 

 

And we all know that on Throne Speech day, one of the things 

that we like about just the place that we’re in and almost the 

liturgy that we go through in all the procedure, is the fact that 

we have executive government here, we have the legislative 

branch here, and we have the judiciary here. And it’s part of our 

education of the public that we have all of these pieces that are 

meant to help our democracy work. 

 

And I know that one of the roles, clearly, of the judiciary is to 

make sure that the democracy does work. And we see that in 

various ways where issues are dealt with by our courts, whether 

it’s many of the First Nations and Métis issues that the courts 

have been able to work through and provide information back 

to our provinces and to the federal government to try to solve 

some of these relationship issues. And so we appreciate the role 

that the court has. 

 

We also know that, as a legislature, we have certain powers. 

But when we go from our legislature to visit with our friends in 

the United States, we’re often surprised by how much power 

that the Speaker has in their legislative structure or how much 

power the House leader, the majority leader, or in the Senate, 

the Senate majority leader have. And in fact, as we observe the 

US [United States] election this week, one of the discussions 

about how power has shifted is the fact that John Boehner 

becomes the House majority leader replacing . . . a Republican 

who replaces a Democrat, Nancy Pelosi. So we end up having 

these kinds of shifts in power because within their structure 

there actually are different bases of power. 

 

And the reason I raise that is that, as I’ve talked about in 

previous Throne Speeches that I’ve given here, we have a 



November 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5863 

problem in Canada around our executive government control of 

the legislature and of, in fact, of basically power being moved 

right into the executive — in our case the Premier; in the case 

of Canada, the Prime Minister — and as we know, there have 

been some people who have started to write about this. And I 

know one of the people that I continually go and look at the 

things that he writes and says is Donald Savoie. And in a recent 

book called Canadian Politics, which is an edited book but 

published by University of Toronto Press in 2009, Donald 

Savoie from New Brunswick writes a chapter in the book called 

“Power at the Apex: Executive Dominance.” 

 

And what he recognizes in his article is that, under our 

Westminster system of government, the executive does have a 

fair amount of control over how the legislature works. But his 

point is that somehow — here in Canada — our legislative 

situation has changed to give the executive even more power 

than maybe is safe for democracy, than maybe is good for our 

country. 

 

And we can see it in little ways — or big ways, depending on 

what the issue is in Saskatchewan. And they don’t end up being 

written about or talked about as broadly as some of the things 

that might happen nationally. But when you end up with a 

legislative proposal for a Chief Electoral office being 

effectively vetoed by the Premier, then you know that you’ve 

got a problem in how the structure works. 

 

At the national level we know that more and more of the power 

has shifted into the Prime Minister’s office and so you’ll 

continually hear comments from reporters, from lobbyists, from 

ordinary citizens: well if we can get the Prime Minister onside 

of this, maybe we can get something done. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we in this 

legislature talk about this particular issue as it relates to the 

province of Saskatchewan. Because when you end up with so 

much of the power in the one person, who is obviously a 

member of this legislature, it distorts how you can solve 

problems. It distorts even what the problems are. But more 

importantly it loses the rich knowledge, wisdom, and strength 

of having 58 people in this legislature as opposed to one and 

some advisors. And, Mr. Speaker, you see it in different ways. 

 

Now I don’t know the process of how this Throne Speech was 

drafted and written, but I suspect that much of it was done 

within the Premier’s office and very little discussion in the 

government caucus. And so therefore you end up with 

something that, I guess, doesn’t really speak to me. I don’t 

think it necessarily speaks to the people of this province. 

 

We can talk about this executive dominance, or this role of the 

Premier, as it relates to even issues like this potash case that 

we’ve been dealing with. And there are a whole number of 

things that go on here. 

 

But very clearly, the Prime Minister’s office is been identified 

by the media, by people, by the men and women on the street 

as, well we’ve got to find out what the Prime Minister thinks 

about this. In the same way, our Premier leads the charge, and I 

think we’ve ended up with a much broader consensus around 

what he’s done. 

 

But once again, many of the discussions around what should 

happen in this particular situation, starting in August, have been 

very closed within. I think practically, the Premier, maybe a 

couple of ministers — but probably not too much — but much 

of it’s been right in the Premier’s office. 

 

And I guess what I’m saying is that for a healthy democracy, 

we need to have all of the people who are part of this legislature 

and part of the executive. Because the executive’s job is to 

make sure we get the proper information into the various 

constitutional entities, but practically we have run into a 

situation in Canada where we’ve had some difficulties. 

 

Now there are . . . I’ve talked about it other years, but I will 

remind people that things like the Premiers’ Conference has 

taken the place of many of the former intergovernmental 

meetings that we used to have. And so rather than have people 

that have great skills, working together and coming up with the 

combinations in all of the governments of Canada, we end up 

having a smaller group of people with advisors coming out of 

their premiers’ office, as opposed to the whole of the civil 

service, making many of the decisions about how the country 

works. 

 

Now clearly we’re getting some decisions made, but it’s not 

quite as straightforward as before. What we see and we know 

on the national level is that many of the ministers are not able to 

provide leadership. And this hasn’t been just true with the 

present Prime Minister, but I think the previous three, four, five 

prime ministers have been developing this method of 

controlling the ministers. 

 

And I want to read into the record one of the quotes — and it’s 

sort of the ending quote of Donald Savoie’s article — because I 

think it’s important that we in this legislature, but also the 

public, keep our eye on some of these things that are happening. 

Because if you have your eye attuned to this change in how our 

country works, you will see it every day in the newspaper. 

You’ll see it on the business page. You see it all over the place. 

 

But the little part that I want to read in is about court 

government, and his comment is about ministers. And so I’m 

reading from page 130 and I’ll read a paragraph: 

 

Advisors, much like courtiers of old, have influence, not 

power. Jean Chrétien made his view clear that ministers 

have influence, not power in Cabinet when he wrote: 

“ministers may have great authority within his department, 

but within Cabinet he is merely part of a collectivity, just 

another advisor to the prime minister. He can be told what 

to do and on important matters his only choice is to do or 

resign.” One of Chrétien’s former senior policy advisors 

unwittingly described court government well when he 

wrote that “Everything a prime minister says is 

unfortunately taken by some as coming from the fount of 

all wisdom. Often the prime minister is just throwing out 

an idea or suggestion for debate and discussion — it is 

solemnly transcribed as if it were one of the Ten 

Commandments.” [That’s Mr. Goldenberg saying that.] 

He was referring to both elected politicians and senior 

civil servants. Kings Henry II and [King] Henry VIII 

would have expected nothing less from their courtiers. 

 



5864 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2010 

And that’s the end of this quote. 

 

I raise this issue again this year, as I have in previous years, 

because I think we need to look again at how we’ve organized 

our governments in Canada. And it goes right from proportional 

representation issue, which is another whole speech topic, right 

to this . . . how cabinets are organized. But practically where 

these issues become important is we end up losing, as I said 

before, sometimes this rich ability of everybody to contribute to 

what happens. 

 

Now in our province, in Saskatchewan, I obviously read the 

speech and listen to the Speech from the Throne. I look at other 

things. But ever since I’ve been in politics, I’ve always had one 

book pretty close to my desk, and it’s one that — I don’t know 

if anybody else has it close to their desk; I think maybe my 

colleague from Regina Rosemont does — but this is called the 

Report of the Saskatchewan Financial Management Review 

Commission, dated February 1992, commonly called the Gass 

report. And whenever I’m wondering about how things are 

happening or what things are happening, I’ll go back and look 

at this group of suggestions about how to correct a number of 

problems that arose with the government in Saskatchewan 

during the 1980s. 

 

[12:45] 

 

And when I was looking at this particular Throne Speech and 

specifically even one clause which was around this — I think 

they call it an innovative approach for financing in health care 

— I thought . . . [inaudible] . . . I think there’s something in this 

report that we should be reminded of. So in February 1992, Mr. 

Gass and his team which included Donald Gass as Chair, Nancy 

Hopkins, Beth Bilson, and Garf Stevenson, one of the points 

that they made as a summary point was that: 

 

The government has a responsibility to manage its 

investments and loans in order to ensure that the stated 

business and public policy objectives are being pursued 

and that the province’s financial exposure is being 

monitored. 

 

And the key word here is financial exposure. Because what was 

happening . . . And they say in other parts of this report that 

there were 47 transactions that they reviewed, and there was a 

whole number of them where the public had no idea of the kind 

of commitment that the government had made in the financing. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we are hearing that there are some of these 

kinds of loan guarantees and other newer instruments. And we 

can thank our legal and accounting friends for creating new 

instruments that do this. But, Mr. Speaker, we need to be 

especially vigilant to make sure that the books show the full 

responsibility that we have as taxpayers and as citizens. And so 

when the government sort of puts into the Throne Speech half 

the information about what the debt is, and doesn’t deal with 

other places where the government is making financial 

commitments, then this is not fair to the citizens of the 

province. It’s not leadership and it’s not the kind of thing that 

we want to have happen in or province. 

 

Now we know that the financial miscalculations of a year and a 

half ago around revenue were devastating to the people of the 

province, but especially so to the civil service and the people 

who were given the task of doing the work here in the province. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we know that the financial situation is still 

difficult for the government. And I mean in some ways, the last 

two weeks around potash is maybe a reflection of that 

desperation. You have an attempt by the Premier and others to 

get some cash into the system to help out the books. Now when 

that didn’t work, oh, you know, everything blew up in 

Saskatchewan and we ended up with where we are today. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the real challenge for us is when we step out 

the doors of this building and look at Wascana Park, and we 

say, well this isn’t the kind of maintenance and care for a park 

that we’re used to in our province — what’s going on? I think 

every part of the province people are saying, well there are 

things that should be done that aren’t being done. When you, as 

a person that’s in charge of setting out the budget, tell people to 

operate with zero per cent increase or a negative number, but 

especially a zero per cent increase, you’re actually telling them 

that it’s going to be a minus two or a minus three. 

 

And when you have people working, you end up having to 

make sure that you can try to keep them going because you’re 

going to need them in the longer term to make sure that the 

services are provided to people. So then all of a sudden the 

money that’s there for programs or for policy development or 

other things is gone. Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m hearing that kind 

of concern around the whole province of Saskatchewan that, 

because of the mismanagement, we’re getting into a real 

problem in our province. 

 

Now we know from the financial information, whether it’s 

some of the things that we heard today about financial 

confidence, but we also know actually from looking at where 

our economy stood, that kind of the peak of the economy was 

2007. The 2008 international financial mess has come home to 

affect where we are in Saskatchewan. We’re more insulated 

than our friends in some of the states or other provinces, but it’s 

still there, and it’s still a major concern. And what that does is 

that it makes it difficult for many of the hopes and the dreams 

that people had to be fulfilled because there aren’t the resources 

there to deal with them. 

 

Now one of the reasons that the Leader of the Opposition was 

so clear in his comments about resources in Saskatchewan and 

the role that we have as a legislature, as an executive 

government, to make sure that the resources of this province 

will provide sufficient finances for the people of Saskatchewan, 

one of the reasons that he’s so crystal clear about that is, we 

know from talking to people all over the province that they 

want to make sure that they participate in using these resources. 

 

And if in fact we’ve set up national or provincial processes that 

don’t capture the share that should be the province’s share or 

the people of this province’s share, well then we need to fix 

that. And you need to have a plan about how to do that. And 

you can’t push it aside. You can’t laugh about it. You can’t do 

anything else. You need to get your best minds, your best 

people, and have people from all parts of the province identify 

how we are going to move forward in this province using both 

the natural resources and the human resources that we have. 

 

Now in my riding of Regina Lakeview, we’re very pleased to 



November 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5865 

have the whole Harbour Landing development and all of the 

things that are happening in southwest Regina. The Regina 

airport has expanded and developed many new business things. 

These are all very positive, but they’ve got to be based on a 

solid economy. They have to be based on a situation where 

we’re not going to get ourselves into the mess that Mr. Gass 

and friends were referring back in 1992. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, we are going to be 

asking a lot of questions over the next couple of months, and 

we’re going to be making the strong point that perhaps we can’t 

. . . It’s not perhaps, we know that we can’t afford another 

mistake like the second term of the Conservative government of 

the 1980s. So we have about a year till the next election. And 

there are some opportunities for the government to actually 

work on some of these issues, but if they’re not willing to do it, 

I think they should step aside and allow us to continue the work 

that we’ve done. 

 

Because when your finances are not in order, when the 

economy is not in good shape, it’s not just the direct 

government services that are affected. It affects the arts. It 

affects all of our restaurants. It affects our hotels. It affects our 

health care system, which is a huge part of what we do. 

 

It affects things like the preservation of the Great Sand Hills. 

Now I was kind of interested to see that in this Throne Speech, 

but everything was ready to go on the greater protection of the 

Great Sand Hills back in 2007, and we have seen nothing there. 

And so I say let’s not hold up there. 

 

But I guess what the main point that I’m making here today is 

that we have a legacy as legislators in this place to make sure 

that it works for the people of Saskatchewan. And whether that 

means rewriting the rules around how the Premier and the 

cabinet and the federal government and the provincial 

governments relate, well then maybe we need to figure out a 

process to do that. 

 

But we also have the task right now to make sure that the 

finance information, that the management of our province is 

being done in an orderly and straightforward way because, Mr. 

Speaker, all of the decisions that we’re making here relate to 

40, 50 years out. And we know that some of the very good 

decisions made in the ’40s and the ’50s and the early ’60s have 

shaped a very great province that we have here that we’re all 

proud of. And we want to make sure that our children and 

grandchildren can look back at the years that we’re around this 

place and say, they didn’t waste the money that was entrusted 

to them. They didn’t make decisions that were boneheaded. 

They didn’t do things that were on the wrong track. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately this Throne Speech leaves me 

cold. It doesn’t capture the fact that we need to be looking way 

out there as inspired leaders at the horizon so that we keep our 

eye on the goal. So, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting against the 

Throne Speech. I will vote for the amendment. And if the 

government happens to accept the amendment, then we will 

vote in favour of the Throne Speech. So thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to stand today and enter into this debate. And before I 

get into the issues dealing with the Throne Speech, I have a few 

other things I would like to say. And I’m going to begin by 

congratulating the member from Saskatoon Northwest. A 

resounding victory, and I know that he will represent his 

constituents well and that he will be here for a long, long time 

and on this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to represent the Estevan 

constituency. And as you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

constituency that is full of diversity — from agriculture to small 

business, an ever-growing oil industry, and of course we are the 

proud home to the Boundary dam power station and the Shand 

power station and Sherritt mines. And I have family directly 

involved in all of the industries that I’ve just mentioned. 

 

I am directly involved in agriculture. I still live on my farm. 

And mind you, I don’t get out there and drive the tractor 

anymore like I used to, but I know how to do it. And I live on 

my farm. It’s a lifestyle I love, and I hope that I enjoy it for 

many, many years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Estevan is also home to the Spectra event centre. 

And it’s a beautiful facility and currently under construction 

there. And once it is finished, it will be another source of pride 

for that community. 

 

And we are also in the process of building the Energy Training 

Institute, a place where people can be trained to work in the 

industries associated with the oil, the mining, and many other 

areas of the economy. And it’s just so nice to have that in the 

southeast corner of the province where those industries are so 

prevalent. 

 

The Bakken play is in the area. The member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy will, you know, it consumes part of his constituency as 

well. But we know that this will be utilized. And thanks to this 

government, Mr. Speaker, that this Energy Training Institute is 

being built with the Minister from Advanced Education who 

just realized the importance of education like that coming to 

that corner of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to at this time acknowledge my 

family. My immediate family all lives quite close to me and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Being now 1 p.m., this Assembly will adjourn 

until Monday the 8th at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5841 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5841 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5841 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5841 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5841 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5841 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5842 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5842 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5842 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5842 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Reaction to Potash Decision 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5842 

 National Diabetes Month 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5843 

 Estevan United Way Telethon 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5843 

 Television Appearance 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5843 

 Snowbirds Celebrate 40th Anniversary 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5844 

 Potash Workers Acknowledged 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5844 

 Television Appearance 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5844 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5844 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5845 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5846 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5846 

 State of the Provincial Economy 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5847 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5847 

 Support for Preeceville School 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5848 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5848 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 Proposed Sale of Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5849 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5850 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5851 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5855 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5857 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5861 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5865 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


