




















































Hansard: March 09, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 27A  TUESDAY, MARCH 9, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4037 

 March 9, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I‟d like to introduce one of the four 2010 Saskatchewan 

Internship Program members. If Michael would like to stand. 

 

Michael was born in Melfort. Prior to beginning his 

post-secondary education, Michael spent a year in Dusseldorf, 

Germany as a Rotary exchange student where he learned 

German fluently. In 2004 Michael enrolled at the U 

[University] of Calgary and pursued a double major in history 

and German language. Michael was recognized twice on the 

dean‟s honours list. I can go on and on. He‟s a very 

accomplished young man. 

 

He will be my intern for the first portion of session from 

January 25 through April 16. So I would like to please ask the 

Assembly to welcome Michael Selnes to his legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I too 

would like to introduce to you and through you to all members 

of the House, my intern for this part of the session, Sheena 

Gordon. If I could get Sheena to stand and give us a wave. 

 

Sheena was born and raised here in Regina, went to the 

University of Regina. And she‟s got quite a background as well. 

Travelling seems to stand out in Sheena‟s background, being 

travelling to Dublin, Edinburgh, Belfast, having spent a 

semester in Cuba and doing all sorts of things like that. She‟s 

got quite an eclectic work experience, been a singing teacher, a 

waitress, a student researcher, a medical receptionist, and the 

list goes on. She‟s volunteered with very different groups 

including Engineers Without Borders, the Lumsden Beach 

Camp, and the Regal Social Association of Regina, and she 

continues to enrol in courses at the University of Regina. 

 

So I ask all members in the House to give her a welcome. And I 

have another introduction after that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to join 

with my two colleagues and introduce my legislative intern, 

Elise Lonie. If you‟d stand up. Elise is a student at the 

University of Regina majoring in political science and history. 

She was originally from Strasbourg, now lives in Regina. And 

she has spent a little time out in my constituency in the last 

month and is a natural. She can talk with the cattlemen or she 

can coordinate with the media. She‟s been a very effective 

intern. So I‟d like to introduce her to you and through you and 

ask all members to welcome her to her legislature. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, while we‟re introducing the 

legislative interns, on behalf of my colleague, the MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre, I‟d like to introduce his intern, Craig Fink. 

If Craig will stand and give us a wave. 

 

Craig is also a Reginian, born and raised here. And also went to 

school, Miller I understand, and also the University of Regina. 

He has quite a strong arts background whether it‟s in music or 

drama. He had actually done some parts at the Globe Theatre 

and took part in a band called The Polymaths. Quite a guy in his 

background. Also, maybe he got a start with this, the University 

of Regina student union where he was vice-president of 

operations and finance. 

 

So on behalf of that, of my colleague from Regina Elphinstone, 

I‟d like to welcome him and say to all the interns, you know, as 

a former teacher, these interns give us a real insight into what 

we do here. There‟s an old saying, to teach is to learn. And I 

think they help us see our world in a new, fresh way. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty‟s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to introduce to you 

and through you to the members of the Assembly a friend and 

future colleague in the Assembly, Yens Pedersen who is here 

with us today. And, Yens, I welcome you here. 

 

Yens is a successful lawyer in Regina and I wanted other 

members to join with me in welcoming him here to the House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to introduce to you 

and through you to all members in the Legislative Assembly, 

just joining us in your gallery, I noticed Terry Parker, business 

manager for the Saskatchewan Building Trades Council. And 

with him, Randy Nichols the business manager for the 

Plumbing and Pipe Fitters Local 179. I‟d like all colleagues to 

welcome these fine trade unionists in our province to their 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — And members if you could join with me in 

welcoming in the Speaker‟s gallery as well is the young lady 

Anna Siddons who is attending Eston College. And she made 

an inquiry about getting to know more about the political sphere 

in this province and approached my office. And we‟ve been 

able to give her a term here as an intern and also working with 

some ministerial staff and ministers and MLAs. We‟re hoping 

to give her a broad scope of what it is to be a politician in the 

province of Saskatchewan. So would you help me welcoming 

Anna Siddons. 

 

Before I call for presenting petitions, I would like to make a 

statement in regards to petitions that were delivered yesterday. 

 



4038 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Oral Presentation of Petitions 

 

The Speaker: — Yesterday, the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview presented two petitions, sessional papers nos. 106 and 

107. Both petitions contained similar prayers requesting the 

government to negotiate a fair and just collective agreement 

with healthcare workers. Sessional paper no. 106 related to 

SEIU [Service Employees International Union] West members 

employed with the Cypress, Five Hills, Heartland, and 

Saskatoon health authorities. Sessional paper 107 related to 

CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] members 

employed with the Prairie North, Prince Albert Parkland, 

Regina Qu‟Appelle, Sunrise, and Sun Country health 

authorities. Both petitions were in order and will be read and 

received today. At issue is the oral presentation of the petition. 

 

Pursuant to rule 16(2), no more than one petition on a subject 

matter may be presented during the period for presentation of 

petitions. Based on the petitions presented by the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview, his oral presentation related to 

Saskatchewan residents from both petitions, and there were 

more than 30 locations announced that did not appear on either 

petition. I would like to remind members that the rules permit 

the oral presentation of one petition on one subject matter 

during presenting petitions. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Fairview and all members should 

ensure that when presenting petitions orally that the location of 

the residents announced are in fact contained in the petition 

presented. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

pleased to rise today on behalf of concerned Saskatchewan 

citizens who are concerned over the condition of Highway 123. 

Highway 123 is approximately . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member is sitting very 

close and actually it‟s getting somewhat difficult to catch what 

the member is saying. So I‟d ask members seated by the 

member trying to present the petition to allow their member the 

opportunity to present his petition. The member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are 

concerned about the condition of Highway 123. Highway 123 is 

about 133 kilometres long and it is an important link to the 

community of Cumberland House. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it‟s the 

only link to the community of Cumberland House. It‟s the only 

road in and the only road out. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer 

reads: 

 

Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining and repairing of 

this highway. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 

Cumberland House. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of indexing minimum wage. And it 

speaks to the issue that minimum wage increases are often very 

sporadic and they do not always reflect the rising cost that‟s 

faced by minimum wage earners. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan‟s 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of the cost 

of living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to present a 

petition regarding the withdrawal of Bill 80. This is the petition 

that indicates that The Construction Industry Labour Relations 

Act, 1992 has provided a stable environment for labour relations 

in the construction industry in the province and that as a result 

of that stable labour relations environment we‟ve been able to 

obtain quality work and safe construction sites that benefit all of 

our citizens. And the petition also indicates that the existing 

building trade contracts support an apprenticeship system of 

training which results in a highly skilled workforce. The 

petition prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Regina and 

Churchbridge. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4039 

today to present a petition in support of wage equity for CBO 

[community-based organization] workers. And we know that 

the research shows that CBO workers are paid on average 8 to 

$10 per hour less than employees performing work of equal 

value in government departments. I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

development and implementation of a multi-year funding 

plan to ensure that CBO workers achieve wage equity with 

employees who perform work of equal value in 

government departments. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, petitioners come from Spiritwood, 

Canwood, Birch Hills, Leoville, and Leask. Thank you very 

much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. The 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure to 

stand today to present a petition that has been circulated by the 

Saskatchewan Student Coalition in support of affordable 

undergraduate tuition costs calling on the Sask Party 

government‟s actions to match their rhetoric. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average of 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the cities of Saskatoon and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

and present a petition in support of reducing the interest on 

fixed rate student loans to prime. And I‟ll read the petition: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately reduce the interest on 

fixed rate student loans to the prime rate of borrowing so 

that students can accumulate less debt and focus their 

finances on building their lives here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is being circulated by the 

Saskatchewan Student Coalition, and folks who have signed it 

reside in Saskatoon and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 

today to present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan residents 

that are in support of expansion of the graduate retention 

program. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a 

petition in support of maintaining quality health care services. 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s important that the government recognize the 

value of health care providers and commit to adequate funding 

and an installation of good faith bargaining in the provincial 

bargaining process. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to negotiating a fair and just 

collective bargaining agreement with health care workers 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the petition is signed by people from Norquay, Canora, and 

Pelly. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased today to 

rise to present a petition in support of the implementation of a 

Saskatchewan scholarship fund. 

 

The petitioners note that the Saskatchewan Party promised to 

implement a Saskatchewan scholarship fund in its 2007 election 

platform and that students in Saskatchewan have recently 

experienced the loss of financial assistance through the 

discontinuation of the Millennium Aboriginal Access Bursary 

and the Millennium Scholarship Foundation. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners call upon the Legislative 



4040 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

Assembly: 

 

. . . to cause the government to implement the promised 

Saskatchewan scholarship fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition has been circulated by the 

Saskatchewan Student Coalition and the signatures on this 

petition are all from residents of the city of Saskatoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 

signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about this 

government‟s disregard for constitutional and legal rights. And 

the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality of rights of all 

Saskatchewan couples, and to withdraw the reference to 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon, and I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my honour 

to rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned Saskatchewan 

residents as it relates to the unprecedented financial 

mismanagement of the Sask Party. 

 

They allude specifically to the $1 billion deficit created by the 

Sask Party and they recognize that this is a circumstance that‟s 

getting worse, not better, with the Minister for Energy and 

Resources projecting $3 billion in revenues, now cutting . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. I ask the member to 

move to the prayer. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by good folks here in Regina. I so 

present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Canadian Television Network Saskatoon Citizen of the Year 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I want to 

recognize the wonderful work of Al Anderson, a constituent of 

mine in Saskatoon Eastview. Rather than just supporting his 

community, Al has directed his time and energy to improve his 

community. He was recently honoured as the 2009 CTV 

[Canadian Television Network Ltd.] Saskatoon Citizen of the 

Year. Al epitomizes the best of Saskatchewan people. 

 

Saskatchewan was built on dreams, determination, and a refusal 

to give up. Strong individuals, town builders, through strength 

of character, vision, and force of will pulled isolated farms into 

villages, laid down main streets, and gathered isolated towns 

and cities into a provincial consciousness. In other words, they 

built communities, and Saskatchewan‟s success and very 

survival depended on their efforts. Al continues this tradition. 

 

Al has long been recognized by sports enthusiasts in Saskatoon 

as owner of Al Anderson‟s Sports. However Al has worked 

tirelessly to make people with special needs active, 

participating, and more importantly, acknowledged and 

appreciated members of the community. His dream has led him 

to be a founding member of both Kinsmen Elwood Lodge and 

Cosmopolitan Industries, and his important work with the 

Saskatchewan Prevention Institute. 

 

Al reminds us that communities are not self-generating or 

self-sustaining. We have to work at it. He shows us that we 

cannot call ourselves a vibrant community unless we are willing 

to accept and appreciate the contribution that all citizens have to 

make. I know I am speaking for everyone in the community 

when I say, thank you, Al. You deserve our gratitude and you 

have certainly earned our admiration and this Citizen of the 

Year award. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Canada’s Olympic Hockey Teams 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise in the 

House to celebrate and honour the men and women of Canada‟s 

Olympic hockey teams. It was with excitement, pride, and 

sometimes even trepidation that I watched as they brought 

home the gold right here on Canadian soil. Our province now 

has our very own golden girls, as Hayley Wickenheiser was 

joined by three other teammates from Saskatchewan, Colleen 

Sostorics, Gina Kingsbury, and Meaghan Mikkelson. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these women embody the dedication, hard work, 

and commitment that it takes to succeed. It is with great pride 

that I watched them receive their well-deserved gold medals. 

Saskatchewan was also well represented on the men‟s team by 

three players and coach Mike Babcock: Patrick Marleau from 

Aneroid, Brenden Morrow from Carlyle, and Ryan Getzlaf 

from Regina. Coach Mike Babcock grew up in Saskatoon. 

 

These men did us proud throughout the whole tournament in 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4041 

Vancouver. Our golden boys from Saskatchewan led the way in 

the semi-final against Slovakia. Patrick scored first, followed by 

Brenden, and then Ryan finished the scoring. That‟s right, Mr. 

Speaker. All three of Team Canada‟s goals were scored by 

Saskatchewan players in that game. Getting the gold with 

strong contributions and excellent play from our homegrown 

talent made the victories even sweeter for all of us. 

 

To all of Team Canada and especially our Saskatchewan 

athletes, thank you. You have given us some amazing, 

unforgettable memories which we will cherish for a lifetime. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Saskatchewan Olympians 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, the 21st winter Olympics in 

Vancouver drew to a close on February 28th, but the spirit that 

it instilled remains alive in hearts of Canadians. The Olympics 

offered Canada an opportunity to celebrate our best and 

brightest athletes from coast to coast to coast, and celebrate 

their remarkable achievements. 

 

Our Canadian team showed not only athletic excellence but also 

dignity, sportsmanship, and an infectious love of competition. 

Over an event-filled 17 days, the country rallied behind our 

athletes, uniting us as a nation and reaffirming our world-class 

achievements. 

 

The Saskatchewan connection to the Olympics was strong. Ben 

Hebert and Cori Bartel were members of victorious curling 

teams. Lucas Makowsky helped bring home gold in the men‟s 

team pursuit speed skating. Lyndon Rush from Humboldt won a 

bronze in the four-man bobsleigh, and Meaghan Simister and 

Regan Lauscher were top Canadians in the women‟s luge event. 

Hayley Wickenheiser and Colleen Sostorics, both long-time 

Team Canada hockey players, led the women‟s hockey team to 

a gold medal. In the Paralympic Games, Colette Bourgonje 

from Porcupine Plain will soon be competing in the Para Nordic 

event. 

 

The iconic and nail-biting men‟s hockey game, certainly etched 

into the memory of many Canadians, also had a Saskatchewan 

connection. Saskatchewanians Ryan Getzlaf, Brenden Morrow, 

and Patrick Marleau helped take their team to golden victory. 

The coach of the team also coached against me in university 

hockey and I can vouch for this: he‟s a tough coach and a fair 

coach and a great coach, and we congratulate him as well. 

 

As John Furlong stated at the closing ceremonies: 

 

We have seen first hand that there is indeed a beautiful 

force that can unite, inspire and liberate — a force that can 

replace despair with hope and ignite the human spirit. 

 

This force is sport . . . 

 

On behalf of the official opposition and of all people of 

Saskatchewan, congratulations to our Olympians and thank you 

for uniting and inspiring us all. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is hard 

enough when a loved one dies. It is even harder when that 

disease is treatable when detected early. Mr. Speaker, far too 

many families suffer tragic losses due to a disease that is highly 

treatable. Colorectal cancer is the second leading cause of 

cancer deaths in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, March is Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month in 

Canada. People across this country work to promote awareness 

about this deadly but treatable disease. In Saskatchewan, 

colorectal cancer is the second most common cause of cancer in 

men and women. 

 

Our government is taking steps in the fight against colorectal 

cancer. Mr. Speaker, we are fully funding the cancer drug 

Avastin so that patients with advanced colorectal cancer can 

have more precious time with their families. 

 

We‟ve provided $1.1 million in funding for a pilot project 

colorectal cancer screening program in Five Hills Health 

Region. Implementation will take place over a 12-month period 

during which approximately 6,000 individuals will be invited to 

this screening program. 

 

Piloting the program in one health region will allow any 

logistical issues to be resolved. Phase 1 will also provide an 

opportunity to assess participation rates, impact on colonoscopy 

services, cost of the program, alternative recruitment methods, 

and other quality indicators. Mr. Speaker, by raising awareness 

and increasing screening, we can beat this horrible disease. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Environmental Activist Awards 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On Friday, 

March 5th, the Saskatchewan Eco-Net presented their annual 

Environmental Activist Awards at the seventh annual film 

festival, See the Change, Be the Change. It is a very impressive 

and inspiring list of award winners, including the long-time 

activist Karen Weingeist, the Coalition for a Clean Green 

Saskatchewan, of whom we‟ve heard a lot about in this past 

year at the energy hearings, and Candace Savage, a well-known 

author and outspoken advocate of biodiversity here in the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m delighted to tell the House that Peter Prebble, 

no stranger to us, was also recognized formally for his 

exceptional commitment to our province, planet, and its 

sustainability. As we know, Peter‟s work on Saskatchewan 

protected areas, particularly at Dore Lake and the Great Sand 

Hills, is outstanding. In fact in many ways it was Peter‟s deep 

diligence and commitment that caused over 90,000 acres of the 

Great Sand Hills to receive the highest level of protection 

possible. He reminded us on Friday that much work remains to 

be done for this special place. 

 



4042 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

As we know, renewable energy is truly Peter‟s passion. No one 

has quite the depth of knowledge and yet the commitment to 

learn more. His leadership in this benefits us all. Peter, a kind 

and gentle man, believes that we can do better and that our 

work is not yet done. Daily he brings that to the ongoing 

struggle for sustainability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Peter and all the winners this year in being recognized as true 

eco activists. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 

River-Watrous. 

 

Canadian Navy Centennial 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to stand in 

the House today to honour the Royal Canadian Navy Centennial 

Year of 2010. During World War I and World War II, many 

young men and women from Saskatchewan joined the navy in 

service of their country. In recognition of this, many ships were 

named for Saskatchewan towns. On February 4th I attended 

such an event, a naval centennial event in Dundurn, one of the 

many events that have been held and will be held across 

Saskatchewan to commemorate the ships and those who served 

on them. 

 

This particular event was to honour the World War II service of 

the HMCS [Her Majesty‟s Canadian Ship] Dundurn, a coastal 

tanker built in Walkerville, Ontario, and commissioned on 

November 25th, 1943. This event to honour the ship‟s service 

was held at the Wilson Museum in Dundurn with HMCS 

Unicorn Commander Randy Hanson unveiling a framed 

pictorial history of the tanker‟s noble service in assisting giant 

merchant convoys during the war. The HMCS Dundurn began 

her mission out of Halifax, hauling vital fuel to escort ships. 

Occasionally she sailed independently, but has often sailed with 

convoys while the U-boats lurked in the dark waters. After the 

war, she remained in service as a naval auxiliary vessel until her 

retirement in 1993. 

 

Again I commend the Royal Canadian Navy for 100 years of 

service, as well as their efforts to celebrate the rich naval 

heritage with towns such as Dundurn and other ones across 

Saskatchewan. I would also like to thank the town and the many 

citizens that showed up for taking part in this event. I would ask 

all members to join me in congratulating the people of Dundurn 

and honouring the memory of the HMCS Dundurn. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Comments About Saskatchewan Party 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, when your record is embarrassing, 

when you‟ve taken the province from a surplus to a deficit in 

two short years, and when you‟re afraid of your opponent, what 

do you do? Well if you‟re the Sask Party government, you get 

scared, point fingers, and go into attack mode. 

 

But the Sask Party‟s not giving Saskatchewan people enough 

credit, Mr. Speaker. Most people see through these attacks. 

They will not fall for the short-sighted tactics of the Sask Party, 

and they‟re letting us know. 

 

Here are just two examples. A letter to the editor in January 28 

StarPhoenix says: 

 

We all know why these ads are on our radio stations at a 

cost of $150,000 to the Saskatchewan Party membership. 

The Wall government is running a billion-dollar deficit 

this year . . . 

 

The letter then goes on to say: 

 

Wall and his advisors are attempting to discredit 

Lingenfelter so that they can implement their program cuts 

without much public outcry. Good luck. I think 

Saskatchewan people are a little more sophisticated than 

that. 

 

[14:00] 

 

A letter to the editor in the February 19th Moose Jaw 

Times-Herald outlines the Sask Party record, “Wall going from 

a $2.9 billion surplus left to the government by the NDP to a 

$1.5 billion deficit in two years — would qualify as gross 

mismanagement.” Then he says, “In the Sask. Party‟s attack 

ads, they ask . . . do you want Lingenfelter as a premier? My 

answer: the sooner the better.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, enough said. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of her Majesty‟s Loyal 

Opposition. 

 

Rural Doctor Recruitment 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, when the Sask Party was 

running for election two years ago, they promised the people of 

Saskatchewan they would deal with the issue of rural health 

care and problems with rural health care especially as it related 

to the doctor shortage in rural Saskatchewan, and they said they 

had a plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today if you go to the government‟s own website 

you will see that the doctor vacancies in the province has risen 

by 50 per cent — that‟s five zero — 50 per cent up. My 

question is to the Premier: is this the plan you had when you 

promised the people of rural Saskatchewan you would fix 

health care in rural areas of the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we inherited a 

situation from that government, Mr. Speaker, where the 

previous government was funding 60 training seats for doctors 

at the University of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there were 60 residencies in 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4043 

the province that were funded, 60 residencies funded by the 

previous government. Mr. Speaker, we campaigned on a 

four-year plan to increase the number of training seats for 

doctors at our College of Medicine in Saskatoon to 100, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟re well on our way. There are now 84 seats, 84 

doctors being trained there, Mr. Speaker. Moreover when it 

comes to residencies . . . and this is an important area because if 

we can increase the number of residencies in the province, our 

likelihood of keeping them here to practice in urban and rural 

Saskatchewan increases. The NDP [New Democratic Party] 

record, the NDP record is 60, Mr. Speaker. We‟re already at 

108 under . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the member from 

Prince Albert Northcote when the Premier is up next time to 

give the Premier the opportunity to respond to the question 

from the Leader of the Opposition. Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier indicates that 

his plan is in action and that he‟s making great strides. I‟d hate 

to see it and see the results if he was failing. We have a 50 per 

cent increase in the vacancies of doctors in this province, and he 

claims success. Well I‟ll tell you, we were over at the SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] convention 

earlier today, hundreds of delegates from across the province. 

Their main issue is the lack of rural doctors and the lack of 

action by this provincial government. And the resolution from 

Willowbunch, no. 15-10A, says in part, “Whereas it is the 

responsibility of the Provincial Government to recruit doctors.” 

 

My question to the Premier is this: will he be doing something 

serious and taking proactive action to see that rural doctors are 

in place and that there isn‟t a shift of responsibility from the 

provincial government to the rural RMs [rural municipality] and 

the rural towns in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, after 16 years of 

NDP in power, Mr. Speaker, with that member serving in the 

cabinet as the deputy premier . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I think the opposition members 

would like to hear the answer to the question. I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — After 16 years of that party‟s health care 

system in rural Saskatchewan, unfortunately rural 

Saskatchewan knows what failing health care systems look like. 

When that member sat in the cabinet, he voted to close 52 rural 

hospitals, Mr. Speaker. When that member sat in the cabinet of 

the province of Saskatchewan, they refused to fund adequate 

seats to train doctors. They refused to fund residencies for 

doctors, so we could keep them here. 

 

This government has moved on both fronts. We‟ve moved to 

recruit more nurses, Mr. Speaker, already over halfway to our 

goal. And, Mr. Speaker, our work‟s not done. There is a brand 

new recruitment agency that‟s been announced by the Minister 

of Health. 

 

Rural Saskatchewan and all of the province understands that 

these are still issues to be sure, the number one issue in the 

province of Saskatchewan. There is work to be done. They also 

see on this side of the House a plan for action, where what they 

got from that member while he was in the cabinet was nothing 

but words, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 

Premier. He indicates that and would have people believe that 

his government is doing an excellent job of rural health care. 

Well I can tell you that in places like Redvers and Shaunavon 

and Arcola, Maple Creek, Leader, where the lack of doctors and 

the shortage of doctors is creating a huge problem. 

 

And he can deny it and pretend it isn‟t happening. But I can tell 

you that the people who need health care and need doctors in 

those areas take a very different approach. And my question 

again to the Premier is: when will he be taking action to fulfill 

the promise he made to rural Saskatchewan to have doctors in 

place? We‟ve seen a major shift of responsibility to local 

government, some communities paying as much as $800,000 to 

recruit and retain doctors. That‟s the responsibility of this 

government . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. I recognize the 

Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, we know there are challenges throughout rural 

Saskatchewan, as there have been for a number of years, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it wasn‟t too many years ago when I was 

sitting on that side of the House, and I was asking — the Health 

critic at that time — about emergency room after emergency 

room after emergency room closing under that government. 

And he said, that‟s just the way it‟s always been, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well that isn‟t the way it‟s always been, Mr. Speaker. We have 

seen in the last two and a half years under our government an 

increase of 72 general practitioners and 92 specialists. Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s 154 more physicians working under our 

government than under that government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Question to the Premier. Mr. Speaker, the 

fact of the matter is that the vacancies have gone up by 50 per 

cent for doctors in the province, vacancies up by 50 per cent. 

 

An example of this is Shaunavon. He will know and the 

Premier will know that the hospital had to close for a period of 

time over the Christmas holidays because of the lack of a 

doctor. If you drove down 37 Highway — and the member 

from Cypress will know this — the fact of the matter is there 

was a black garbage bag over the hospital sign. That‟s how the 

indication was from this government that the hospital had to 

close. 

 

And the Premier laughs. He thinks this is a big joke. I want to 

ask him the question: when will he take it serious, his job as 

Premier, that it‟s his responsibility to get doctors into our 

hospitals in rural Saskatchewan? 



4044 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, over the last two and a 

half years, we‟ve seen the doctor count in this province increase 

by 164 positions — 92 specialists, 72 GPs [general 

practitioner], Mr. Speaker. But that isn‟t good enough, Mr. 

Speaker, and we understand that. That‟s why we‟ve increased 

the number of seats in the College of Medicine. That‟s why 

we‟ve increased the number of residency seats, Mr. Speaker. 

But more importantly, that‟s why we as a government are going 

to start taking responsibility, unlike the former government . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, that‟s why we‟re taking 

responsibility, and we‟re starting a physician recruitment 

agency that will look at making sure that we retain our 

positions. Mr. Speaker, it wasn‟t very long ago under the NDP 

when we had the worst retention record of our nurses, Mr. 

Speaker. Under our government, it‟s the best in Canada, and 

we‟re going to do it with physicians as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

SaskPower Rates 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Will the 

minister call the recent rate increases at SaskPower what they 

really are, an annual backdoor tax increase of nearly 16 per cent 

for every family household, every farm, and every business in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the question because I want to put on record that our 

government is committed to ensuring that SaskPower is run 

properly now and into the future. And it doesn‟t have to take 

many minutes thinking backwards to realize that there was zero 

planning and zero money put into the infrastructure in utilities 

under that government 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, in the last 10 years of the NDP 

government, they averaged $280 million a year. In the last two 

years under our government, we‟ve spent $1.4 billion in 

infrastructure just in SaskPower. We want to ensure there is 

infrastructure in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, do they really think that they can 

tell the people of Saskatchewan no money‟s been put into the 

infrastructure of SaskPower over the last number of years? 

Nobody believes that. Mr. Speaker, families are paying more 

for their power because their money‟s going to Toronto, to the 

shareholders and an out-of-province, private company. The 

government‟s agreement with Northland Power, and I quote, 

“. . . provides protection against changes in the price of natural 

gas, as fuel costs are passed on to SaskPower.” 

 

Will the minister tell us why Saskatchewan families are paying 

more for their power bill to protect the private, Toronto-based 

company from natural gas increases? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I think the members 

opposite should remember it wasn‟t too long ago that there was 

a deal done with ATCO with the previous government, under 

SunBridge with the previous government. We all understand, 

and I think that the Leader of the Opposition should remember a 

quote that he used, where he said utility rate hikes are a “fact of 

life in Canada.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have to increase our rates because of things 

like the expansion needed for ensuring that we do have the 

facilities in our province. And we are ensuring that we have the 

lowest costs possible for the people in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, increases do occur occasionally, 

but the rate of inflation was 1 per cent. The rate increase of 

power is over 15 per cent over the same period. Mr. Speaker, 

we know that this agreement guarantees Northland Power 

protection from increased costs, but the minister can‟t offer the 

same protection to taxpayers in Saskatchewan. Why did the 

minister sign an agreement where all the risk is handed to the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers and all the profits to a Toronto-based 

company? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to clarify, I‟d like 

to clarify for the Leader of the Opposition. When I made the 

statement that the utility rate hikes are a fact of life, that 

statement was made by the current Leader of the Opposition. 

And he is the one that . . . [inaudible] . . . that issue. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟d like the people in the province to know that . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. If members of the opposition want to 

continue adding their own comments, they‟ll just absorb their 

time in question period. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — I guess maybe the Leader of the 

Opposition doesn‟t remember that he made that statement. It 

was The StarPhoenix from September 25th, 1999, where he said 

that utility rate hikes are really “a fact of life in Canada.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure that the people of the 

province understand that, looking at utility cost comparisons 

across our province, Saskatchewan fares very well. We 

understand that hydro provides a lower rate than gas, for hydro. 

And when it comes to the gap between provinces, the only 

province in Canada that has a lower rate when it comes to 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4045 

utilities is Manitoba. Everybody else is higher than 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, this government won‟t release any 

details of the 20-year contract with Northland Power. We‟ve 

heard that Saskatchewan families will pay 20 cents per kilowatt 

hour for Northland‟s power. Will the minister tell us how much 

Saskatchewan families are going to pay for Northland Power? 

Is it the 20 cents we‟ve heard, or is it even more? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m very pleased to say that 

our government is working with the private sector to ensure that 

we can supply power and have power purchase agreements with 

individuals and so that people in our province can have a lowest 

rate possible. There are deals that are being made with private 

companies to ensure that we can have power supply across our 

province. There was so little money put into the infrastructure 

within power, utility, and telephone under the previous 

government that now we have an opportunity to ensure that 

we‟re building our infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of the province can ensure that under 

this government they can turn on the lights and there will be 

power. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well, Mr. Speaker, she won‟t deny the 20 cent 

cost, so obviously that‟s true then. The Premier told members of 

his own party at their convention last weekend that his 

government was, and I will quote, “moving away from the 

government having to build and own all the generating 

facilities. We will now work with private sector providers.” 

 

[14:15] 

 

This government is quietly privatizing our Crown corporations 

one piece at a time. At least Grant Devine and Elwin 

Hermanson had the courage to tell the people of Saskatchewan 

their true plans. Can the minister tell us, can the minister tell us 

which part of which Crown corporation the Premier plans to 

privatize next? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I know the members of the opposition were 

paying close attention to the events of the Saskatchewan Party 

at the convention and the speech that I gave. It‟s interesting 

though. The member who asked the question should be paying 

closer attention to what his government did in office. 

 

His government in . . . his opposition, in criticizing a 

partnership with the private sector supplier of energy, forgets 

the fact that under his, when he was on the government side, 

and when the Leader of the Opposition was the minister for 

Crowns, they did what? They struck in a private purchase deal 

with SunBridge, a private, Alberta-based partnership. Maybe, 

maybe he got to know them when he was in Calgary. I don‟t 

know. That was the first one. 

 

ATCO was another one, Mr. Speaker, another cogeneration deal 

with a Calgary-based company, Mr. Speaker, where they would 

provide, where there would be a partnership between 

SaskPower and a private sector company to supply electricity. 

And the last one is Husky, which is based where, Mr. Speaker? 

It‟s probably not even based in Canada. That‟s another deal 

they‟ve done, Mr. Speaker. They should get their homework 

done before they come in with questions into question period. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Chiropractic Services 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can the Minister of 

Health today please provide an update on the contract 

agreement between the province and the Chiropractors‟ 

Association of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what I will say is that 

the chiropractors of our province, that are spread across our 

province in many communities, do a great service in the 

profession that they supply, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

co-payment, it‟s a subsidy that is supplied to chiropractors. We 

in Saskatchewan have supplied that subsidy. The only other 

province is Manitoba. For many years, Mr. Speaker, that has 

been supplied. 

 

We look at all of our expenses as we are going through the 

budget cycle, Mr. Speaker. We have some insured services, 

some uninsured services. For example, ambulance services are 

subsidized. They‟re not an insured service. Chiropractors are 

subsidized. They‟re not an insured service. We‟re looking at all 

those expenditures, Mr. Speaker, and as we move closer to the 

budget, and on budget day, you‟ll know the answer to that 

question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here‟s the real story. On 

January 7th, after one year of negotiation, the president of the 

Chiropractors‟ Association signed an agreement with the 

government on behalf of the chiropractors. The president of the 

Chiropractors‟ Association was told that the minister would 

sign the agreement within days. The Chiropractors‟ Association 

was later told the agreement was off. It sends a chill through the 

entire health system when there is no honour in bargaining. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is the minister refusing to honour this 

negotiated agreement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I have said earlier, 

there are nine provinces and territories that cover absolutely no 

coverage on chiropractic service at all. A few provinces, a very 

few provinces will cover the . . . 



4046 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — There are a couple of provinces in 

Canada that will cover low-income, Mr. Speaker. There is only 

one other province other than Saskatchewan that cover their 

services, and that‟s capped at 12, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

many provinces have moved away from funding chiropractic 

services. We see that across Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we read the budget on March 24th, the 

people of Saskatchewan will know the decision of our 

government, Mr. Speaker, and they won‟t know until that time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the minister had gone so far as to 

prepare a news release about the signed agreement between the 

government and the chiropractors. The minister was even 

quoted in that proposed news release as saying, “I am pleased 

that we‟ve reached a deal with the Chiropractors‟ Association 

of Saskatchewan. It allows us to exercise some fiscal 

responsibility to treatment, cap, and copayment.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: what changed? Why is he no 

longer pleased with the agreement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we had said, all the way 

along, for chiropractic services that it has been subsidized. 

Their contract was up a number of months ago, almost a year 

ago, so it was only incumbent on the ministry to start talking to 

the chiropractic association. It wouldn‟t have been responsible 

for any government, I don‟t believe, to sign a contract unless 

they can guarantee that funding‟s there. That funding will either 

be there after budget or not be there after budget, Mr. Speaker. 

It just . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. There is a handful of opposition 

members that seem to want to answer the question, and I 

believe the Minister of Health has been recognized. I recognize 

the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Well the member opposite said, well 

why would you even negotiate it, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

the event that funds are available, we want to make sure that we 

have a contract ready to go. If the funds aren‟t available, Mr. 

Speaker, it would not be responsible for any government to 

follow through. Perhaps they feel that . . . You know, it was 

quite interesting as they had the galleries partially full with a 

number of their strong supporters, Mr. Speaker, how they were 

complaining about a contract that never went forward, has taken 

too long. Now the minister is saying well why even negotiate? 

 

Mr. Speaker, you negotiate. And if the funds are there in this 

particular situation because it is in the collective bargaining, it‟s 

a subsidy to chiropractors. If the money‟s there, the agreement‟s 

in place and away we go, Mr. Speaker. If we decide that it isn‟t, 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the contract would be there in case 

the funds are. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — That‟s just goofy. I mean that is just goofy, and 

Goofy‟s only working in Disneyland, not here. 

 

It appears the Sask Party is prepared to, they‟re preparing to 

eliminate all funding for chiropractic care. I mean, the minister 

could dance and skate around all he wants, but this is what the 

message is coming out today. As a result, chiropractic care will 

be inaccessible for many people, especially those people on low 

income. It will mean forcing chiropractic patients to seek care 

from other areas of the system, going to emergency rooms, 

going to specialists, going to GPs. It will mean people living in 

pain and living with chronic pain, and it will mean ultimately 

increased costs to the health system and to individuals. Mr. 

Speaker, this is typical Sask Party math. Save $1 now. Pay $3 

later. 

 

To the minister: will he recognize that eliminating chiropractic 

care is unfair, short-sighted, won‟t save money, and in the end 

will cost the health care system more money? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said it from the 

outset, there are nine provinces that absolutely do no funding of 

chiropractic service whatsoever. A couple of provinces will 

cover low-income. And, Mr. Speaker, our province and 

Manitoba do cover chiropractic services at this point. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but if you use her argument, if you use her 

analogy that you better fund everything . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 

provinces and territories, nine that don‟t fund, and there are a 

few that do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you use their argument though, you would fund 

all sorts of service that people already pay out-of-pocket such as 

physiotherapy, such as dentistry, Mr. Speaker. Is that what 

we‟re saying? Is that what the opposition is saying, is they 

would like all of that funded because we fund chiropractic 

service? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — There‟s nobody following that logic, Mr. 

Speaker — nobody. In a letter to the Premier, the president of 

the chiropractic association of Saskatchewan said, and I quote, 

“In spite of good evidence, the government appears to have 

decided to sacrifice the public good and refuse to maintain 

partial coverage for chiropractic services, ostensibly on the 

basis that revenue projections have been miscalculated.” Blame 

it on potash. 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4047 

Mr. Speaker, this just isn‟t about an agreement that‟s not being 

honoured. This is about what‟s doing best for the patients of the 

province and the entire health system. To the minister, Mr. 

Speaker: why should patients and their families have to suffer 

real pain that affects their quality of life because of the Sask 

Party‟s fiscal mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we supply 

a large array of services in this province. Many are insured 

services that are dictated to us by the Canada Health Act. 

 

We also supply a number of services, Mr. Speaker, that aren‟t 

dictated to us through the Canada Health Act. Some are 

subsidized. Some are covered completely, Mr. Speaker, and 

chiropractic services would fall under that category, so would 

ambulance services, so would long-term care, so would home 

care, Mr. Speaker. Many of these services are subsidized by 

government. They aren‟t dictated by the Canada Health Act. 

We have to look at all of those services and decide whether we 

should cover them or not. 

 

I remember not too many years ago when the opposition was in 

government. They decided they wanted to charge long-term 

care fees at 90 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Remember that, how they 

felt that was very appropriate, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the budget is read on March 24th, we‟ll 

know the answer to the chiropractic question as to whether 

they‟re subsidized or not. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 127 — The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 127, 

The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act amends The Assessment Management 

Agency Act that provides the legislative framework for the 

assessment system in Saskatchewan. The major amendments in 

this Bill have come about in part because of a number of issues 

resulting from the 2009 revaluation and in part because of the 

changes to the education property tax system earlier this year. 

The Bill also proposes amendments related to technical changes 

that will improve the legislation, enabling the Saskatchewan . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I‟m having difficulty 

hearing the minister present his reasons for the Bill No. 127. I 

recognize the Minister Responsible for Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Bill also 

proposes amendments related to technical changes that will 

improve the legislation enabling the Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency, SAMA, to become more flexible and 

efficient in carrying out its mandate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed in this draft Bill address 

the following issues: first, this Bill proposes to strengthen 

government‟s role related to assessment policy making and help 

to ensure future decisions are consistent with provincial goals 

and priorities. Second, this Bill proposes to change the 

composition of the board of directors by reducing the number 

from 11 to 7 members and adjust SAMA‟s funding in 

recognition of changes to the education property tax system. 

Third, Mr. Speaker, this Bill introduces amendments in several 

areas that improve the effectiveness of the Act on technical and 

administrative matters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take just a few moments to 

highlight the more significant changes that this Bill proposes. 

The first issue I would like to raise is related to the 2009 

revaluation. Concern has been expressed not all of SAMA‟s 

assessment policy choices are consistent with the provincial 

government‟s goals and priorities. Assessment policy, when 

implemented, inevitably affects the distribution of property tax. 

This has broad implications for the province‟s economy and the 

social and economic well-being of various sectors. 

 

For example, heavy industrial manufacturing improvements 

experienced a substantial assessment increase due to SAMA 

adopting a new costing manual in conjunction with replacement 

cost increases in the 2009 revaluation. The new Marshall and 

Swift manual is the industry standard for North America. The 

change was made to more accurately reflect replacement cost. 

However this caused tax shifts not anticipated, impacted major 

businesses, and has proved to be inconsistent with economic 

and education property tax relief goals established by the 

province. 

 

Legislative amendments to provide the opportunity for 

government to review and approve assessment policy and 

methodology changes are proposed. This introduces a new step 

for sober second thought, considering broader public policy 

beyond what the assessment appraisers recommend. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this makes SAMA more accountable for its 

decisions and will ensure SAMA does its due diligence. It will 

make government policy accountable for assessment policy 

changes it approves, and involves a shift in responsibility. This 

is a fairly fundamental change for SAMA, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Our goal is to ensure the effect on our province‟s economy is 

considered in making these decisions. Proposed amendments to 

The Assessment Management Agency Act include the addition 

of ministerial approval to apply to board orders regarding the 

following: methods of valuation; assessment manuals, 

guidelines, handbooks, and other materials required for property 

valuation; the base date for valuation; the method for 

calculating, preparing, and maintaining equivalency 

assessments; and codes, standards, manuals, or other reference 

materials pursuant to subsection 12(1.1). 



4048 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

The ministerial approval process is for assessment policy and 

leaves the bulk of SAMA operational activities unchanged. A 

transition amendment is proposed relating to all existing orders 

passed prior to this Act coming into effect. These orders would 

remain in force until they are amended or repealed in 

accordance with this Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second issue I bring forward is the proposed 

change to SAMA funding and the composition of the board of 

directors. School divisions have a significantly reduced vested 

interest in the assessment system. The province now sets mill 

rates for the education portion of property tax, and there‟s a 

much-reduced reliance on property tax for education. 

 

The smaller board — 7 members as opposed to 11 — is a more 

accurate reflection of the interests in the assessment system. 

The two members nominated by the Saskatchewan School 

Boards Association and two provincial government members 

will be removed. The new board will be composed of seven 

members, composed of two persons nominated by the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, two persons 

nominated by the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities, two provincial government appointed members, 

and the board Chair who is appointed by the provincial 

government based on consultation with SUMA [Saskatchewan 

Urban Municipalities Association] and SARM. And I was 

proud to appoint Neal Hardy to that position. 

 

Based on SAMA‟s numbers, this reduction in the board size 

will save almost $100,000 per year. Mr. Speaker, the funding 

relationship will see amendments to match these changes to the 

education system, funding, and SAMA board composition. 

 

In recognition of the changes to education system funding, the 

Minister of Education will no longer make payments on behalf 

of school divisions. Rather the funding payments currently 

made on behalf of the province and school divisions will be 

combined and made by the Minister of Finance. The share of 

funding from government is eventually to be 65 per cent, and 

the municipal share will be 35 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, situations have arisen where assessment appeal 

decisions have been set aside in subsequent years by assessment 

appraisers causing individuals to have to appeal repeatedly even 

though the facts have not fundamentally changed. An 

amendment to extend the effect of appeal decisions is proposed. 

This would require assessment appraisers to comply with SMB 

[Saskatchewan Municipal Board] appeal board decisions in the 

future years, not just the current years as the case right now, 

provided the facts of a property situation have not changed and 

subject to changes in market value. Some consequential 

amendments will be required to The Cities Act, The 

Municipalities Act, and The Northern Municipalities Act 

relating to this change. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the remaining amendments will help to 

improve SAMA‟s effectiveness and pertain largely to technical 

and administrative matters. Many of the key technical 

amendments were requested by SAMA to address issues that 

were causing challenges for SAMA in carrying out its mandated 

responsibilities. These relate to entry onto property, statutory 

immunity for SAMA employees, issues regarding 

municipalities opting back into SAMA services, and 

reinspection deadlines. 

 

The proposed change regarding right of entry onto property 

would allow assessment appraisers to enter onto a property for 

inspection after making reasonable efforts to notify the owner 

or occupant of the property. This is consistent with the authority 

provided to municipal employees in The Cities Act, in The 

Municipalities Act, and proposed for The Northern 

Municipalities Act, 2009. 

 

An amendment is proposed to provide SAMA officials and 

employees with similar liability protection as provided 

municipal employees under The Cities Act, The Municipalities 

Act, and The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009. Mr. Speaker, 

providing SAMA and its employees with the same authority 

and protection that municipalities already have will improve the 

organizational flexibility and efficiency of the agency. 

 

A provision is added to address problems associated with a 

municipality opting back into SAMA and subsequent budget 

issues. SAMA will have the ability and flexibility to charge for 

services beyond the 65/35 provincial-municipal shares where it 

would be unfair for all municipalities collectively to be 

expected to fund them. 

 

As requested by SAMA, references to property reinspection 

periods are removed from the AMA [Assessment Management 

Agency] Acts. Subsequent amendments to the Assessment 

Management Agency regulations will remove the property 

reinspection deadlines that are currently set. This change is to 

better reflect industry standards. The deadlines have proved to 

be impractical. SAMA and municipalities need the flexibility to 

target reinspection activities to property that most needs it. 

Municipalities will have to work with SAMA to determine the 

timing of reinspections. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments brought forward today have been 

proposed after careful consideration to ensure the assessment 

policy for the province is consistent with provincial goals; to 

ensure the legislation is consistent with changes to the 

education property tax system, including the change to the 

composition of the board and the funding for the agency; and to 

make changes that will help SAMA to improve its 

effectiveness. Accordingly I move second reading of Bill No. 

127, the assessment agency amendment Act, 2009. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Municipal Affairs has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 127, The Assessment Management 

Agency Amendment Act, 2009. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 

I have to say that while I looked at the Bill, the minister‟s 

comments actually caused a bit more, quite a bit more concern 

than what reading the Bill and having a glance at it has. So I‟m 

going to have to go through and pay particular attention to a 

couple of areas, the minister‟s comments also. And I hope all 

the cheering from his side of the House was that it was the first 

Bill as a minister that he‟s actually put in place. 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. Actually five. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Oh, five. Okay. He‟s actually been working a 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4049 

little harder than I thought, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I hope it wasn‟t in support of all the comments that he made 

because when he talks about making SAMA more in line with 

government goals, he really needs to look back at the mandate 

of SAMA and what it was put in place to address, and the role 

that SAMA plays across this province and why it was put into 

place, Mr. Speaker. Because you don‟t have to go back very 

long and you will see that reassessment didn‟t take place over 

many, many, many years in this province. And it has nothing to 

do with who made right decisions or who didn‟t. But the fact of 

the matter is one of the roles of government is making good 

public policy decisions that will move the province forward. 

 

And when we had run into a time, and I believe — I know some 

of my colleagues may be able to correct me on this, but I 

believe — we had been at 1965 assessment levels in this 

province. Saskatchewan‟s property values were considerably 

out of whack and out of step with what was happening in other 

places, not only across Canada, but beyond. So SAMA took this 

job to put in place reassessment. And I have to tell you, Mr. 

Speaker, after going through this a number of times, it is a 

painful process. It is a painful process for government who 

moves ahead with reassessment and making sure that the 

property values and the assessment rates that are in place across 

this province are consistent with standards that are recognized 

and met in other areas of the country. 

 

You cannot leave Saskatchewan at the whim of politicians 

when it comes to assessment. There needs to be a process in 

place. So when the minister stands and says SAMA needs to 

better reflect the priorities of the government and the goals of 

the government, that causes a great deal of worry. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s surprising how the government was quite 

quick to make the changes to SAMA because they said 

education funding doesn‟t rely on education property tax 

anymore. But it does. So they have removed the members from 

the board, made some changes to the board of SAMA. Did that 

quite quickly, but yet we aren‟t going to see an actual funding 

formula in place for another two years in education. So 

meanwhile education is being really minimized, I feel, in this 

province when we see that their input is no longer required or 

no longer felt that it‟s required at SAMA. We‟re still talking at 

10.08 mills is still the provincial rate. That still has a huge 

effect on the education system right across this province, but the 

government‟s saying, no, it doesn‟t matter. You‟re off the board 

— moved. 

 

Now the minister also made the comment, and a question that 

came to mind for me was, well is the education system still 

helping fund SAMA? Because there was a reliance for 

education on the funding that came through the assessment that 

SAMA put in place. Education rightfully made a contribution 

towards the operation of SAMA. Now the minister says, no 

that‟s been changed. It‟s now going to come through the 

Ministry of Finance. 

 

So my question to the minister is, does that mean that funding 

will go into the education system, or is he just shuffling the 

money? Is it just basically where you‟re running the money 

through? Is it the same money comes off the operating funding 

for the Department of Education that just moves into the 

Department of Finance and is shuffled through to SAMA 

differently? Or is that money being reinstated to the Department 

of Education into funding education across the province? 

Because it‟s no small change, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not small 

change. And it can have a huge impact, especially when the 

government is saying quite clearly this year, zero per cent 

increase to funding. So that means there are many, many school 

boards across the province that are worried about the funding. 

They are worried about the funding because a zero per cent 

increase in fact is a reduction to services. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, each of us will know that this 

government has approved considerable increases to utilities 

over the last two years, increased cost to your household 

budget. So if my income is going up or staying the same and I 

have a zero per cent increase, my costs are still continuing to 

rise. 

 

And that‟s no different than the school boards who are looking 

after facilities scattered over their districts. That is no different 

than school boards who have increased costs to manage through 

their board budgets, multiple facilities to look after. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we are putting our faith in them in educating the 

children of this province to build a better future for all of us and 

to build a better future for each and every one of the smallest 

citizens in this province. So it‟s not small change. 

 

And if we‟re just playing a shell game with the money, then 

that‟s a problem, Mr. Speaker. You‟re discounting the 

education system. You‟re discounting the people who have sat 

on this board and have contributed to SAMA and the 

assessments that have been done. And you are discounting each 

and every citizen in this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, those are questions that we‟ll have to get 

into in more detail once . . . as we move along with this piece of 

legislation. And even more, we‟ll know when the budget comes 

out on the 24th how the money‟s been shuffled and if it is just a 

shell game. Because I have to say, Mr. Speaker, there is not a 

great deal of comfort with this government and their financial 

figures that have been released and the shell game that has 

happened with the budget of this province. And open and 

accountable has not been a strong suit of this government. So 

there‟s a number of concerns and a number of questions — well 

many, many questions — that are going to come out as this Bill 

moves forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the minister said to bring SAMA more in 

line with government goals and he repeated it a couple of times 

throughout his comments for the second reading for this Bill, 

and he talked about consistent with education property tax or 

the changes and the goals of the government. He repeated it 

again. And he talked about a sober second look. 

 

Do you know what? SAMA is a group of very professional 

individuals who have worked hard in this province to make sure 

that the assessments were appropriate, and they have been more 

than accommodating. When it comes to answering questions, 

they are out, they have public meetings. They attend some very 

difficult meetings that I would . . . You know what? I bet that 

half the members on the government side wouldn‟t go to 

meetings as difficult as some of the ones that SAMA goes to. 

They send the bureaucrats out. That‟s what they do. They send 



4050 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

the bureaucrats out. And they do it over and over again. But you 

know what? Then they have the nerve to stand in this House 

and say, well SAMA needs to give some sober second thought 

to some of the decisions they have made. Gives them time. 

 

Well you know what? That‟s inappropriate. It‟s inappropriate. 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this Bill it just . . . I have to 

say the minister‟s comments raised more questions for me than 

what the Bill did. I had questions on the education side. I had 

questions on the education funding and how that is going to be 

dealt with, but the minister‟s comments really raised many 

more questions than I had before. And it really calls into 

question the changes that are happening to SAMA, and it calls 

into question political interference, Mr. Speaker, with an agency 

that has provided a professional service right across the 

province, the goals of the government. 

 

This province has always prided itself on a very professional 

civil service and they have provided good public policy and 

good service to the people of this province for many years. And, 

Mr. Speaker, they are recognized for the public policy and the 

service that they provide. And there has to be a process in place. 

There has to be respect for the opinions and the expertise that 

these people bring. And I‟m really nervous that that is not there. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And as I said before, you know, being government isn‟t just the 

fun stuff. It isn‟t just blowing, you know, 3 to $4 billion, ending 

up with a $1 billion deficit. Oh let the good times roll, Mr. 

Speaker. Part of it is making sure that you are providing and 

putting in place a good foundation for this province and 

everyone in it to be able to move forward. It‟s not about me and 

my friends; it‟s about every citizen in this province. And that‟s 

where this whole Bill just smacks many people right in the face 

and in the good sensibility that Saskatchewan people possess. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is a number of areas, gosh, that have just 

jumped up and questions that are just screaming to be asked. 

And when we look at . . . I guess another one of the comments 

that I scribbled down quickly as I was listening to the minister, 

that SAMA needs to look at the economic impact that needs to 

be considered by SAMA in their assessment. 

 

And he also spoke about getting rid of timelines and timetables. 

Now I need to review his speech. I do need to review his speech 

to make sure that I heard everything correctly, and it will 

actually provide a number of questions for estimates and when 

we are . . . Not in estimates but in committee, when we are 

dealing on a more detailed basis with the Bill. 

 

But there are some problems. There are some real problems 

with the comments that were made. Are you going to play 

politics with the assessment? And I know there were some 

problems with some of the classes and the assessment that took 

place and how it took place. I know there was problems with 

seed-cleaning plants where some adjustments were made. I 

know there was problems with hotel, motels and the assessment 

that took place there. 

 

But there is opportunity to make adjustments and to either ease 

it in or review. And my understanding is that when the process 

to do with seed-cleaning plants was reviewed, they had realized 

that there had been a factor that had been used that was 

incorrect. And if the process had gone too far and the taxes had 

already been paid . . . Now they have a term for it, Mr. Speaker, 

but it has to do with the tax roll. If that step had already been 

taken, then a reassessment and a review would be done before 

the next tax notice was issued. So wrong factor was used; 

SAMA realized the mistake was there. A number of facilities 

had their changes made this tax year. Others will have it made 

next tax year before the tax notices come out. 

 

So the system isn‟t perfect, but do you know what? Of all the 

properties that they deal with, of all of the very complicated 

assessment processes that they go through to make sure that we 

have legitimate, accurate assessments done on all of the 

properties in this province, that‟s pretty small, the errors that we 

will see. 

 

And SAMA has always been and the professionals that work 

there have always been more than willing to talk to people that 

are having a problem. There‟s a formal process you can go 

through of reassessment and appeals that you can go through, 

but SAMA itself and the people that work there, in my 

experience, have always been more than willing to sit down and 

explain some of the difficult decisions that they‟ve had to make. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, this reassessment brings 

Saskatchewan up to 2006 values — 2006. That does not cover 

the boom. That covers a beginning of our economy to start to 

take off, prices starting to rise, but not that spike we had much 

after that. So if people figure that this assessment was so 

terrible and it‟s just so out of line with what‟s happening in the 

province, this assessment isn‟t even there yet. We‟re at 2006 

values. That‟s what this assessment brings us up to. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there needs to be a regular process of 

reassessment to make sure that the businesses and the 

residences and the values in this province are assessed at a 

current level, and there also needs to be a respect for the 

professionals that provide this service. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m hoping it was in just the minister‟s 

comments — that we don‟t see this political interference 

directly into SAMA with adjusting a timetable or getting rid of 

a timetable, that somehow it should be up to the will of 

politicians to make these decisions and have an opportunity to 

make any type of adjustments in them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a number of other questions. But I want 

once more to be able to go through the legislation and have a 

talk with some of the interested parties about this Bill. And I 

know that there are a number of my colleagues that have an 

interest in looking at this Bill a little more closely, especially 

after the minister‟s comments. So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I‟d 

like to adjourn debate on Bill 127. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 127. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4051 

Bill No. 128 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Labour Mobility) 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m pleased to take this opportunity to move second 

reading of The Miscellaneous Statutes (Labour Mobility) 

Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan finds itself in a unique situation 

regarding our labour market. While we know we‟re not immune 

from what‟s going on around us and the global financial 

contagion that has swept across the globe in recent months, and 

at the same time we certainly are aware that we have a very 

unique circumstance within Saskatchewan and within the 

country. That is, we continue to have the lowest unemployment 

rate in Canada. We know that there have been layoffs here 

within Saskatchewan. That‟s why we put in place a number of 

public policy instruments to help those people, and we‟ve 

helped them by the thousands. 

 

Today we have the lowest unemployment rate in the country 

and, most recently, we‟ve had more encouraging news and that 

is our working people are earning more on average than ever 

before. In fact we‟ve seen more than 55,000 jobs posted on the 

saskjobs.ca website since April 1st. Clearly there is a demand 

today and we anticipate that that will continue to grow for 

skilled workers. As economies in Canada and around the world 

enter this recovery, this is not going to be unique for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Compounding the issue is the demographic reality that will see 

a significant number of working people in our province leave 

the labour market in the coming years. Clearly we need to make 

sure that we‟re able to fill that void and that we‟re acting in a 

strategic fashion in order to meet what I call our talent 

challenge. To do that, we are helping to ensure that we‟re 

investing more in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and we can think 

of a number of initiatives where we are investing in First 

Nations and Métis communities, Mr. Speaker. We also want to 

make sure that we‟re encouraging our expats to come back 

home, Mr. Speaker, and we‟re encouraging newcomers from 

across the country and around the world to come. In fact most 

recently we‟ve had more encouraging news where we‟ve set a 

new population record for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this marks a philosophical shift. Under this 

government, the province is moving forward. That stands in 

stark contrast to when it was ruled by the members opposite in 

the NDP. Mr. Speaker, that‟s why I‟m very pleased to bring 

forward The Miscellaneous Statutes (Labour Mobility) 

Amendment Act for the second reading today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan employers and industries as well as 

broader community stakeholders — what the OECD 

[Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development] 

refers to as social partners — have long been asking 

government to develop new and commonsense and 

comprehensive solutions to address our ongoing labour market 

shortages. That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what we are acting on. 

These amendments reflect our contribution to a vital 

pan-Canadian framework that has been put in place by the 

leading decisions makers across this country, regardless of 

partisan stripes, to ensure full labour mobility for all Canadians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a thorough approach which is making it 

easier for employers to find working people, and new 

opportunities for working people to find meaningful 

employment right across the country. This legislation will 

ensure compliance with the Council of the Federation‟s 

commitment regarding the Agreement on Internal Trade, and 

especially noted under chapter 7. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should note that Saskatchewan has been part, as 

the members opposite will know, of the AIT [Agreement on 

Internal Trade] since it has come into effect in the mid-1990s. 

Since then all provinces and territories have been working 

towards eliminating barriers to trade, investment, and labour 

mobility within the country. Today, Mr. Speaker, we are taking 

the next step on that journey, a step that ensures that workers 

from across the country will be more easily able to bring their 

skills and knowledge and expertise to Saskatchewan and a 

variety of other Canadian jurisdictions. The amendments 

proposed in the Act will ensure that residency is not an issue to 

labour mobility and that workers certified in another province 

or territory may be recognized in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments made in the Act are the result of 

a government-wide effort. The Act affects 37 regulated 

professions which are overseen by no less than 14 government 

ministries. Each of these ministries has and continues to consult 

with regulators to ensure that Saskatchewan will achieve full 

labour mobility as set out in the AIT. These consultations are 

absolutely vital to this ongoing process. Most importantly, they 

ensure that the health and safety of Saskatchewan residents is 

safeguarded. They also help to ensure that Saskatchewan 

residents will continue to see work done at the same 

professional standards that we‟ve become accustomed to. 

 

The AIT allows provincial governments to continue to set 

occupational standards as required and to establish appropriate 

levels of protection for the people of this province. While 

regulated professions across Canada have a high degree of 

commonality, this provision allows the Government of 

Saskatchewan to work with regulatory bodies to ensure that the 

best interests of our people right across the province remain 

safeguarded. Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to move second reading 

The Miscellaneous Statutes (Labour Mobility) Amendment Act, 

2009. And for that, Mr. Speaker, I would say thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour has moved second reading 

of Bill No. 128, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Labour Mobility) 

Amendment Act, 2009. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And the 

first thing that comes to mind, you know, the minister stands 

and he says, well there‟s 55,000 jobs on SaskJobs listed on 

there. Now I haven‟t looked at it, Mr. Speaker. I‟m not looking 

for a job, but I‟m sure there are many, many across the province 

who have. 

 

But I would have to say as I look through, I believe the minister 



4052 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

said this covers 37 professions. Would any of these jobs be 

filled by people within these professions? And who exactly or 

whom exactly is the minister looking to keep happy with this 

piece of legislation on labour mobility? Because you know, Mr. 

Speaker, in all the time I‟ve been in the workforce and in public 

life, I have never heard concerns with people moving 

interprovincially to be able to find work and be able to qualify 

for a job in one province or another. 

 

In fact the SaskParty used to stand up and say, whoa, 

everybody‟s moving to Alberta or everybody‟s moving here. So 

now all of a sudden we need a labour mobility agreement to 

what, facilitate that? Now the minister . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Oh to bring them back. So it‟s like the 

SaskParty‟s built a bit of a fence, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Once 

they‟re somewhere else, they can‟t come back. 

 

Now I know the minister did make a mistake in his graduate tax 

legislation because he did not include other people who had 

received their education outside of Saskatchewan. And when 

they came to Saskatchewan to work . . . Or they may have been 

born and raised here, were educated outside of the province. 

And it could have been something quite easily that wasn‟t 

offered within the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But when the minister first put in his piece of legislation and 

talked about it being the best package in Canada, which we 

won‟t argue the fine points, but he ignored these people who 

were moving back to Saskatchewan until the member from the 

opposition, from Saskatoon, raised it a number of times in this 

House — that the minister had missed that piece entirely and 

had to make some changes.  

 

And we‟re glad he did. We‟re glad that he‟s open to suggestions 

and that he actually . . . Now he can claim it for his own if he 

likes, but that‟s kind of an ego thing, Mr. Speaker. And it really 

doesn‟t matter because as long as things are being improved for 

Saskatchewan people, that‟s fine. If he wants to take credit for 

it, he can. But there is one other thing I would like him just to 

do, put a little bit of effort into. Now the minister is from the 

University of Saskatchewan. That‟s where he worked is my 

understanding. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Alberta. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Ms. Higgins: — What‟s that? Oh, he‟s talking to me, Mr. 

Speaker. We won‟t get into that. But when he says this whole 

change has taken place in the last two years, well he really 

needs to get his head out of the sand and have a look because 

the economy of Saskatchewan has been doing well for a 

number of years. We have been a have province a number of 

years before the Saskatchewan Party was elected. And while he 

may have been doing some good work up at the University of 

Saskatchewan, I‟m sure he isn‟t responsible for Saskatchewan 

being a have province because it happened long before he 

entered political life. So he really needs to kind of contain his 

ego, just a wee bit, Mr. Speaker, because it‟s getting a little bit 

out of control. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when we look at this Bill, a number of the 

comments that the minister made, you know like, who is having 

problems. And this is much like the . . . What was the trade 

agreement? Oh, TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour 

Mobility Agreement], TILMA, that was it. They were 

hot-to-trot to sign TILMA and got a fair bit of push back on 

that. So now they‟ve signed, it‟s called something else. I think 

it‟s the same thing though. Anyway it was a partnership . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well that‟s okay because if you 

want to stand up and debate, you‟re more than welcome to. You 

can explain it all to us. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they won‟t release any information. They 

won‟t release any information on any of it, so it‟s all a secret. 

We need it really badly; we need this legislation really badly. 

We need to have this labour mobility. And the minister points 

to this 55,000 jobs posted on SaskJobs. Do we know, would any 

of these professions fill those jobs? Are any of these professions 

listed on SaskJobs? I don‟t know, Mr. Speaker, but it raises a 

number of questions. 

 

And when I see some of the other, what should I say, liberties 

that the minister has taken when he explains some of the 

wonderful things that he‟s initiated and he‟s doing and his 

government is doing which are straying somewhat from the 

facts, then I have to start worrying about the legislation. And if 

his reality is getting that far out there, well maybe his reality 

with this piece of legislation isn‟t quite what we‟re expecting 

either, so it just gives us cause that there is a number of 

questions that need to be asked. 

 

And when the minister is proudly standing up and saying, well 

it makes it easier for employers. And then I think about a couple 

pages later in his comments, then he finally mentioned 

employees. And it‟s kind of when you look at essential services 

and you look at the changes to The Trade Union Act and you 

look at the changes to the trespass Act or the implementation of 

the trespass Act. 

 

You look at . . . I mean the comments with the Minister of 

Health today about chiropractors, how he bargains. Well if he‟s 

got the money, okay, he‟ll keep his word. If he doesn‟t have the 

money, well he‟s just going to ignore all the work that‟s gone 

on and the contributions that chiropractors made. 

 

We look at the piece of legislation that was put in place for 

Victoria Park Capital, Mr. Speaker. Didn‟t like the agreement, 

didn‟t like what had been negotiated, but they sit down and talk 

about it and do it the way professionals do it? No. They just 

tabled a piece of legislation that yanked the agreement null and 

void. 

 

So we‟ve seen the kind of partnerships, we‟ve seen the kind of 

co-operation that this government likes to put forward and how 

one-sided their views can be many, many times, Mr. Speaker — 

more times than what we would actually like to admit. 

 

Anyway, I get back to my comments. The minister made the 

comment that this was easier for employers because we‟ve seen, 

through the legislation I just mentioned, that he doesn‟t have 

great consideration for employees, nor is there anything 

comprehensive that really looks at . . . You need more than a 

piece of legislation. You need good wages. You need good 

health care. And we‟re struggling with doctors leaving this 

province, Mr. Speaker. They‟re worse, worse than it‟s been in 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4053 

many, many years. 

 

You need good housing. You need affordable housing, and you 

need housing opportunities for people where they need it. And 

it‟s not just Saskatoon and Regina where students, where 

employees, where families moving into our communities are 

having trouble. It‟s in Estevan. It‟s in Weyburn. It‟s in 

Shaunavon. Mr. Speaker, we could go to many, many 

communities in your area. We can go into the North, in the west 

side of the province or the east side of the province. Housing is, 

affordable housing is a real issue. Small communities, 

especially, because they have even less choice than what we do 

in communities that may be a little larger. So you can‟t just put 

in a piece of legislation and say we‟re going to have this 

mobility across Canada. Because we don‟t want people just 

driving across Saskatchewan; we want them staying here. But 

you have to have the necessities of life. It has to be attractive. 

 

And you can‟t just whack everyone over the head with what 

you want them to do, like essential services, the changes to The 

Trade Union Act, Victoria Park Capital. I mean, I‟m sure 

businesses across this province were real impressed with that 

one from this group that says they‟re a bunch of wizards of the 

business world, but yet they put in a piece of legislation like 

that. Mr. Speaker, that‟s appalling. And I‟m sure there are many 

business people across this province that were not happy when 

that was done. Business for entrepreneurs? Give me a break. 

Why would they do that when they can just put in a piece of 

legislation that makes everything go their way? And that‟s what 

they‟ve done. 

 

In some areas, Mr. Speaker, in some areas of life and in 

communities, that would be considered bullying. And I would 

say, you know, have a look at the Education website. There is a 

whole program on anti-bullying programs that can be put in 

place. And I‟m sure the Sask Party caucus could probably 

benefit from looking at that anti-bullying legislation and see 

what it means to actually really deal with the people of this 

province, and not just people who are like-minded. Because 

that‟s one of the challenges of government. 

 

And it goes back to the SAMA legislation that we were talking 

about previously. Not everything‟s your way. We have to deal 

with the processes that are in place, and there‟s a reason for 

that. There‟s a reason for that, Mr. Speaker, because they have 

been developed over many, many years. Good times, bad times, 

these processes have been in place. Will they be refined and 

improved? I hope so. Will they be updated and made relevant to 

the way society operates and to the issues of our communities 

and the issues within the province? I hope so. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when we see things thrown out like this — 

just put out like isn‟t this a wonderful idea, and darn I‟ve done a 

good job — you need to look at the big picture. And you need 

to look at the whole picture because you have to make sure that 

you are addressing all of the needs of Saskatchewan people and 

not just what suits your agenda. And there are processes in 

place, and there are many other things that have to be looked at 

besides this. 

 

And the minister has impact in a number of areas that would be 

a bonus to attracting people — not just people from other parts 

of Canada, but from around the world, to this province. And he 

needs to look at the broad picture, not this one Bill like it‟s 

going to fix so many things and fill those 55,000 jobs that are 

listed on SaskJobs. 

 

That‟s really stuck in my mind you know, Mr. Speaker, that 

55,000 jobs on SaskJobs. I‟m going to have to go in and have a 

look to see if any of these professions would actually fill those 

jobs or are any of these professions listed on SaskJobs? I don‟t 

know if anyone has a computer and they want to have a look if 

any of the 55,000 jobs that are listed, the minister says 55,000 

jobs are listed on SaskJobs right now. So if any of these 

professions . . . Are any of these professions listed on those 

55,000 jobs? 

 

You know, so you can‟t fight or build your arguments from 

using some really bogus numbers . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Well that‟s what your minister said. You know, he said 

55,000. But my question is, are any of these professions listed 

in this Bill? Are they posted on that job site? Because if it isn‟t, 

well the minister is using some pretty bogus arguments to really 

support his Bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a number of areas that we need to 

really look at. Also some of the self-governing, self-regulating 

professions, what their opinions are to changes being made. 

And as always, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan is well 

known or Saskatchewan used to be well known. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has always been known for the 

value that it placed on working people. Up until a couple of 

years ago anyway, Saskatchewan had a remarkable reputation 

for what we had done to ensure safe workplaces and value 

working people, no matter what the profession, across this 

province. 

 

Well that reputation has suffered somewhat over the last couple 

of years under this Sask Party government. It is important. And 

I know that self-regulating professions have always taken great 

pride in being just that — self-regulating — and that they have 

set standards that they believe are important to the people of 

Saskatchewan and important to those professions here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to see the minister just roll this out, 37 

professions that he feels need to be opened up. And I‟m hoping 

he means opened up to consistent standards across Canada, not 

a race for the bottom. And that‟s always the fear, is that instead 

of opening standards and leading best practice across Canada, 

we will meet the lowest common denominator of all the 

regulations across Canada. And that‟s the fear. That we need to 

make sure that the standards are upheld because many of these 

self-regulating professions have put in place standards that they 

feel are important. 

 

So is the minister committing to maintain that high professional 

standard that these professions have for themselves, or is he 

looking at downgrading to the lowest common denominator? 

That‟s the question, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a big one. 

 

So I‟ve got a number of issues with the arguments that the 

minister put forward and also numerous questions about the Bill 

itself. But there are a number of people that are active in these 

professions that we would like to do some further consultations 



4054 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

with, so, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to adjourn 

debate on Bill 128. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 128. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 124 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2009 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. It seems that there 

are some members that would like to have a discussion, a bit of 

a dialogue. If they‟d move behind the bar so that we could hear 

the member on the floor, that would be appreciated. I recognize 

the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 

2009. Mr. Speaker, this Bill is being introduced at the request of 

the Law Society of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Law Society is the professional regulatory body that 

oversees the legal profession in the public interest. This 

oversight is performed by elected and appointed benchers who 

act as the governing body or by the professional staff of the 

society. The Law Society and the government recognize that it 

is in the interests of everyone that any complaint is dealt with as 

quickly and as expeditiously as possible. Accordingly the 

amendments will streamline the Law Society discipline process 

in a number of ways. 

 

First, the Act will allow the benchers of the Law Society to 

delegate non-decision-making functions to the professional staff 

of the Law Society. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Secondly, and perhaps the most important change, is that the 

amendments will permit a hearing committee to impose any 

appropriate penalties including suspension and disbarment of 

the lawyer if that is the appropriate course of action. 

 

Currently, Mr. Speaker, sentencing for serious misconduct is 

often a two-stage process. First, the hearing committee 

determines whether the complaint is well founded. Then, 

sometimes months later, all of the other benchers must gather to 

impose the penalty. Saskatchewan is the only jurisdiction in 

Canada that has this two-stage process for the legal profession. 

The Legal Profession Act, 1990 is the only legislation in 

Saskatchewan that has such a process for a professional 

discipline. This will be amended, and a significant amount of 

time will be reduced in the discipline process. 

 

Other amendments include clearly separating the investigative 

and adjudicative functions of the Law Society. This separation 

is already in place at the Law Society. It is important for the 

public to feel that their interests are protected and that an 

investigation and disciplinary decisions are made by different 

people. The amendment will make the current practice a 

legislative requirement. 

Currently only a lawyer can appeal a finding of conduct 

unbecoming or a penalty to the Court of Appeal. It may be in 

the public interest however for a decision or a penalty to be 

appealed by the Law Society. Therefore the amendments will 

allow the conduct investigation committee to appeal a dismissal 

of a complaint or a penalty if the committee feels it is not 

appropriate for the conduct in question. 

 

Other amendments remove the requirement for lawyers to have 

permission of the Law Society to resign their memberships. 

Further amendments include changing the rules for closing trust 

accounts when a small amount is held for a client who cannot 

be found, changing the limitation period for prosecution of 

unauthorized practice of law by non-lawyers from one year to 

two years, increasing the membership of the Law Foundation 

by two members. There are also, Mr. Speaker, several 

housekeeping amendments. 

 

Finally, for the first time, the Law Society‟s dues and objectives 

will be clearly articulated in the legislation. For many years, the 

Law Society has had a mission statement that eloquently 

identifies its roles and purposes to govern the legal profession 

in the public interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important that the legislature and the people 

of Saskatchewan recognize the exceptional value that lawyers 

and the Law Society bring to the province. The public is well 

served and will continue to be well served by these 

amendments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to now move second reading of 

The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2009. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 124, The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 

2009. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

member for Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 

want to thank the minister for the comments that he made on 

Bill 124, An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act. And when 

he made the comments right at the very beginning that it had 

been requested by the Law Society, and as I go through it, Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m not going to profess any expertise in area of the 

law. It looks like a number of hearings, a hearing committee, a 

number of changes that have been made. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I really believe that . . . well I know that I 

need to talk to a couple of my colleagues and some other 

stakeholders, other people that will have a better understanding 

of what has been done, where changes need to be made to 

facilitate some improvements for obviously something that has 

been an issue for the Law Society. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, at this point in time in order that my 

colleagues and I may have time to have a better look at the 

suggested changes or the recommended changes for The Legal 

Profession Act, I will adjourn debate at this point in time on Bill 

124. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 124. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4055 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 100 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 100 — The 

Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to enter into the discussions regarding the transfer of 

the assets and liabilities of the Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B 

[Christian Community of Universal Brotherhood] Trust Fund 

and then the repeal of The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. 

Trust Fund Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, what the government intends to 

do is to wrap up the Doukhobors of Canada trust fund and 

transfer the assets and liabilities of the board and the fund to 

any person, agency, organization, association, enterprise, 

institution, or body within or outside of Saskatchewan that in 

the opinion of the Lieutenant Governor in Council is capable of 

representing the interests of the Doukhobors of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have had a chance to consult with some 

members of the Doukhobor community. And it‟s not at all clear 

that this is precisely what the Doukhobor community in our 

province is interested in having done with this particular piece 

of legislation. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, when the minister stood in the Assembly 

and introduced the Bill, he indicated that there was no public 

policy reason for the government to be involved in this 

endeavour any more and that they were going to transfer the 

monies to some entity, but they weren‟t clear in terms of what 

entity they were going to transfer the assets to. 

 

Now I understand that there is close to $300,000 in assets. And 

historically what‟s happened is that the interest from the assets 

has been distributed between Doukhobor societies in 

Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British Columbia. And there was a 

man that basically . . . His name is Larry Ewashen, and he‟s the 

man that introduced in 2006 sort of a history of how this fund 

came into being. And I think what he found useful and what we 

are interested in is that this board made grants to recognize 

non-profit organizations who were dedicated to establishing and 

maintaining the heritage and culture of the Doukhobors of 

Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as a young person growing up I had the, I 

guess, the privilege to know a guy by the name of Jim Wright 

that wrote the definitive history of the Doukhobors, certainly in 

Saskatchewan. And that book was Slava Bohu. 

 

And there is a proud history of Doukhobors who came to our 

province who settled in communities in the Blaine Lake area 

and in the eastern part of Saskatchewan around Veregin. And in 

fact we were very pleased that in 2005 that we were able to 

designate the Doukhobor Dugout House at Veregin as a 

provincial heritage site. And we thought that that was important 

to do during the province‟s 100th anniversary. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that the Government of Canada 

originally promised the Doukhobors that they could hold land in 

common and be exempted from military service and that many 

of those promises to Doukhobor citizens in our country were 

not honoured. And we also know that there was a split in the 

Doukhobor community that led to basically three different 

groups of people, and we had a number of people that moved to 

British Columbia in the area of Castlegar. 

 

The Doukhobors that stayed behind were called independents, 

as they were willing to swear an oath to the Queen and they 

were open to the idea of private land. Mr. Speaker, according to 

The Encyclopedia of Saskatchewan virtually all Doukhobors in 

our province today are descendants of those independents, those 

Doukhobors that were prepared to swear an oath to the Queen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this trust fund was established by the NDP Allan 

Blakeney government in 1980 to administer the funds of the 

former Christian Community of Universal Brotherhood, a 

co-operative that owned a number of assets in Western Canada 

until it was foreclosed upon in the late 1930s. And the money 

that was left in the C.C.U.B. fund was combined with the 

proceeds of the sale of former Doukhobor reserve lands that had 

been held in an account supervised by the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I said, a document that‟s been provided to 

us by a BC [British Columbia] member of the board of the 

C.C.U.B., Larry Ewashen, notes that these parcels of land 

originally belonged to the communal Doukhobors who had left 

for British Columbia. 

 

So when this trust fund was established in 1980, there was 

approximately $267,000 in the fund. And the principal was to 

be invested forever, and the interest earned on the fund‟s 

investment was meant to preserve Doukhobor culture in our 

province. And organizations could apply for project funding, 

and that‟s what‟s important. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we will be very interested to hear from the 

minister exactly who in the Doukhobor community in 

Saskatchewan is asking for the dissolution of the trust fund and 

to get rid of the legislation because that‟s important. Because 

there are many older Doukhobors, who certainly we have come 

to know in opposition, who have worked very, very hard to 

preserve Doukhobor historic sites and culture. And they‟re very 

proud of that. And the money that this trust provides for them 

allows them to hold onto that Doukhobor heritage and to fund 

the historic sites that we have in our province. 

 

And I think any of us that have ever gone to Veregin have been 

hosted by the Doukhobor community in Veregin who have 

taken us to their sites to show us what the Doukhobor 

community did and contributed to our province. 

 



4056 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

And I will be very interested to hear very clearly from the 

minister who exactly in the Doukhobor community is calling on 

the Government of Saskatchewan to get rid of this fund because 

we haven‟t been able to find people that we know in the 

Doukhobor community that are calling for this. And I think it‟s 

important that the minister clearly put that on the record 

because he didn‟t do that in his speech. 

 

He was not at all clear with us in his speech why the 

government was going to dissolve this Act. He did tell us that 

there wasn‟t any compelling public policy reasons why 

government should continue to be involved in the trust fund. 

Well he says the government‟s role in the management of the 

trust fund is negligible. Well, Mr. Speaker, there are historic 

reasons why we have pieces of legislation. It does not mean that 

people in the ministries or the ministers spend all of their time 

worrying about legislation. But there are people in our province 

where pieces of legislation are important to them because of 

their historic significance and what those Bills mean to them. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister says that he consulted with the 

Doukhobors of Canada trust fund board regarding the proposed 

changes to the Act. Well let‟s understand that there are 

representatives from British Columbia, representatives from 

Alberta, representatives from Saskatchewan. As well the 

Government of British Columbia and the Government of 

Saskatchewan appoint someone to the trust fund board. As I 

understand it, he says, and we‟ve been informed that they‟ll be 

proceeding to investigate a new corporate structure. Well I think 

if I was being told on a board that the government was going to 

blow up my legislation, I would be seeking to find some other 

structure. But the question is, is this the government‟s idea or is 

this coming from the community? And that‟s not at all clear that 

this is coming from the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know in this province that the Doukhobors 

have an interesting and proud tradition. There have been some 

brilliant books written about that tradition, in particular I think 

Jim Wright‟s book called Slava Bohu that talks about what 

Doukhobor people had to endure when they came to this 

province and where they came from and the promises that were 

made to them by the Government of Canada that were not 

fulfilled. We need to ensure that history is not repeated in a rush 

to adopt this Bill. We need to consult with the descendants of 

Doukhobor citizens to ensure that the Bill meets these needs. 

And we also need to consult very closely with the people of 

Veregin, the people of Blaine Lake to make sure that this is 

what they want us to do. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Because Allan Blakeney didn‟t introduce this legislation 

without having consulted with the Doukhobor community, and 

in fact he introduced the legislation with the insistence and 

support of the Doukhobor community in our province. So I will 

want the minister to tell us who exactly in the Doukhobor 

community in the province of Saskatchewan is asking for us to 

dissolve this historic piece of legislation. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I will take my chair. And I‟m 

looking forward to being in committee with the ministry to hear 

from him who it is, the names of the individuals. Because 

certainly we know who the Doukhobor community is in this 

province, who‟s actively involved with those historic sites, 

who‟s involved in ensuring that the history of the Doukhobors 

in our province is being preserved. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Oh, I‟m adjourning debate. Sorry. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Okay. The member from Saskatoon 

Nutana has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 100, The 

Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment Act, 

2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 103 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 103 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I didn‟t 

realize it was my turn so quickly, and here I was waiting and 

anxiously waiting for my name to be called. And my name has 

been called, so I‟m up and want to say what a great pleasure it 

is to have the opportunity to enter into this particular debate — 

the debate on, soon as I find the Bill here, debate on the Act to 

amend certain statutes with respect to matters concerning 

professional discipline. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is Bill No. 103 and it‟s an interesting 

Bill, Mr. Speaker. I have had the opportunity to briefly, briefly 

go through it. And I‟m certain it needs more work than that. But 

it‟s truly an opportunity to enter into this debate and to do so on 

behalf of the fine people in Regina Northeast. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, you will agree with me that whenever 

you or I or any member of the Assembly here have had the 

opportunity to travel this great province of ours here in 

Saskatchewan that, wherever we‟ve travelled, whoever, 

whatever community we may have stopped in for either 

services or lunch, it‟s quite easy to strike up a conversation with 

somebody within that community. And you find them — people 

in Saskatchewan — to be friendly and warm and quite 

receptive. 

 

And I can say the same for the people in Regina Northeast, Mr. 

Speaker, that there are no finer people in this great province 

than those fine people who have given me the privilege and the 

honour to be in this Assembly and to represent them here and to 

bring their thoughts and their concerns forward on this 

particular Bill, as I‟m sure as the days go on we‟ll have the 

opportunity on other Bills. But on this particular Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, it is certainly my pleasure to be here. 

 

This is a Bill that certainly governs the disciplinary actions, I 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4057 

guess you‟d say, of professional agencies and professions. And 

it‟s a little similar to the experience I had a number of years 

back when I had the privilege of being the government 

Co-Chair of the Saskatchewan Construction Panel. And I hope 

the Construction Panel is still in existence and still operating 

well in this province . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And my 

colleague across the way indicates that it is, and I‟m sure that 

with him at the helm as the government Co-Chair, I‟m sure that 

it‟s in very capable hands. But we had the opportunity at that 

time, Mr. Speaker, to look into an issue that was brought to our 

attention by the architects in Saskatchewan here, and it was a 

limitation of liability issue. 

 

And at that time in this province, as in other provinces, there 

was no real limit to the responsibility of individuals who may 

have been involved in construction projects, either presently or 

in the past. And that brought a fair amount of concern to a 

number of professional agencies that were involved with the 

Saskatchewan Construction Panel, not the least of which was 

the architects. But they sort of headed it up, I guess you would 

say, in wanting to make some changes to that Act and to their 

ongoing liability issues. 

 

I can remember one of the gentlemen who was representing the 

architect profession on the panel used to say that the limitations 

existed to 10 years past death. Well I don‟t know if it went quite 

that far, Mr. Speaker, but there certainly was no limit to the 

liability issue at that time in this province. So the Saskatchewan 

Construction Panel sort of headed up the initiative to look at 

what was done in other provinces. What was the liability issue 

in Manitoba, what was the liability issue in Ontario as far as 

length of time is concerned, and how long was somebody 

involved in a construction project in Manitoba liable for that 

project? Was it two years after the completion of the project or 

was it 10 years after? What was the average? 

 

We looked at what was going on in Manitoba as far as the 

legislation was concerned. We contacted Ontario and got 

briefing notes from Ontario in regards to the limitation of 

liability issue in Ontario and the same in Alberta and British 

Columbia. And it was an interesting issue, Mr. Speaker, 

because when you say that there was no limit to the 

responsibility or liability issue where the responsibility of 

individuals involved in the construction project — and that‟s 

exactly what it was — it wasn‟t, and I want to make this clear, 

it wasn‟t isolated just to the architects. It wasn‟t isolated just to 

the designers of the project. 

 

The responsibility fell upon everybody involved in that project, 

whether it be the architect, whether it be the designer, whether it 

be the individual contractor who took on the contract, the 

general contractor, or any of the subtrades that may have taken 

on their responsibilities, whether it be the plumbers or the 

electricians or the carpenters or whether it be the individual who 

worked on that project. They were all liable. They were all 

liable and that created a problem because of the issue of 

ongoing liabilities and the ability for professions to get 

insurance to cover those liabilities since there was no end to it. 

There was no end to the liability issue. 

 

So it was through the initiative of the Saskatchewan 

Construction Panel, and primarily headed by the architects, that 

the government, the previous government took note of that and 

certainly did a consultation process across this province. It was 

a lengthy consultation process. I believe it took nearly a year or 

thereabouts for the Department of Justice to consult with all the 

various aspects of those people who would be affected by any 

change and then brought back a report that indicated that, that 

basically indicated and suggested that the rule of thumb today 

in Canada here was a limiting of that liability to 10 years. That 

was what was used in Alberta. I believe that was what was 

common practice in Manitoba. Ontario, if my memory serves 

me correctly, was longer. I believe Ontario was about 15 years. 

 

But here in Saskatchewan, we chose to limit that liability to 10 

years so that after 10 years, a project was 10 years old, 

individuals involved in the construction of the initial stages of 

that project were no longer liable for it. 

 

It was really unfair because individuals who were responsible 

for designing it, designing the project, for simply being the 

contractor involved in the project, perhaps just a general 

contractor, not physically involved in the construction of it, but 

the general contractor, the subcontractors and subtrades that 

were responsible for that issue was liable on an ongoing basis, 

for basically forever and a day. And that liability continued with 

them despite the fact that they had no control over the 

maintenance. There was no control or input on their part as far 

as the maintenance of the project or the maintenance of the 

building was concerned. 

 

And as you know, Mr. Speaker, and I‟m sure all the members 

here in this House would agree, that any project, any 

construction project, any building built or any other project, it 

has to be maintained if you‟re going to expect some longevity 

out if it. And here we had a group of individuals who were 

responsible for the construction of the project, who were 

responsible for the building of the project, responsible for the 

designing of it, and yet they had no input into the maintenance 

of that project but yet they were liable for it. They were liable 

for it. So if there was a failure in that structure, there was a 

failure in that structure, they would be liable for it even though 

that failure may have occurred as a result of the lack of proper 

maintenance. So certainly it wasn‟t fair. 

 

And there was the ongoing issue with many of the professions 

to be able to carry the proper insurance that they would in their 

profession because of the ongoing liability. As I said earlier, 

one of the architects, one of the colleagues at the time on the 

Saskatchewan Construction Panel, would jokingly suggest that 

the liability at that time was 10 years past death. Well 

unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that may have been some, a grain 

of truth to that. 

 

But that, I suppose, is one example of being able to hear from a 

profession or professions and to identify by them an issue or 

problem that they were facing within their own, their own 

business world, and to be able to identify that and work 

co-operatively with government, and government with them, to 

do a consultation process that brought back meaningful results 

and were able to then identify the proper legislation, to 

modernize the proper legislation that was satisfactory to the 

professions that were involved. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to think that in some way that 

this is basically, this piece of legislation, this particular Act is 



4058 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

headed in the same direction and of the same intent. Of course 

immediately, Mr. Speaker, when you look at these changes . . . 

And these changes are quite wide-ranging. From my count, Mr. 

Speaker, I believe that these changes will affect some 40 or 

maybe even more self-regulated groups within our province. 

 

Well when it affects that many groups, Mr. Speaker, I would 

have to think one would have to suggest that it‟s fairly 

wide-ranging and one would want to know what effects it has 

on each group and how perhaps it affects each group differently 

and what the results of these changes will mean to each group 

in the short term as well as the long term. 

 

I note, Mr. Speaker, that this Act means that you can pursue 

disciplinary action against someone in a profession even after 

they‟ve resigned, and I think that‟s fair. I think that‟s fair. I 

don‟t think that any individual or professional should be able to 

duck their responsibilities; if they find themselves in gross 

negligence that they should be able to duck that responsibility 

by simply resigning from their profession or from their 

profession‟s association. 

 

I think that there should be a window of opportunity in the 

event a situation should arise and an individual decides that the 

best way to duck that responsibility would be to resign and to 

leave the profession; that there should be a window of 

opportunity for those affected if there‟s somebody affected 

negatively; that they should be able to recoup some 

compensation for their losses or for the negative effect that the 

actions of an individual may have had on them or their business 

or their lifestyle. 

 

And I note, according to the changes here, it would suggest that 

that opportunity will exist for two years after resignation. Well 

again, Mr. Speaker, I think the intent is good. I think the idea of 

having the ability to follow the actions of an individual — to 

follow them even though they‟ve resigned — for a period of 

two years is good, but my question is, is it enough? Is two years 

long enough? Is two years perhaps satisfactory for one 

particular group of professionals, but perhaps not satisfactory 

for another? 

 

As I‟ve already indicated it, these changes will affect 40-odd 

groups, Mr. Speaker. So does that mean that we have a 

cookie-cutter type legislation that applies to everybody equally? 

And how does that work? Because I would think that there may 

be some groups that you would want a longer period of time to 

be able to effect some action. This is on an individual who may 

have resigned from that profession and may have moved on to 

doing something else, but their actions while in that profession 

have had some really negative and long-term effects on you as 

an individual or perhaps your family or perhaps in your 

business, and you would maybe want to have the ability to have 

that followed for a greater period than two years. And maybe 

that cookie-cutter suggestion isn‟t correct in all professions. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Maybe two years is too long in some others. Maybe there‟ll be 

those who will say that we don‟t need it two years or two years 

is far too long; that‟s an anvil hanging over somebody‟s head 

longer than it can be useful to the public. 

 

So those are the questions that immediately come to my mind, 

is that, what are the effects? What group of individuals have . . . 

advice has the government received from what groups to 

suggest that the cookie-cutter model of two years is enough 

time to be able to pursue individuals after they‟ve resigned from 

an occupation or from a profession to be able to receive 

satisfaction for perhaps any wrongdoing that they may have 

done when they were in that profession? What magic advice did 

the government get and from who that would suggest that two 

years is adequate? That‟s one of the questions of course, Mr. 

Speaker, I would have. 

 

As equally, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be fair to ask the 

government who from these professions, from these 40-odd 

professions, which professions — not necessarily the 

individuals — but what professions contacted the government 

and asked for these changes. And what reasons were given to 

the government that convinced the government they needed to 

enter into this discussion and to look at making these changes to 

the disciplinary process here to limit the ability for individuals 

to seek compensation after an individual has resigned to two 

years? Or what organizations said that this needed to be done in 

order to modernize the laws and bring things up into line to best 

affect the individuals served, but also best affect the individuals 

within their organizations? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a lot of questions that just at first 

glance at this particular piece of legislation that comes to mind. 

And it‟s a wide-ranging group, as you can imagine, if you have 

40 various professions that are affected by the changes in this 

legislation. You can understand, I‟m sure, Mr. Speaker, that it 

has to be a wide range of professionals. And I wonder, you 

know, how the government came to the conclusion that the 

two-year limitation was the correct amount of time and whether 

this cookie-cutter approach would simply be satisfactory to all 

the professions. 

 

I also would like to ask the government, you know, how did 

you arrive at these 40? Why is it just these 40? Why is it that 

these ones made your short list of 40? And what professions did 

you omit? What professions did you not include in the list of 40 

that would be affected by the changes of this legislation, and 

why were they omitted? 

 

There‟s a lot of questions that come to mind and I‟m sure that if 

we got into a frank and open discussion about this that the 

government would, I‟m sure, be forthright and provide us that 

information, as to what criteria they used to determine who 

would make their list, their short list of 40, and who would be 

given the opportunity to not to be on that list. And it, you know, 

raises some very interesting questions because it‟s a wide group 

of professions that we have are already on the 40, the list of 40. 

And why wouldn‟t we have others that have been left off? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s fair to say that the regulated 

bodies that we‟re talking about here and basically the 40 

professions that we‟re talking about are all self-regulated 

bodies. And these self-regulated bodies, they do their own 

disciplinary actions, they carry out their own disciplinary 

actions, and it‟s basically an internal process. And as a process 

it‟s usually triggered after they receive a complaint from a 

citizen. 

 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4059 

And it‟s been my experience, Mr. Speaker, that from the 

organizations that I have been involved in, the self-disciplinary 

organizations that I have been involved in or equated with or 

had any dealings with, that they do a very good job, a very good 

job of regulating themselves. In many cases I personally think 

that the level of regulations or the level of tolerance that they 

have for their own members is less than that which would be 

outlined in many governmental regulations that would govern 

the operation of these professions. 

 

So I think that, you know, we have a tremendous track record in 

this province by the professional organizations here that would 

indicate that they do a very good job of self-regulating their 

members. And they do a very good job of disciplining their 

members when necessary. 

 

But they also do a very good job of investigating complaints 

from citizens who have had a dealing and felt they were 

wrongly treated or wrongly done by by the profession or by the 

professional within that organization and that they‟ve put their 

complaint forward. And for the most part, I find the 

organization themselves have a very rigid disciplinary process 

that they immediately pick up on the issue brought forward by 

the citizen, the complaint brought forward by the citizen and 

immediately start an investigating process that is very rigid, 

very thorough. 

 

And at the end of the day, I think have probably a greater 

disciplinary effect on their members than that of many 

government regulations that are set, whether it be in Ottawa or 

whether it be in the province here, to regulate agencies and to 

regulate professions. So I think it‟s something that the 

professions really aspire to because they want to ensure that 

they have confidence in, that citizens of Saskatchewan have 

confidence in those various professions. 

 

And I certainly don‟t want to see anything that would erode any 

of that confidence that members in various professional 

associations, any suggestions that perhaps they can dodge 

disciplinary action by simply resigning their membership. 

 

I think that the disciplinary actions of professional 

organizations which are self-regulated certainly ensure that their 

members are providing the best of professional services to their 

clients. But at the same time, they can‟t duck any misfortunes or 

issues that may arise as a result of perhaps misinformation or a 

miscue, I could say, by individuals within their association. 

That they quite quickly take disciplinary action on those 

individuals and have the ability to follow them so it doesn‟t 

end, their responsibilities don‟t end just upon the member‟s 

resignation but it follows the member for a period of time. 

 

Now I don‟t know, Mr. Speaker, if within the regulations of 

each organization, each professional organization that they have 

that limit of two years. I don‟t know that. I would think that 

many organizations may have different staggered periods of 

time that they can follow the actions of a member, or the action 

of the member follows the member. 

 

I would like to know of the government who they consulted 

with, what was the level of consultation that brought about the 

determination that two years was the magic number, and that 

cookie-cutter number would be able to be applied to the various 

professional organizations. And that that would ensure a 

reasonable length of time, an adequate length of time for 

individual members of society — if they had an issue with that 

professional organization — that they would be able to take it to 

the organization. The organization would have the time then to 

follow it through with the member — even though the member 

may have resigned, but follow it through with the member and 

ensure that the member was held accountable for their actions, 

even though they may have resigned, for their actions while 

they were a member of that professional association. 

 

So I‟m sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we want to ensure at all 

times that the integrity of the organization is upheld and the 

confidence that people have in this province in various 

self-regulating agencies and organizations and associations are 

upheld because that‟s key. People need to have confidence in 

their professionals that they are dealing with. 

 

I‟m encouraged, Mr. Speaker, that the minister is willing to 

look at perhaps sharing some of this information that has been 

gathered locally here, perhaps on a national level, to ensure that 

those professions who are international or interprovincial at 

least, here in this province, would have the ability to operate 

here in Saskatchewan, but also that information would be able 

to flow with individual members who may be members of 

Saskatchewan but move on for whatever reasons to other 

provinces. And that information and that history would follow 

them and be available to professional organizations outside of 

Saskatchewan. So I think that‟s quite good. And I think that‟s 

something that most professional organizations would welcome. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the government if they carried 

out extensive consultations with the group of 40 that are listed 

here, on the self-regulated groups that are listed here, on the 

information provided to us. And if they have, to what level did 

they carry out that consultation. And what was the results of the 

consultation? It would be interesting because it‟s vast and 

varied, the number of organizations that we‟re talking about 

here. 

 

And I would think that they would have in some cases even 

competing interests. And how that was dealt with by the 

government through its consultation process and how they were 

able to arrive at some of the recommendations — that is, that 

went from recommendation level to changes to the statutes 

here, to changes to the Act here that is embodied in this Bill, in 

Bill 103. 

 

And we wonder in that consultation process, was there an 

assurance by the government individuals doing the consultation 

that certain provincial standards would be maintained and 

certain provincial standards would be set as the benchmark for 

all the professional organizations to adhere to, to ensure that 

these standards would be in place to be able to protect 

Saskatchewan people, and Saskatchewan people would be able 

to, in good faith, be able to deal with the organizations knowing 

that there was a higher standard that they were being held 

accountable to? And I think that would be very important, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Immediately comes the question, when you look at a Bill and 

the changes when a government brings it forward, have other 

provinces gone down this same road? Has this particular 



4060 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

initiative been in existence in other provinces? In other words, 

have other provinces brought in similar type legislation? If they 

have, what has been their experience? What was the experience 

in developing that legislation? What was their experience after 

that legislation was introduced? 

 

And was other governments contacted and discussions carried 

out between officials as to whether or not those provinces who 

perhaps have already implemented such legislation, are they 

willing to share their experiences? And are they willing to make 

recommendations on perhaps changes that they would make 

based on their experience after the legislation was introduced 

and discussed in their legislatures, but also after their legislation 

took effect? Because often we do the best job we can as human 

beings to try to anticipate what the effects of certain changes 

may be, but often we‟re not able to identify all of those effects 

as a result of all of those changes. So sometimes one can learn 

from other people‟s experiences. 

 

And I‟m just wondering if this government has taken that 

opportunity to contact and to talk to the governments who — in 

other jurisdictions, other provinces here in Canada — who have 

perhaps introduced similar type legislation and have had the 

opportunity to proclaim it and have had the opportunity to start 

to analyze some of the effects of their legislation and how it has 

worked in a very positive way for the various professional 

organizations within their province. And what has been some of 

the negatives that they have identified? And from those 

negatives, what are some of the changes that they would have 

made if they would have that opportunity to make the change? 

Or when that time of opportunity does come and they want to 

amend their particular piece of legislation, what would those 

amendments be? What would they look like? 

 

[16:00] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a number of issues that arise from 

around this particular piece of legislation, and the number I 

suppose is as great as the number of groups or bodies being 

affected. And we have, you know, we have the certified general 

accountants. Now, Mr. Speaker, it‟s one of the groups that‟s 

being affected here. 

 

My question is, what was the consultation and what was the 

experience of the government officials in their consultations 

with the general accountants? Was there recommendations for 

changing in the system of accounting? Was there a 

recommendation for changing in the system that that reporting 

was done, and if there was, what were those changes? And how 

would they go about making sure that they are able to maintain 

a high level of professionalism within their association, and to 

do so while still providing an effective service, while still 

providing a service that‟s affordable to the general public. 

 

Because as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think 

probably you‟re involved in your farming operation. You rely 

fairly heavily often on your accountant to be able to provide 

you the information to help you make certain financial 

decisions, whether it be investing in some aspect of your 

operation as other business people do. I know that they rely 

quite heavily on the advice of their accountant as to whether the 

timing is right for you to make that investment or whether 

you‟re maybe taking on a little bit too much, too large an 

investment, and maybe leveraging your operation. Or perhaps 

the accountant, in his opinion or her opinion, is that it‟s time to 

maybe cut back or dispose of some assets. There‟s all types of 

various good information and good suggestions that accountants 

will have. 

 

And I think many people across this great province, including 

yourself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I know I have on occasions 

relied quite heavily on the advice of my accountant because, I 

suppose it‟s because they look at things from a little different 

point of view. They‟re not quite as close to the issues that many 

of us are. And so that we want to be able to rely on that 

independent information or view that the good folks have. 

 

I noticed, Mr. Speaker, as I glanced through this — and I just 

want to take a second look just to make sure that I didn‟t miss it 

because, as I had indicated, 40 is a large number and a large 

number of organizations. And we see that the rural municipal 

administrators are a part of that, urban municipal administrators 

are part of the 40 that are affected by these changes. 

 

But we also see that there‟s a lot of professional organizations 

out there that are not affected. One of them I see is not 

mentioned here is the Saskatchewan road builders association is 

not on this list. 

 

And I think that‟s interesting because they are truly 

professionals, Mr. Speaker. When I, in my role as Highways 

critic, I‟ve had the opportunity to view first-hand a lot of the 

work being done by the members of the Saskatchewan 

Construction Association, the contractors . . . the Saskatchewan 

road builders association, pardon me. And the number of the 

contractors out there that are actually moving dirt and 

rebuilding highways and resurfacing highways, they do a very 

professional job. And I take my hat off to them because it‟s a 

neat job. 

 

It‟s something that I really find myself often just gazing at the 

choreography, I guess you would say, of machines working on 

a construction project moving dirt — the one weaving in, 

another one weaving out, and working back and forth. And in 

no time at all, they‟ve left a very finished product behind them. 

It‟s a marvel to me to watch man and machine work that way 

and to be able to choreograph themselves in such a way that 

they don‟t run into each other. I‟m sure that if I was operating 

one of those machines, that would be one of my biggest fears, 

would be running into somebody or driving over something. 

 

But they do so in a very professional, very professional way, 

and they leave behind a very quality finished product that is 

certainly then . . . You know, the earth is moved, the ditches are 

made, and done to a certain slope that has been surveyed. And 

they‟ve got little marks on those stakes over there, and these 

guys are operating this big, heavy equipment. And just a glance 

at that stake, they know what they‟re doing, and they know how 

deep to cut the particular cut or how much fill to lay in there. 

And in no time at all, it‟s done, and it‟s done to exact 

measurements. 

 

And I marvel at that because these are great big, awkward 

heavy-duty equipment, and yet those operators are able to do 

such a fine job, such a fine job. It‟s a marvel to watch. I often 

really take time to watch an operator on a backhoe or on a track 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4061 

hoe, the ability to reach out and reach 20 or 30 feet away and be 

able to just do some really fine work. 

 

I mean digging a hole is one thing. I think probably even I 

could dig a hole, although it might end up in three or four 

different places, but I think even I could do that. I watch a 

professional do it, and they do it with such a fine degree of 

accuracy and able to reach out and able to leave a smooth, 

quality, finished job. And I marvel at that, Mr. Speaker. I 

marvel at their ability to be able to be so skilled, so skilled as to 

be able to operate those big heavy machines and do such fine, 

delicate work with them. It‟s something that I find myself often 

in awe of. 

 

But those are perhaps some of the professionals that I would 

have wondered why the government hadn‟t included them in 

their list, why they hadn‟t talked to the Saskatchewan 

roadbuilders association and have them included in their list of 

professionals, because they truly are. They truly are. 

 

And I‟m sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you‟ve had that opportunity 

to watch that type of work being done in the construction 

industry, whether it be in the local municipal level or on a 

highway project. And I think we‟ve all had the opportunity of 

travelling in Saskatchewan and travelling on one of our many 

highways when there‟s been construction on that highway. And 

we‟ve had to slow down and some cases stop, wait for a 

flagperson and a truck or car to follow us through to the 

construction area so we can get through it without doing any 

damage or any harm to our vehicle. But it‟s also that we don‟t 

impede the operation of the workers at the job site. 

 

I know that whenever you‟re in coffee shops, and so on and so 

forth, there has been some people who had suggested that here 

in Saskatchewan we really have two seasons — one season is 

winter and the other one is construction. And that happens 

because we do have a short construction period here. And when 

we have a lot of infrastructure to maintain, both in the city level 

here but also within the province, you have a short period of 

time to do that maintenance. And it simply has to be done. 

 

But in reality I have yet to run into anybody who really had a 

strong and earnest complaint about the time they may have had 

to spend waiting for a tow vehicle to come through so that they 

could follow them through the construction site. And yes, 

sometimes it‟s a little bit inconvenient, perhaps when in a bit of 

a rush as many my colleagues would be to get to a meeting 

perhaps or meeting with some group, and you have to spend 10 

or 15 minutes waiting at a construction site. But end of the day 

you know that as a result of that construction you‟re simply 

going to enjoy a better infrastructure in this great province of 

ours. 

 

And we also know that we have a limited time in which we can 

do that construction because of the climatic conditions of 

Saskatchewan. We have, you know, significant period when the 

ground is frozen and winter is upon us. And it‟s tough to build a 

road at that time. But I take my hats off to the professionals 

who do a marvellous job of being able to fulfill their contracts, 

to be able to build those roads, both on a municipal level and on 

a highway level, to ensure that we enjoy a good, solid, and 

strong infrastructure for our motoring public. 

 

It‟s not only essential for those of us who travel Saskatchewan a 

fair amount for political purposes or perhaps for business, but 

it‟s also very important for the flow of commerce, as in today‟s 

world we‟re seeing much of our commerce, our trade is being 

done on the truck, back of a truck really. And a lot of our 

commerce and a lot of our goods and services flow across this 

great province of ours on the backs of semi-trailer units. And 

that‟s very important that they have an artery, I guess you‟d say, 

of commerce, that they have a good infrastructure to be able to 

move that. 

 

Because in a lot of cases in today‟s world the inventory is no 

longer stored in warehouses at convenient locations across this 

great country of ours. Warehousing is much further and a lot of 

the service, a lot of the goods and services is delivered in a 

just-on-time basis. And I‟ve had many, many people within the 

various industries tell me that changes that they‟ve noticed over 

the last number of years is the fact they don‟t have a warehouse 

locally, whether it be in Regina or in Saskatoon, that they can 

get their goods and services out of there overnight. The 

warehouses may be in Edmonton or Calgary and the goods and 

services are flowing from there, and they‟re flowing from there 

on the backs of semi-trailer units. 

 

And it will come in overnight all right, but it‟s just in time. It‟s 

sort of the just-in-time service and we‟re seeing more and more 

of that in all various retail levels. We‟re seeing more of that 

happen with the retail systems across this great province. We‟re 

seeing that happen in the grocery systems, and we‟re even 

seeing that in the automotive system. We have dealers today 

will have parts and shipments coming in basically overnight and 

will come in overnight. And they‟ll come through on that 

infrastructure that‟s so required. 

 

And in order to maintain that infrastructure, you need to have 

professionals doing it. And this is why I‟m wondering about 

whether or not the government had looked at all professionals, 

all professionals in this great province of ours when they came 

out with the changes to this Act as in this Act in 103. Or is it 

just isolated, these changes are just isolated to these 40 various 

professions? 

 

And I wonder why just these 40 when there are so many 

professions across this great province of ours that are so 

important, so important to our economy, so important to 

ensuring that our economy continues to grow and continues to 

be strong and provides the services to Saskatchewan people that 

in many cases we‟ve become accustomed to. 

 

And so I wonder, when I‟m looking at this list, if the 

government has really, really sent out the information that‟s 

required to all the professionals in this province that, we want to 

talk to you all about your limitations and what you require 

within your profession to be able to limit your, the ability for 

professionals to have action follow them, not only after their 

resignation but up to two years after their resignation. So I‟m 

wondering if that type of liability issues or that type of 

discussions really took place with the various professions across 

this great province of ours. 

 

And I can understand, Mr. Speaker, that this Act affects some 

40 self-regulated groups around the province, and we will 

definitely want to hear from all of those various groups as to 



4062 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

how this piece of legislation or these changes will affect them 

and their organization. And basically I would like to know, is 

the government taking into consideration some extra provisions 

that would perhaps be available to special cases that may arise? 

I can‟t just think of any right off the top of my head, but we 

always should have that. I would think that government would 

want to have that on behalf of professions that are being named 

here, on behalf of the members of the professions, but also on 

behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who may have an issue with 

one of those professions. 

 

That there may be special circumstances that arise, special 

cases, special circumstances arise that something does not fit 

the cookie-cutter mode, doesn‟t fit that. That we need to look at 

ways and means to ensure that there is something in the 

legislation that would allow for special circumstances to be 

given due consideration. Although maybe at first glance doesn‟t 

seem to fit the mould, but special circumstances suggest that in 

this case or that case, perhaps two years is not long enough; that 

an expanded period of time may be required to be able to satisfy 

the particular case that may arise. 

 

So those are some of the things, Mr. Speaker, that we would 

need to ensure that the government has included in its 

legislation and has given some thought through that process. 

And if so, how does it affect each and every individual group 

that‟s within the 40 listed? 

 

[16:15] 

 

But I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that I‟m sure that it‟s a 

frustrating process, probably a very frustrating process, for both 

the wronged individual and the professional body when 

someone, rather than facing discipline matters, simply would 

resign and duck their responsibility. And as I‟ve already said, 

Mr. Speaker, I think that that‟s a time limit that allows for 

individuals not to be able to duck their responsibility by simply 

resigning. That a two-year time limit there that, that 

responsibility, the individual can still be held responsible for 

their actions when they were a member, although they may 

have resigned, but within that two-year frame. If action is 

started, compensation could perhaps be reached by the wronged 

individual or group and that the professional body would hold a 

member accountable and take the necessary action to ensure 

that fair and reasonable compensation is arrived at. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that, you know, that is good. But once again 

I wonder why, why more professions weren‟t included in this 

group, why more professions weren‟t consulted with, why more 

professions weren‟t included in this legislation to ensure that 

Saskatchewan people would have that protection and that 

ability to seek compensation when they have been wrongly, 

wrongly done by, by an individual within that profession or 

while they were in that profession before they resigned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would have to say that we are largely in favour 

of this idea. There‟s no question about that. But it questions me, 

or my questions I guess you‟d say I would have for the 

government is, once again, why did you limit these 40 

particular professions and why wasn‟t the consultation process 

much, much, much broader than that? And if it was, if it was, 

who all did you talk to and why didn‟t you include all of them 

in this particular piece of legislation? 

Was there objections by various other professional 

organizations? Did they want to not be covered? Did they want 

to have the ability for their members to be able to duck their 

responsibility after two years or before two years by simply 

resigning? Or did they say that they felt that their own 

self-regulatory regulations were strong enough to be able to 

satisfy those situations where perhaps the member would try to 

duck his responsibility or her responsibility by simply leaving 

the profession by resigning, leaving the profession and therefore 

their responsibility not follow them? 

 

And did the professional organization say, no we feel that our 

self-regulating regulations are strong enough that we can pursue 

this matter even though one of our members or former members 

has become a former member. We still are able to pursue this 

matter with him or her into a future, a limited future whether it 

be two years or three years or five years, but a limited future. 

But they felt strong enough that their regulations, that their 

disciplinary actions would be able to follow the individual 

through. 

 

This is one of the questions, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to 

have answered because I think I have the greatest of faiths in 

professional organizations. I do. I‟ve had the opportunity in my 

lifetime to deal with many of them, and I have found them to be 

very professional. But on top of that, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve found 

them to be very . . . found them wanting to assure that there was 

absolutely no question as to their integrity and to the integrity of 

their members. 

 

And that if there was, that they themselves, to ensure continued 

faith in their organization, they would take extreme measures to 

do investigations of complaints that were levied against one of 

their members by a citizen of this great province. They would 

take extreme measures to investigate — fair measures, but 

extreme measures — to investigate, to ensure that they turned 

over every leaf and followed all the information that was 

required and to be able to make an informed decision, 

sometimes in favour of their member, of their association, 

sometimes in favour of the citizen who lodged the complaint. 

 

And on those occasions when they found in favour of the 

citizen who lodged the complaint, they ensured that the proper 

disciplinary action on their member was taken, was taken, was 

put into place. Proper compensation was received by the citizen 

who levied the complaint who was found to have been wronged 

by that profession and that professional, and that fair 

compensation was received. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, like I said, I‟m basically in favour of this 

particular legislation. There‟s a lot of questions that come to 

mind about whether or not it actually goes far enough, or does it 

go too far. Those are the kind of questions that I would like to 

know what various organizations that the government has 

consulted with, and what their reactions to that consultation 

process was. 

 

And we see when we look at the list of those occupations 

affected by Bill 103 that the list is varied. I mean 

agriculturalists, architects, assessment appraisers, the Canadian 

Information Processing Society of Saskatchewan, certified 

general accountants, certified management accountants, 

certified management consultants, chartered accountants, 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4063 

chiropractors . . . Which I find quite interesting chiropractors 

would be one of the groups that was consulted by this 

government, when yet this government seems to have difficulty 

being able to arrive at a funding agreement with the 

chiropractors. 

 

But community planning professions, dental, dieticians, 

engineering and geoscience professions, forestry professions, 

funeral and cremation services. And, Mr. Speaker, that‟s 

something that as I can say for myself as I get older, that‟s 

something, an issue that becomes more and more of a concern 

to me and I want to make sure that I have all those services 

lined up. 

 

Interior decorators, land surveyors and professional surveyors, 

the League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 

Superintendents. Now those are the people, Mr. Speaker, who 

have the responsibility of ensuring that our children are 

receiving the highest level of education and that are doing so by 

the professionals that we have within our educational system 

that deliver those lessons to our students. And what they really 

are doing, Mr. Speaker, is preparing the leaders of tomorrow. 

The students of today, as you‟d agree with me, I know, are the 

leaders of tomorrow. And we want to ensure that we provide, 

we as today‟s society provide our students with the best of 

education, the best of knowledge. We want to provide them 

with the best of tools to be able to meet the challenges of the 

future, a very changing future. 

 

And I think somebody once said, and I‟m kind of searching my 

memory as to who it was — I can‟t think of the name right off 

the top of my head — but somebody once said that the amount 

of change that we‟ve seen in our world in the last 10 years, we 

will see that much change in the next two. And I believe that 

may be the case with technology and the rapidly changing 

technology. We‟re seeing a lot of these changes, so we must 

ensure that the professionals that we are dealing with here in 

our educational system are given the ability to provide the best 

of tools to our students who are the students of today but will be 

the leaders of tomorrow. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have licensed practical nurses, which is 

by the way a group that I have the greatest admiration for 

because they provide ongoing care and services to those 

individuals who find themselves in the hospital setting. And 

sometimes we have all experienced perhaps a hospital setting 

— some of us for a very short period of time, others for a longer 

period of time — and we know what wonderful people they are 

that provide us that comfort, provide us that service, provide us 

that care. 

 

And we certainly want to take our hats off to them at every 

opportunity because they certainly deserve the recognition for 

the quality of care and quality of service they provide us. 

 

Management accountants, Mr. Speaker. There now again, as the 

economy booms, as our economy grows, as people work 

throughout our systems here, as businesses are established and 

businesses grow, businesses expand, in many cases businesses 

flourish, that is done a lot of the times upon decisions made 

after key information is received by the management team 

that‟s making that decision. 

 

But key information is received from the accountants that are 

doing the books, are keeping an eye on the cash flow. They‟re 

keeping an eye on long-term investments and short-term capital 

and so on and so forth. And we find these as being a very 

important part of business, a very important part of providing 

the information required to make the right decision for business 

— to ensure that business grows but stays strong while growing 

and doesn‟t fall upon hard times because of misinformation or a 

bad decision made because the information wasn‟t available to 

them at the time. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the list certainly goes on and on and to the 

point where there‟s, what I have on my list is from 39 to 40 

professions that are being covered by this particular Act. 

 

I notice that there are other professions that are not covered by 

the Act and it‟s interesting, Mr. Speaker, why certain 

professions would be covered and certain ones wouldn‟t. And 

those are kind of the questions that I would like to have the 

government be able to answer. 

 

But I think it‟s also important that we, we in the opposition 

have the opportunity to speak to many of the groups that have 

been identified as being affected by the changes, and that we‟d 

like to know, you know, first of all, was the consultation with 

these groups done? Did the government talk to all 40 of these 

groups? And what was their response? What was their thoughts 

on, first of all, the process that the government used for 

consultation? 

 

But more importantly, what was their thoughts and their 

recommendations as they put forward to government through 

that consultation process? Were they taken up by government? 

Or was this just a shell game that the government was using a 

bit of a smokescreen, went out and did the consultation, but 

already had their mind made up that here were going to be the 

changes? 

 

And it was going to be a two-year change regardless of what the 

other organizations may have wanted, that they were going to 

cookie cutter everybody into one simple restriction of a 

two-year limitation to the ability for individuals to seek 

compensation or seeking a righting of a wrong that they may 

have experienced from a profession. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think that there is a lot of questions 

to be asked here yet and a lot of debate to take place on this 

particular Bill. And I would hope that in this process the 

government would be a little more forthcoming with some of 

the information and some of their experiences through their 

consultation process. 

 

But with that, Mr. Speaker, I will move adjournment of debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 103, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) Amendment 

Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Yes. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 



4064 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

Bill No. 117 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 117 — The 

Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am very 

pleased to enter into debate this afternoon on Bill 117, an Act 

respecting hunting and fishing and trapping. It‟s a very simple 

Bill in theory in that it names a day where we all respect the 

heritage of hunting, fishing, and trapping in Saskatchewan and 

pay due respect to the pioneers and the folks that still practice 

those things today. And so it gives me great pleasure to stand 

here today and enter into this debate because I have on many 

occasions participated in each of them. 

 

When I was a young boy about eight or nine years old, I had a 

friend that lived down the street from me that lived right on the 

edge of the city of Prince Albert, about a block away from the 

river. And I‟d get together with the buddy of mine and he had a 

trapline just out of town. And so we‟d walk . . . And my mom‟s 

going to find this out for the first time, nearly 30 years later, 

that I‟d cross the river when it was frozen or partially frozen. 

Now on those occasions when I would cross it then, I probably 

wouldn‟t make it today. I‟d probably fall through the ice. But 

that‟s more a statement on how much I‟ve grown as a person 

than it is on the ice itself. 

 

[16:30] 

 

But I would hook up with my buddy at his place, and we‟d walk 

across the river, and we‟d walk his trapline. And we‟d walk for 

hours and in the cold, and he talked about how his father had 

had that line for a long time. And so you learned very quickly 

the pride that one has in doing something that‟s been passed 

down from generation to generation. And I very much enjoyed 

it. You know, at times I thought we were doing something a 

little bit devious so that always appealed to me as well, part of 

my nature perhaps. 

 

But we would walk those lines. And you know, whatever you‟d 

find in the trap, you‟d bring home and they‟d look after it from 

there. And so it provided a little bit of income for the family, 

and it enabled a cross-generational passing down of 

experiences. And I‟m, you know, glad to have been able to take 

part in it, and learn about that part of Saskatchewan and our 

history, and understand in some small way what has taken place 

over hundreds of years in Saskatchewan. 

 

If you go up and you look at the settlement patterns of . . . Well 

Canada generally, it‟s settled by sort of how our great country 

has been exploited for goods and services. And when I say 

exploited, I don‟t mean in a negative way. I mean utilized. And 

so if you look at how we settled Saskatchewan, it was settled 

largely by rivers that were engaged in trapping. 

 

If you have ever had occasion to attend to Stanley Mission, the 

oldest building west of Winnipeg . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . What‟s that? 

An Hon. Member: — Tell them about that bear you ran into. 

 

Mr. Furber: — And so I‟ve spent time at Stanley Mission. It‟s 

a gorgeous church and a great place and a beautiful part of the 

country. And so what they‟ve done up there is have trapping 

historically since the land was settled and much previous to 

folks from Europe ever coming over. In fact Stanley Mission‟s 

celebrating 150 years very shortly here. So I‟ve had experiences 

there. 

 

Additionally I‟ve travelled up in northern Saskatchewan right 

along the Churchill with my colleague from Regina Rosemont. 

And we spent time on a canoe trip once with our partners and 

ended up camping at a site where we had seen a bear during the 

daytime. And you know, you run into black bears often up there 

— it wasn‟t too much of a surprise — but we assumed that 

when we had spotted it the first time, that would be the last 

time. 

 

And what had happened on this occasion was we went out for 

the day and had a bit of a day trip and hung out and caught 

some fish and did some canoeing of rapids and the like. And we 

got back to camp and what I‟d found was that we‟d been . . . 

Well the folks that were there before us had been gutting fish at 

the camp for a period of time, and it‟s like an aphrodisiac to 

bear. And so the bear came back that night and we had the very 

sturdy protection of a nylon tent. And I still have claw marks on 

me from the member from Rosemont jumping over me to get 

out of the tent to see where that bear was and what it was doing. 

 

So the bear came back into the camp and we had an interesting 

experience — myself with a hatchet in hand, the member from 

Regina Rosemont protecting himself in the best way he could, 

and another woman with a flashlight trying to locate a bear in 

the dark in the bushes in northern Saskatchewan. And the 

member for Regina Rosemont would appreciate it if I told the 

story about how he . . . well he was bigger than the bear and 

was much meaner looking, but couldn‟t wrestle the bear, in fact 

forced it to run away through various means. I don‟t know if it 

finally got his scent or what happened, but the bear ended up 

leaving, and so we went back to the tent and tried to get to 

asleep. And I do recall that we woke up in the morning very 

early, as you usually do when you‟re camping, accompanied by 

some crows and whiskey jacks. 

 

And when we woke up, we‟d found fittingly that this bear had 

eaten only the member from Regina Rosemont‟s food. Now I 

say fittingly because he had to stay for a few more days, and we 

were leaving that day. And I largely blamed him for the bear 

coming around in the first place. I don‟t know what the reason 

was, but I assumed that it was coming after Trent for one reason 

or another. 

 

And so I have experiences with hunting and fishing, well 

trapping and fishing in northern Saskatchewan. And I had spent 

a lot of time in my childhood right around Kindersley, 

Saskatchewan where I was born, my grandparents‟ farm, 

hunting geese in the fall. And you know, we‟d sit in blinds and 

hang out all day, and you know, you‟d be awfully excited 

hanging out with your uncles and grandpa. And they‟d tag one 

and you‟d run out there and grab it and bring it back. So you 

learned sort of stories from the day when hunting wasn‟t done 

exclusively for sport but out of necessity. You know, my 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4065 

grandpa would tell me stories about how they would hunt in 

order to provide some protein for the family in tough times. 

 

So interesting that this Bill, an Act respecting hunting and 

fishing and trapping, is really about Saskatchewan, and it‟s 

about how it was settled. And it‟s about how stories are passed 

on, and it‟s about how we appreciate the land today. I have 

great experience in Cypress Hills, in the Great Sand Hills, in 

northern Saskatchewan enjoying the land and enjoying some 

trapping, fishing, and hunting all over the province. And so I 

think, with some experience in each, I appreciate a day that we 

would honour hunting, fishing, and trapping in Saskatchewan 

and honour the history that it provides the province. 

 

But it‟s important to recognize a few things, I believe. One of 

which is that unless you have these lands protected and in good 

standing, nobody wants the fish in a lake that‟s poisoned. And 

you can‟t hunt animals that don‟t exist. And you certainly can‟t 

trap them either. And so we have to do more to protect the 

environment. 

 

And certainly I believe that when you make a promise to protect 

the environment, you should, ought to keep that promise. When 

you say as a party when you‟re running an election that you‟re 

going to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 32 per cent by 

2020 and then a year later, after you find out that you‟ve been 

elected on that promise, you back away from it. And then you 

introduce An Act respecting Hunting, Fishing and Trapping. 

Well I don‟t think that walking away from a promise with the 

environment respects hunting, fishing, and trapping in 

Saskatchewan. In fact I think it is entirely the opposite. 

 

And when you see a government where they know full well that 

70 per cent of the emissions coming out of Alberta end up in 

Saskatchewan . . . They know that. You don‟t have to do much 

testing to find it out. In fact they haven‟t done much testing. We 

know it from Alberta‟s testing. And so what have they done 

about it? What have they done to ensure that Saskatchewan is 

either, one, properly compensated or, two, that it stops? 

 

You know the Environment minister is here. I think folks 

should ask her what she‟s done to ensure that that stops. 

Because I have also been fishing by Dillon, Saskatchewan and 

up by La Loche, and those are the areas directly affected with 

west winds moving pollution into Saskatchewan from the oil 

sands. 

 

Now you can‟t have An Act respecting Hunting, Fishing and 

Trapping if you don‟t have pristine lands in order to do that 

with. And so how is it, as a government, you can walk away 

from your promises to the environment and at the same time 

introduce legislation where you say you want to introduce An 

Act respecting Hunting, Fishing and Trapping? 

 

Now additionally, when you introduce legislation — we‟ve had 

this discussion many times in this Chamber already — it‟s 

important that you consult with people. And in fact in many 

cases the Supreme Court of Canada demands that you have a 

duty to consult with First Nations and Métis people. And I 

would ask, because it seems absent in this case again, how 

much of their duty to consult have they carried out? Because it 

is no secret that the first people in Saskatchewan to hunt, fish, 

and trap were First Nations peoples. And so I think that while 

you have a legislated duty to consult, you certainly also have a 

moral duty to consult. Because when you take into account one, 

traditional territory, and two, traditional practices, I think that 

that speaks to the necessity to provide the duty to consult. 

 

And I would argue that that hasn‟t taken place in this case. If 

you look at who was invited to the legislature when they first 

introduced this Bill, it was the Wildlife Federation and it was 

the Trappers Association, but it wasn‟t First Nations and Métis 

groups and it wasn‟t peoples that represent those groups. And if 

you look strictly at their history of consultation on things like 

Bill 5 where you had the now Health minister say before the 

election that, you know, we don‟t need essential services, not in 

this case — and then without any consultation whatsoever, after 

the election it‟s introduced. It speaks to the character of a 

government when you introduce legislation that directly affects 

living people in Saskatchewan, real people in Saskatchewan, 

but you refuse to consult with them. 

 

The same is obviously true with educational assistants, as we 

found out very recently. There was zero consultation done with 

that group that‟s directly affected by up to — by doing some 

quick calculations — 80 per cent of their workforce being 

eliminated by some terrible policy brought forward by the 

Minister of Education. And when people find out about this 

plan to reduce EAs [educational assistant] by up to 80 per cent 

or more, the minister has the nerve to go to the Saskatchewan 

school boards and tell them, well you know, I know that 

education is important in Saskatchewan. And being that you‟re 

elected on the school boards, you know that education is 

important to Saskatchewan, but I have great difficulty selling 

that to my cabinet colleagues. 

 

To which I respond, wow. That‟s the Deputy Premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan and he‟s saying that his cabinet 

colleagues don‟t support education in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now how is it that the — by title — second most powerful 

person in that government would take away his own 

responsibility for the policy coming out of his own department, 

ministry and walk away from that responsibility and put it on 

the backs of everybody else‟s in cabinet, including the Premier, 

saying that, well I guess I value education in Saskatchewan, but 

the other folks in cabinet don‟t? 

 

And so I would question that approach. And I‟d be very upset if 

I was another cabinet member being sold out by the Deputy 

Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. But that‟s what‟s 

taken place in this case. And so they do that and they absolutely 

refuse to consult with anybody directly affected by these 

decisions. 

 

And so now, well now that the House Leader, the House Leader 

for the government asks, what‟s that got to do with this Bill? 

And obviously he hasn‟t been following because I‟ve talked 

specifically about how they refuse to consult with anybody on 

even the smallest legislation. 

 

You can‟t trust them on policy coming out of the Deputy 

Premier‟s ministry. And again, I can‟t help the House Leader 

for the government with his credibility problem. I can‟t help 

him. He asks what consultation and what talking to the people 

of Saskatchewan about a Bill has to do with a Bill. 



4066 Saskatchewan Hansard March 9, 2010 

And so maybe therein lies the problem — that you can explain 

it to them very simply and straightforwardly and they still don‟t 

understand it. And he wants to enter into debate about Bill No. 

117, An Act respecting Hunting, Fishing and Trapping. He 

wants to enter into the debate. And he can‟t understand why 

you should consult with the people of Saskatchewan when you 

introduce legislation that directly affects them. 

 

Now I know he‟s jealous that he isn‟t one of the people being 

blamed by the Deputy Premier as not caring about education. I 

know he‟s jealous about that. And I don‟t blame him. But he 

had his opportunity for three months to be a cabinet minister 

and he should be happy with that because I know he enjoyed it. 

And now he sits three rows back — you can barely see him — 

and he‟s chatting about, he wants to know what consultation has 

to do with the Bill. Well I‟ll continue to discuss Bill No. 117, 

An Act respecting Hunting, Fishing and Trapping. But I do 

have more to talk about when it comes to consultation because 

now I‟ve mentioned a couple of specific examples. 

 

But let‟s talk about Bill 80. Bill 80 directly affects a number of 

folks working in the province of Saskatchewan. It affects 

people who built this province. And when I say literally built 

this province, I mean it. They built this province stick by stick, 

brick by brick. They do the wiring. They do the steelmaking. 

They do everything to build the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so this government, without any consultation, decides that, 

well I think we should introduce legislation that helps to gut the 

industry, that ensures that many different negative things take 

place for the working people of Saskatchewan. And you‟ve got 

a Premier who says, before he‟s elected, on the radio, that we‟re 

going to go to war with working men and women in 

Saskatchewan. And so he does that. And they do it without 

consulting. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. The 

member is talking about everything except Bill 117. I would ask 

that you direct that member to direct his comments to the Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much. To respond to the point 

of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, several 

times I‟ve listened very careful to the member talk about and 

reflect on the fact that it‟s about consultation on legislation and 

how through the lack of consultation on various pieces of 

legislation, this is in fact indicating that they haven‟t done 

proper consultation on this Bill as well. So I think it‟s been very 

clearly ruled back to the legislation many times. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I know on adjourned debates we‟ve 

allowed a bit of leniency when we‟ve been talking about it, but 

I would remind the members to discuss the Bill that is before on 

the order paper that is up for discussion right now, which is Bill 

117, The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act. And that 

is the Bill that is on the floor being debated right now, and I 

would encourage the member to continue on that debate. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think that it‟s an 

absolute necessity that on any Bill, including Bill No. 117, An 

Act respecting Hunting, Fishing and Trapping, that you consult. 

I think it‟s important. And I think that it‟s not obvious to the 

members opposite that it‟s important. It‟s frustrating. And I 

think it frustrates many people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Another group that was frustrated by a lack of consultation in 

Saskatchewan just this week was people who support women 

who are in crisis in Saskatoon. There were a group of men and 

women who were reduced entirely by 75 per cent and they did 

it without consultation. So again a pattern of a complete lack of 

consultation as is seen in Bill No. 117. 

 

Now why it is that these men and women think it‟s appropriate 

to introduce a Bill like No. 117, An Act respecting Hunting, 

Fishing and Trapping, without consultation, is sad. But it‟s not 

surprising, as I‟ve demonstrated many different times when 

they haven‟t consulted. In fact they refused to consult with their 

own officials on many occasions. 

 

They refused to consult with ministry officials when it came to 

potash. In fact the only people they consulted with there were a 

few companies in Saskatchewan that produce potash, but they 

refused to have any consultation with their own departments, 

their own ministry where they could‟ve done it. They wouldn‟t 

have guessed that potash would go from $3 billion in revenue 

for the province, as the Energy and Resources minister 

believed, down to 2 billion as the Premier suggested and the 

Minister of Finance suggested, down to 100 million, now at 

negative $204 million. They refused to consult in that situation 

in the same way that they refused to consult on Bill No. 117, An 

Act respecting Hunting, Fishing and Trapping. 

 

They also refused to consult with an area of the province that‟s 

quite famous for having great hunting, fishing, and trapping. 

That‟s the town of Big River. They didn‟t consult with Big 

River on their saw mill. Well that‟s not entirely true. The 

Minister for Energy and Resources consulted there and told 

them that if the saw mill was purchased by somebody, that they 

have an allocation. He did say that. He did say that, and then he 

backed away from it because now they‟ve got no allocation. 

And on one other occasion they consulted there. In fact the 

Premier went there and told them that they would have an 

allocation of 400 000 cubic metres. And then ministry officials 

said after that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well that‟s not 

true. In fact, no decisions have been made on the allocation. 

And so that‟s another part of the province where you have to 

balance the environment, forestry with hunting, fishing, and 

trapping because it‟s important. 

 

Now it‟s unfortunate that this government has chosen to walk 

away from its responsibility with respect to the environment on 

another front because, as I detailed before, you can‟t have 

hunting, fishing, and trapping in Saskatchewan without pristine 

lakes and lands that support the wildlife that you need in order 

to do those activities. And so when you walk away from your 

responsibility as a government, you walk away from the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Any modern economy that‟s doing well in Saskatchewan or 

doing well in this world does well because it has three pillars. 

And we‟ve heard this from the Leader of the Opposition many 

times. One of them is strong businesses because you need 



March 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4067 

business, the economic driver of a jurisdiction. You also need 

strong unions because you have to ensure that workers are able 

to earn a decent wage to be protected and to work in a safe 

environment. 

 

And you also need strong government and this is where they 

fall down. This is where they fall down because instead of 

providing leadership on an environment file, they walk away 

from that responsibility. And they do it in various ways. They 

do it, as I‟d said, because they don‟t care about monitoring. In 

fact, they‟re allowing the Government of Alberta to reduce 

monitoring of oil sands. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — We‟re discussing Bill 117, The 

Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act. And I know the 

member may mention the name every five minutes, but that 

doesn‟t really talk about debating the Bill. I would ask the 

member to discuss the Bill that is on the floor right now in front 

of the legislature. 

 

Mr. Furber: — I think it‟s very clear, and I‟ve made it clear on 

several occasions during this speech that you have to have a 

clean and good environment in order to respect properly 

hunting, fishing, and trapping in Saskatchewan. I think I‟ve 

detailed that. And if you want to have any integrity at all when 

you introduce Bill No. 117, An Act Respecting Hunting, Fishing 

and Trapping, you have to have the proper environment in 

which to do it. The two are absolutely interconnected and 

directly linked. And so I believe that you cannot walk away 

from your responsibility with respect to the environment and 

introduce this legislation at the same time — absolutely not. 

 

Now one way that they‟d walked away from that responsibility 

that directly affects hunting, fishing, and trapping in 

Saskatchewan is by moving away from their responsibility to do 

assessments with respect to the environment, assessments that 

are done in industry. And they‟re going to walk away from their 

responsibility as a government in order to have corporations 

fulfill that role. And so I don‟t think that you can have a healthy 

environment for hunting, fishing, and trapping in Saskatchewan 

if you walk away from that responsibility. 

 

Now one good and interesting thing about this legislation is that 

the date that they‟ve chosen, November 15th each year, and I‟ll 

quote from the Bill, “November 15 in each year is designated as 

„Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Day‟ in 

Saskatchewan.” Well I think November 15th is a great day to 

choose. Just happens to be my nephew‟s birthday, and so I 

know he‟ll be extremely pleased, once this Bill is passed, to 

celebrate his birthday and to share it with the tremendous 

heritage we that have in Saskatchewan respecting hunting, 

fishing, and trapping. 

 

And so if you look at another way in which hunting, fishing, 

and trapping is directly affected, it‟s through the forested lands 

in the North. Many, many traplines exist on those lands, 

traditional territory for First Nations, Métis peoples where they 

participate in the same industry that their forefathers have 

participated in for centuries. 

 

And so when you have a government who while in opposition 

claims that there‟s a “let-it-burn” policy and when they get into 

government they say that they‟re going to change that policy 

. . . When they‟re in opposition and that there‟s no possible way 

that the forest should renew itself, and then when they‟re 

elected they walk directly away from this policy, or from this 

supposed change in policy and continue absolutely . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time being 5 o‟clock, this House 

now stands in recess until 7 p.m. later tonight. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4037 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4037 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4037 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4037 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4037 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4037 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Oral Presentation of Petitions 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4038 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4038 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4038 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4038 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4038 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4039 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4039 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4039 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4039 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4039 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4039 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4040 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4040 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Canadian Television Network Saskatoon Citizen of the Year 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4040 

 Canada’s Olympic Hockey Teams 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4040 

 Saskatchewan Olympians 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4041 

 Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4041 

 Environmental Activist Awards 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4041 

 Canadian Navy Centennial 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4042 

 Comments about Saskatchewan Party 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4042 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Rural Doctor Recruitment 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4042 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4042 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4043 

 SaskPower Rates 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4044 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4044 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4045 

 Chiropractic Services 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4045 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4045 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 127 — The Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4047 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4048 

 Bill No. 128 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Labour Mobility) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4051 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4051 

 Bill No. 124 — The Legal Profession Amendment Act, 2009 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4054 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4054 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 100 — The Doukhobors of Canada C.C.U.B. Trust Fund Amendment Act, 2009 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4055 

 Bill No. 103 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4056 

 Bill No. 117 — The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4064 

  D’Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 4066 

  Yates (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................. 4066 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 




