




















































Hansard: April 28, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 52A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 28, 2010, 8 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5133 

 April 28, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 08:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 136 — The Technical Safety Authority 

of Saskatchewan Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of my remarks today I will move the second 

reading of Bill No. 136, The Technical Safety Authority of 

Saskatchewan Act, 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 136 proposes legislation to establish the 

Technical Safety Authority of Saskatchewan. This new 

authority will provide regulatory enforcement and advisory 

services related to safety standards for boilers, pressure vessels, 

elevators, and amusement rides. Such services are now 

overseen by the Ministry of Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing‟s licensing and inspections branch. The authority will 

also administer the associated safety statutes related to this 

equipment. 

 

For the most part, the public is unaware that these services are 

being provided in the first place, yet there are thousands of such 

devices in use across the province every day. Here‟s the 

breakdown. Every year in Saskatchewan approximately 32,400 

boilers and pressure vessels are in operation, 3,100 elevators 

carry passengers and freight, and 240 amusement park rides 

thrill fairgoers. 

 

During the previous year, for an example, licensing inspections 

inspected nearly 5,000 boilers, around 4,000 pressure vessels, 

more than 2,000 elevators, almost 300 amusement park rides, 

and around 250 refrigeration plants. If only one of these devices 

should fail or if a boiler or pressure vessel explodes, property 

and lives are put in jeopardy. We need to ensure this does not 

happen, which is why ensuring this equipment meets rigorous 

safety standards is vital. 

 

Currently periodic inspection of in-service pressure equipment, 

elevators, and amusement rides are prescribed under The Boiler 

and Pressure Vessel Act, 1999, The Passenger and Freight 

Elevator Act, and The Amusement Ride Safety Act. 

 

Boilers and pressure vessels are inspected at frequencies of 

one-, two-, or five-year intervals depending on the assessed 

degree of potential risk. Inspections ensure that installed safety 

devices continue to provide for safe operation and to ensure that 

the structural components are sound. 

 

In addition to inspections of installed devices, inspections are 

conducted on new equipment under construction at fabrication 

shops and during installation at site locations. Owners of 

pressure equipment who follow an approved quality 

management program can now perform their own periodic 

inspections of their equipment. 

 

Elevators are inspected at frequencies of 12 to 18 months 

depending on their assigned risk. The risk is based on 

maintenance by licensed contractors. The types of elevating 

devices in operation in Saskatchewan include passenger 

elevators, freight elevators, dumb waiters, lifts for disabled 

persons, escalators, man lifts, and chairlift, T-bars, and rope 

tows. 

 

Amusement rides are inspected each year or when they‟re being 

set up at fairs or exhibitions across the province. The 

amusement ride sector operation in Saskatchewan is 

predominantly itinerant, with out-of-province equipment 

operating on several national carnival show circuits. Each 

amusement ride is inspected at the first set-up location in the 

province to ensure that equipment safety and operational 

standards are met. 

 

If any of this equipment that I spoke of — boilers, pressure 

vessels, elevators, or amusement park rides — is found 

deficient after an inspection, a corrections order is given to the 

owner or operator. 

 

Why does this government require that this Bill be passed into 

legislation during this session? There are two vital reasons, Mr. 

Speaker. We know there is a backlog, a backlog of inspections 

for boilers, pressure vessels, amusement rides, and elevators. 

And industry has raised concerns that the timeliness issue could 

lead to a significant public safety issue. The sooner we are able 

to move forward with this legislation, the sooner we can make 

progress on our backlog. 

 

Second, because this function that currently falls under CPSP‟s 

[Corrections, Public Safety and Policing] mandate will move to 

an authority that collects its operating revenues from its 

stakeholders, it is necessary to align revenues with expenditures 

appropriately for the business year. Ultimately, funding out of 

the General Revenue Fund will only be provided until July the 

1st, 2010. 

 

Over the course of the summer, ministry officials consulted 

with industry representatives on their issues with how licensing 

and inspection services are now structured and on how they 

could suggest improvements to timeliness and quality control. 

We were unequivocally told that a stand-alone organization was 

the course to take. Government is just not structured in a way 

that is sufficiently flexible and responsive to industry‟s needs. 

This is particularly the case when we look at the issue of 

recruitment and retention of technical experts. In our 

deliberations over creating an authority, we also took into 

account that similar organizations undertaking similar work 

have been operating successfully in British Columbia, Alberta, 

and Ontario. 

 

To that end, Mr. Speaker, Bill 136 proposes the authority be 

structured as a delegated, administrative organization of 

government. Under such a model, the authority may charge fees 

and retain revenues, but its policy, legislation, and regulations 

will be retained by government. And, Mr. Speaker, I wish to 



5134 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

repeat that — that its policy, legislation, and regulations will be 

retained by government, specifically Corrections, Public Safety 

and Policing, to ensure continued maintenance of public safety 

and accountability. 

 

Through the proposed legislation, the authority will have the 

power to set its own fees. These fees are applied to owners and 

users of regulated equipment and apply to those who directly 

benefit from the use of the equipment and technologies 

regulated. Additionally the legislative proposal empowers the 

authority to enter into agreements, set and charge the amount of 

fees for its services, purchase property, accept monies 

appropriated by the legislature, and establish bylaws. The 

authority will also be able to provide services to neighbouring 

provinces if that is deemed necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a negotiated safety standard agreement is meant to 

govern the relationship between CPSP and the authority. The 

legislative proposal prescribes what must be included in the 

agreement and includes such requirements as the expected 

safety outcomes, performance objectives of the authority, 

requirements for and access to records, requirements for 

insurance, and provisions for settlement of disputes. 

 

In addition the proposed technical safety authority legislation 

sets out the governance structure for the organization. It allows 

for governance by a board of between five and 10 members. 

Two are proposed to be appointed by the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council and the remainder is proposed to be appointed by the 

board. The Bill allows for the board to establish policies and 

procedures related to how it will conduct its affairs and carry 

out its responsibilities. It also establishes parameters for 

creating a code of conduct, setting up an audit committee to 

oversee the authority‟s finances, and directs the board to 

prepare and make public availability a business plan. 

 

It is proposed that the business plan be presented to the CPSP 

minister and will be tabled in the legislature. Proposed 

legislation will require the board to have bylaws that set out the 

requirements regarding a nomination process for making board 

appointments, establishing reimbursement and remuneration for 

board members, and establishing the fees to be charged for 

services. 

 

The board will be required to publish these bylaws so that they 

are publicly available to ensure transparency and accountability. 

They will also be provided to the CPSP minister. Mr. Speaker, I 

should also point out that there will be consequential 

amendments to the associated safety statutes — The Boiler and 

Pressure Vessel Act, 1999, The Amusement Ride Safety Act and 

The Passenger and Freight Elevator Act — which address their 

delegation to authority. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to note that the employees of 

CPSP‟s licensing and inspections branch will be transferred to 

the new authority, meaning there will be no job loss as a result 

of this transfer. And I wish to repeat that for all to hear. There 

will be no job loss as a result of this transfer. 

 

I‟m confident the legislative proposal that I have before you 

today represents the fulfillment of multiple commitments by 

this government. It is the assurance that public safety risks are 

acknowledged, monitored, and reduced. It is the assurance that 

industry will receive more effective and timelier service. And it 

is the assurance that industry continues to be a driving force in 

the growth of our province. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that 

The Technical Safety Authority of Saskatchewan Act, 2010 be 

read a second time. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing that 

Bill No. 136, The Technical Safety Authority of Saskatchewan 

Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s a 

pleasure to have an opportunity this morning to rise and add my 

comments to the tabling of the technical safety authority of 

Saskatchewan respecting the administration of safety statutes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest to the minister‟s comments. 

And I think the first thing that jumped out at me when we talk 

about a delegated administrative organization, the Technical 

Safety Authority of Saskatchewan, that will have the ability to 

administer the safety programs for boilers, pressure vessels, 

amusement rides, and elevators, the minister made the comment 

that he doesn‟t think that the citizens of the province pay 

attention to, or even know that these are actually even carried 

out across the province, or probably not aware of the type of 

schedule that‟s maintained. 

 

But I have to say, Mr. Speaker, I was on an elevator the other 

day, and it still carried the inspection certificate with the 

signature of the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] on it. And I 

got a little nervous, Mr. Speaker, because I was a little 

concerned that he had done the inspection, Mr. Speaker, and 

signed it off. Being he hasn‟t been a minister for a while either 

so, Mr. Speaker, we might have to ask some questions about 

how often inspections are done. 

 

But seriously, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of concerns. 

And while the legislation lays out how the authority will be 

structured, what the purpose of the authority is, Mr. Speaker, 

the member also pointed to a number of more specific issues 

that do raise a number of questions: that the authority will have 

the ability to do work outside of Saskatchewan; they will 

establish the rate of remuneration and the rate of reimbursement 

for expenses for the board members. It‟s kind of traditional how 

these arm‟s-length boards are laid out and what the transition 

will be over the next number of months. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what it gets down to is, we really have to ask 

why, why there‟s a feel that public safety should be the 

responsibility of an organization that‟s arm‟s length from the 

Government of Saskatchewan. And is that not a role of the 

Government of Saskatchewan? One of the main roles of the 

Government of Saskatchewan is to make sure that public safety 

is maintained and to be able to efficiently provide the services 

that are needed across the province so that citizens can not 

worry about, they don‟t have to worry about whether 

inspections are being done because they know that the 

Government of Saskatchewan is being diligent in their 

obligations and their responsibilities. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while we may not always know the amount of 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5135 

inspections that are done, people of Saskatchewan do feel 

secure knowing that the government is responsible and that the 

government is following through on their obligations and 

making sure that these inspections are done on a regular basis. 

 

[08:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have to comment on . . . The minister made the 

point that through this delegated administrative organization, 

that it really gets down to a public safety issue. Because he 

stated the fact that if you get behind on inspections to pressure 

vessels, how long do you let them go? Well I guess that‟s a 

question, Mr. Speaker. How long has the minister let them go? 

And has he been diligent in carrying out his responsibilities 

with the authority that he has as a minister? And why, Mr. 

Speaker, would an arm‟s-length organization be able to deal 

with the problems any better than what the minister has not 

been able to deal with them? 

 

And I don‟t know whether it‟s maintaining officials that have 

the ability to carry out the inspections. Mr. Speaker, there are 

many tools at the use of the government where they can — 

whether it is hiring more staff or more inspectors — be able to 

keep up with the inspections and get rid of the backlog that 

obviously the minister . . . It sounds like there is a backlog on 

the inspection side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many tools, market adjustments for areas 

where employees are needed but difficult to recruit and retain 

by the government. So I wonder how much effort the 

government has actually put into the whole issue of building up 

the workforce of inspectors and being able to do away with the 

backlog. Is this a problem that the government has created? And 

is it one that they‟ve actually put some effort into fixing? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a number of questions that we will 

need to ask. And the minister also commented that they needed 

an arm‟s-length board and to move inspections out to the 

private sector, because government is not flexible enough and 

not able to meet the needs of industry. 

 

But I would say to the minister, please go talk to the member 

responsible for Energy because the oil and gas sector, the 

Government of Saskatchewan, whether it‟s land leases and the 

various requirements that are needed for development in that 

sector, the department and the unit within the Government of 

Saskatchewan has a well-earned reputation for being very 

flexible, very responsive to the needs of the industry, and being 

much quicker at providing what the industry needs over some 

of our neighbours, Alberta for example. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you have discussions with people in the 

industry, they will say that it‟s much better to deal with the 

Government of Saskatchewan and the department here because 

they are very receptive, they are very flexible, and they‟re very 

receptive to the needs of the industry. 

 

So maybe, Mr. Speaker, the minister just hasn‟t looked far 

enough and looked for some solutions. He‟s just gone with an 

ideology that feels that the private sector is more of . . . will be 

able to do a better job. I would say, Mr. Speaker, there are many 

questions that the government is shucking some its 

responsibility off to the private sector and that he maybe should 

have done a little more work and had a look at what other 

options are open to him. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it may take a number of issues off the 

minister‟s plate, but again I would say, maybe step back, have a 

look at what options are open to you, what other solutions are in 

place before you contract out and privatize the inspection 

service that the people of Saskatchewan rely on. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I do have to say one of the things when we 

first had some discussions and we heard that this Bill was 

coming forward, seeing it tabled in the House, one of the first 

things that we thought of and that came to mind was when the 

federal government was moving meat inspections, CFIA 

[Canadian Food Inspection Agency] was moving to a private 

system of self-regulating within the industry. The Bill was 

tabled in parliament in Ottawa. It was beginning to move 

through. These discussions had been out there and concerns had 

been out there by many citizens, and we ended up with a — I 

guess by chance, Mr. Speaker, it happening at that time — a 

breakout of listeriosis. The Bill was quickly pulled off of the 

table. We haven‟t heard anything about it since being put 

forward again by the government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is clearly a case where the responsibility 

for public safety rests with the Government of Saskatchewan, 

and rests more specifically with the minister. But, Mr. Speaker, 

inspections, and I would say the citizens of this province have 

that expectation that the government is responsible for these 

areas. It‟s their jurisdiction and it is a responsibility of theirs. 

 

So to move it to an arm‟s-length organization and remove that 

responsibility because in the legislation, Mr. Speaker, it quite 

often refers to it not being a responsibility of the Crown, or the 

Crown not being liable, and clearly lays out that they have no 

responsibility. They maintain the legislation, maintain the 

statutes, but have no responsibility for them being carried out. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the listeriosis affair that happened federally 

caused a great deal of concern, caused a great deal of effects to 

the health of many people across the province, was clearly a 

message to the government, the federal government, that they 

needed to step up and take responsibility for their obligations 

and not move it out to the private sector. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, while there‟s a number of questions, there‟s a 

number of my colleagues that would also be concerned with 

this piece of legislation and also for the people that are 

involved. And I would say we need to look at having 

discussions with some of the people involved to get a more 

first-hand understanding of what this will mean. So at this time, 

Mr. Speaker, I would adjourn debate on the Technical Safety 

Authority of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 136. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 



5136 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

Bill No. 137 — The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker at the end of my remarks today, I will move second 

reading of Bill No. 137, The Safer Communities and 

Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 137 proposes amendments to the existing 

safer communities and neighbourhoods Act to strengthen the 

legislation‟s provisions concerning wearing and/or displaying 

gang colours in permanent establishments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members are no doubt aware of the situation 

involving charges against two motorcycle clubs for wearing 

gang colours in a permitted establishment. This circumstance is 

at the heart of the reason for the Bill proposing amendments to 

the legislation. And I will talk about those in more detail in a 

minute. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first I‟d like to provide some background to The 

Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Act and how we got 

where we are today. The Act was put into force in 2004 to 

provide a legal structure for holding building and property 

owners accountable for specific illegal activities that regularly 

take place on or near their properties. 

 

These activities include producing, selling, or using illegal 

drugs; prostitution; gang and organized crime activities; child 

sexual abuse; solvent abuse; or the unlawful sale and 

consumption of alcohol. Residential and commercial properties 

that are known to be housing these kinds of activities are 

targeted. Under the safer communities and neighbourhoods, or 

SCAN legislation, these properties can be shut down by the 

province. The Act empowers the SCAN director, who‟s an 

official of the Ministry of Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing, to apply to the court for a community safety order to 

shut down the property and have tenants evicted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I should take a minute to point out that the SCAN 

program has been well used by Saskatchewan citizens looking 

to rid their neighbourhoods of criminal activities. From January 

2005 when SCAN started until February of this year, it has 

received 2,732 complaints. Most of these, 2,079, were reported 

as drugs, 184 as prostitution, 167 as gang organized crime, and 

93 as grow ops. The remaining 203 complaints were within 

other specified activities such as alcohol and sniff houses, and 

six cases fell under The Seizure of Criminal Property Act. 

Related to enforcement action, SCAN has been involved in 393 

evictions and 16 successful community safety order 

applications. 

 

Our current intelligence tells us that there are around 21 

identified street gangs operating in Saskatchewan. Each has its 

own set of garb or insignias, known as colours, to identify 

members. We also know that wearing colours in the proximity 

of another gang often encourages violent encounters between 

the two. These kinds of situations present safety risks to 

ordinary, law-abiding citizens and just won‟t be tolerated. 

 

Let me go back to my chronology of the evolution of the Act 

with the notion of gang colours in mind. On April the 19th, 

2007, The Summary Offences Procedure Act was amended to 

allow for issuing a summary offence ticket information for an 

offence under section 60.1(2) of the SCAN Act. This section 

makes it an offence to wear gang colours in any permitted 

premises. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, after the amendment came 

into effect, members of the Hells Angels Regina and Saskatoon 

chapters and the Saskatoon chapter of the Freewheelers were 

charged with separate offences under this section. The charge 

against the Regina Hells Angel member was subsequently 

stayed. The charges against the Saskatoon Hells Angel and the 

Freewheelers member that were set for trial in September 2008 

were adjourned pending constitutional arguments by the Crown 

and defence representatives. 

 

As of October 31st, 2008, five charges had been laid under 

section 60.1(2) of the SCAN Act, all related to members of the 

motorcycle gang. Again all charges were adjourned until June 

2009 based on constitutional arguments. These arguments were 

heard in June 2009, and on December 17th, 2009, Judge Lavoie 

released his ruling against the Crown on the constitutional 

challenge. Mr. Speaker, according to Judge Lavoie, the Hells 

Angel‟s right to freedom of expression was affected negatively, 

and this concern outweighed any public safety concerns put 

forward by the Crown. We are confident we can address these 

issues through amendments to the Act. 

 

We were made aware that the legislation as it exists today 

probably wouldn‟t withstand a constitutional challenge because 

it is too broad. Thus, Mr. Speaker, the amendments to 60.1 

included in Bill 137 may appear simple but they are certainly 

far-reaching. Essentially they expand on the definition of gang 

colours and narrowing the scope of the meaning of permitted 

premises. We also have better information on gangs and their 

symbols and paraphernalia, so for an example, the legislation 

adds tattoos in description of gang colours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was also determined that the existing legislation 

called for penalties that were too harsh, possibly hindering 

prosecution for the offence. So the amendments propose to 

lower the amount of fines and to remove the option of a prison 

sentence for the first offence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that is important to this government 

to send a clear message to organized crime and gang members 

that we will not tolerate their activities in this province. That is 

why, under the legislative amendments, the prison sentence for 

a second offence still stands. However, on the advice of Justice, 

the fine has been lowered for the second offence as it has for the 

first. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Bill proposes to detail the names of 

groups considered as gangs in the regulations accompanying the 

Act. As with the other amendments I mentioned, this will help 

clarify the definition of a gang and gang colours for the 

purposes of enforcing the legislation. The amendments will also 

narrow down the type of licensed premises to which this 

offence applies, to address the court‟s concern that the reach of 

this section was too broad. 

 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5137 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 137‟s proposed amendments to The Safer 

Communities and Neighbourhoods Act will help ensure the 

clarity required to withstand a constitutional challenge. The 

intent is to ensure that any group intent on unlawful activity 

cannot advertise their proclivities in permitted premises. This 

kind of activity disrupts the ability of law-abiding patrons to 

enjoy their social occasion and creates a risk to public safety. 

The SCAN Act is in place to ensure our communities and 

neighbourhoods are places that are safe for everyone. A small 

handful of people intent on a criminal lifestyle should not take 

our peace of mind away from us. 

 

[08:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government will continue to use measures like 

the Act to deter criminal activity in this province. We have 

committed to the safety and security of Saskatchewan citizens, 

and we are determined to keep that promise. Therefore, Mr. 

Speaker, I move The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods 

Amendment Act, 2010 be read a second time. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing has moved that Bill No. 137, The 

Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2010 

be now read the second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 

pleasure — I know I often say that; members often say that — 

but indeed a pleasure to rise to speak on this Bill today. 

Listening to the member from Wood River, the Minister for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing even refer to the 

Charter of Rights and constitutional questions, Mr. Speaker, 

alone was worth the price of admission. 

 

But secondly . . . And I commend the minister for his history of 

this legislation. In fact legislation of this type, an Act of this 

type was first implemented in New Democratic Party Manitoba, 

Mr. Speaker, without a lot of fanfare, I think. But it was a 

successful program and when I became minister of Justice, 

within weeks I had had some conversations with the minister of 

Justice in Manitoba, and I had met with the officials responsible 

for implementing and conducting the SCAN program in that 

province. 

 

And very soon in Saskatchewan we introduced legislation, 

passed legislation, and it has had the effect that the minister 

described in making many, many neighbourhoods safe. It did 

that almost immediately. It has done that over the years. I am 

pleased to hear the minister‟s report that the success of the 

program is ongoing. And as a matter of fact, Saskatchewan, and 

I personally, became quite a proselytizer for safer communities 

and neighbourhoods programs. 

 

And I believe that similar legislation and similar programs have 

been adopted across the country now, following arguably 

Manitoba‟s lead, but I believe Saskatchewan‟s lead because 

Saskatchewan aggressively adopted the program. And at 

numerous federal-provincial-territorial meetings I promoted the 

program as an appropriate provincial response to issues of 

crime, particularly organized crime, particularly crime around 

drug sales and the improper sale of sex in brothels and 

particularly in residential neighbourhoods. And the program I 

think has shown its effect across the province and its effect 

across the country where adopted. 

 

At the beginning, Mr. Speaker, when the program was begun, 

we started in the cities. And a new program takes new money. 

So it was always an argument of course, Mr. Speaker, to get 

new spending in any department, but the government was 

committed to the program. But I remember attending 

conferences, SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association] and SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities], Mr. Speaker, and having municipal leaders ask, 

when can we provide more inspectors? When can we have a 

greater effect in their communities? When can we expand this 

program across the province? And we did as quickly as we 

could, Mr. Speaker, and I think the effects have been 

significant. 

 

And every year that I was minister of Justice, the crime rate in 

the province of Saskatchewan dropped, and I believe it has 

continued to drop every year since, Mr. Speaker. And I can‟t 

prove it and the current minister responsible for the legislation 

can‟t prove it, but I believe that this legislation is a significant 

contribution to that trend within our province, Mr. Speaker, 

because there weren‟t any other trends, demographic or 

otherwise, that suggested that might be the case. But legislation 

like this, brought in by the previous government, the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] government, and supported by this 

government, I think contributed to that encouraging trend 

within the province which of course still has to be encouraged, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now this legislation, this Bill deals with later amendments to 

the safer communities and neighbourhoods legislation and 

specifically the issue of, as the minister put it, gang colours in 

licensed premises. And part of the reason for this legislation is 

the correlation between alcohol consumption and crimes of 

violence, Mr. Speaker, which I don‟t think will surprise 

anybody. That‟s part of the reason. So you are more likely to 

have a crime of violence where alcohol is being consumed and 

being abused than where it is not, Mr. Speaker. That‟s, I think, 

an empirically proven fact. 

 

And alcohol is consumed in permitted premises. It‟s consumed 

in other places, Mr. Speaker, but there was no question in the 

mind of the government of which I was a member, of the NDP 

government of which I was a member, that the province had the 

jurisdiction to make this type of legislation apply to licensed 

premises, Mr. Speaker, where we might not have had the 

jurisdiction to make it apply in other places. And I believe that 

that was, that point was upheld by Judge Lavoie in his judgment 

which the minister referred to. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, it‟s one thing for an organization, 

whether it‟s a criminal organization or not, to dominate their 

own private clubhouse and to wear their own colours and to feel 

comfortable amongst themselves and perhaps for members of 

the public, who are not invited to private clubhouses, to feel 

comfortable, Mr. Speaker. It‟s another thing for an 

organization, particularly, arguably, a criminal organization or a 

gang, to take over a public facility to which the public is 

entitled to come and which the public needs to feel comfortable 

in. And the concern about public intimidation, as subjective as 

it is — and I think Judge Lavoie struggled with that to a certain 



5138 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

extent — as subjective as that is, is an important concern. 

 

The public should be able to go to any licensed premises they 

want to go to in the province of Saskatchewan and not feel 

vaguely under threat because it looks like it is the clubhouse or 

partly the clubhouse of a gang, Mr. Speaker. And it is difficult 

to give evidence into court of that type of intimidation or that 

type of concern or that type of effect on a business of a licensed 

premises, Mr. Speaker. But I think it is easy to understand that 

such intimidation, such concerns might exist, Mr. Speaker, and 

they should not be easily dismissed. 

 

Now this circumstance where the legislature passed legislation, 

The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act 

under the NDP government, which arguably was somewhat 

broad and expansive and a court has decided that it was too 

broad and perhaps too vague and the legislature is returning to 

protect its intent of its legislation by narrowing — I trust, I hope 

no more than necessary — the scope of the legislation, this is a 

rare circumstance of what probably should take place more in 

this country and what is called a dialogue between legislatures 

and the courts. 

 

The legislature, when the original legislation was passed, was 

not timid, Mr. Speaker. The legislature had all the concerns that 

the minister expressed today about the intolerance of organized 

criminal activity in the province of Saskatchewan, and the 

legislature wanted to use all powers available to it without 

being sure of what the extent of its powers might be, but not 

show unnecessary restraint pre a judgment of the court as to 

what those powers might be. 

 

Now a court, Provincial Court, has said that these powers 

should be narrowed and the scope of the legislation should be 

narrowed, although the court recognizes the intent and its value, 

Mr. Speaker. And the legislature is responding in what I called 

today a dialogue. 

 

My first reaction upon hearing that Provincial Court had read 

down, overruled the legislation of this legislature in respect to 

gang colours in licensed premises was that the government had 

responded badly. I believed that — my first reaction was, Mr. 

Speaker — that the government should appeal this judgment of 

Judge Lavoie and see if appellate courts had the same restrictive 

view as to what the legislature could do in these circumstances. 

 

Upon consideration I believe the government is moving in the 

right direction. I have read Judge Lavoie‟s judgment which I 

hadn‟t did when I first reacted. I‟m not entirely persuaded. I 

believe he could have upheld the legislation in its entirety. I 

think he overemphasized the concern about deleterious effects 

of not allowing members of organizations to wear what are 

known as gang colours, and I think he underestimated the 

benefits of avoiding the intimidation effect in licensed premises 

that I previously discussed. 

 

Nonetheless Judge Lavoie has done his job. He has interpreted 

legislation in light of the constitution of the country. And 

certainly it‟s arguable, it is certainly understandable for the 

government to believe that the judgment — well written, well 

reasoned even if we as legislators don‟t necessarily agree with it 

— would be upheld on appeal, and that the wisest course of 

action is to do our very best as a legislature to save the intent, 

purpose, the overall effect of the Act to the extent that we can 

while in a dialogue with the court addressing the concerns that 

have been raised in respect to freedom of expression. 

 

I won‟t go through the judgment in any kind of detail. I think 

that might be more appropriate in committee when we have 

access to the constitutional lawyers employed by the 

government and perhaps even one or two of the Crown counsel 

that argued in defence of the Bill at the Provincial Court. And 

we will, I think, permit it to go to committee quickly for a 

couple of reasons. 

 

First of all, I think that‟s the best place to have that discussion. 

And secondly, I and my colleagues, as the originators of the 

original legislation, believe in its importance, do not want there 

to be a vacuum in this area, and wish to proceed as quickly as 

possible, and, as a matter of fact, wish the government had 

brought forward their Bill earlier than they have. But here it is, 

and we have no desire to impede it any further. 

 

I will note one small matter for the members of Executive 

Council in the room, and that is — and this is not too 

uncommon — Judge Lavoie‟s quotation from my second 

reading speech as to the intent of the legislature in enacting the 

original legislation, The Safer Communities and 

Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2005. It is not unusual in 

circumstances like this — particularly when constitutional 

questions arise and there is some potential concern about the 

intent of the legislature because counsel for one side or the 

other is making the argument that the legislation is vague — for 

the courts to go to the second reading speech of the minister. 

 

And on occasion, members of the government I know will go a 

little off script on their second reading speeches. And I‟ve never 

seen an opposition speech in debate of a Bill be used for that 

purpose, but I have seen these speeches of ministers — and in 

this case, me, Mr. Speaker — used for that purpose in court. 

And it‟s just a little warning to the ministers opposite that they 

may not want to go off script on their second reading speeches 

because what they say will be taken to be legislative intent if 

the Bill is actually passed and enacted. 

 

[08:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the government and the opposition is 

on common ground. We have an initiative of the former 

government that has shown its value that the current 

government wishes to continue with, that may need to be 

modified. I hope that the courts will appreciate how strongly 

this legislature feels on these issues, Mr. Speaker, and that we 

strive to strike a balance with the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms but that we want to accomplish the ends that I spoke 

to in my second reading speech on the original legislation and 

that the minister spoke to in his second reading speech today, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And for the purposes of accomplishing the will of, I think the 

unanimous will of the legislature, Mr. Speaker, I will close my 

remarks and we will allow this matter to go to committee and 

hopefully to see the Act passed and proclaimed in the 

immediate future. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5139 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

put forward by the Minister Responsible for Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing that Bill No. 137, The Safer Communities 

and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2010 be now read the 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 137, The Safer 

Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2010 be 

referred to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the committee 

responsible for intergovernmental affairs and justice. 

 

Bill No. 143 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 

to move second reading of The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 

2010. Mr. Speaker, the amendments being proposed by The 

Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2010 can be categorized under 

three main areas. 

 

First, the amendments increase the tobacco tax rates effective 

March 25th, 2010 as announced in the March 24th, 2010 

budget, and modify the tax calculation for cigars. Second, the 

amendments establish the First Nations tobacco tax refund 

program in legislation. This includes defining new terms, 

providing new tobacco markings, stronger enforcement 

measures, additional offences and penalties, and 

regulation-making provisions for weekly tax-free purchase 

limits, tobacco markings, and reporting requirements. And 

thirdly the amendments introduce new provisions that could be 

described as administrative and housekeeping in nature. 

 

These combined changes, Mr. Speaker, are expected to generate 

about $35.7 million in additional tobacco tax revenue in the 

current fiscal year. A more detailed description of each of these 

three areas, Mr. Speaker, is as follows. 

 

First, increase tobacco tax rates. The tax rate on cigarettes and 

grams of tobacco increases by 2.7 cents per cigarette and per 

gram to 21 cents per cigarette, per gram effective March 25, 

2010. The tax rates on cigars increases from 95 per cent of the 

taxable price to 100 per cent of the taxable price. The 

calculation of the taxable price of a cigar is being modified to 

address a competitive issue raised by Canadian cigar 

manufacturers and to make it consistent with the tax calculation 

methods implemented by other provinces in recent years. 

Second, First Nation tobacco tax refund program. Mr. Speaker, 

new definitions are added in the legislation to establish the 

refund program for tobacco purchase tax-free on-reserve by 

status Indians. The definitions include black stock, which is 

tobacco marketed in accordance with the federal Excise Act 

2001 and sold tax-free to status Indians on the reserve by 

on-reserve retailers and by duty-free shops to international 

travellers. Exempt consumer is a person registered as a status 

Indian under the Indian Act, Indian and Indian band as defined 

under the Indian Act. 

 

Section 11 of the Act, Mr. Speaker, is revised to address the 

markings of tobacco and the rules, prohibitions, and offences 

around selling, storing, transporting, and possessing black stock 

tobacco. Also provision is made to establish in regulations the 

one-carton limit of tax-free black stock tobacco with provision 

for over-limit purchases for ceremonial and cultural uses for 

status Indian purchases made on-reserve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, new sections 18.1 to 18.6 are added to establish 

administrative penalty provisions that allow for giving notice 

with 30 days to appeal a penalty assessment of triple the amount 

of tax, in addition to the tax owing, for contravening the Act in 

certain circumstances. Also if a person fails to submit a return 

required by the Act, a penalty in the amount of $25 for each day 

of default to a maximum of $1,000 may be assessed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, section 25 of the Act is amended to provide 

enforcement officers with the authority to seize unmarked 

tobacco, including black stock tobacco, in various situations 

and circumstances where the Act is contravened. 

 

Section 34 of the Act, Mr. Speaker, is amended to provide 

several new regulation-making provisions for the black stock 

tobacco marking program, purchase and possession limits for 

tax-free black stock tobacco, registration of retailers, exempt 

consumers, over-limit purchases, i.e., for ceremonial and 

cultural purposes, and reporting requirements for licensed 

importers, licensed manufacturers, and exempt sale retailers. 

 

The third area of administrative and housekeeping provisions. 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, certain administrative and housekeeping 

changes are being made, including: provision allowing for the 

possibility of a tobacco manufacturer starting up in 

Saskatchewan; provision to enter into an agreement with the 

federal government to collect the tax on tobacco shipped from 

out of the country through the postal courier system; prohibiting 

refunds from being assigned or transferred and allowing for 

set-offs against refunds where taxes collected by the revenue 

division are owing; and adding a provision stating that where 

there is a conflict between this Act and any provision of any 

agreement, for example, First Nations tobacco tax agreements, 

this Act prevails. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, the tobacco tax rate increases come 

into force on the date of assent but are retroactive and deemed 

to have been in force on and from March 25th, 2010. The 

changes to the First Nations refund program along with the 

administrative and housekeeping provisions come into force 

when the Act is proclaimed. With that, Mr. Speaker, I move 

second reading of The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved second 



5140 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

reading of Bill No. 143, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 

2010. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

extremely pleased this morning to get up and speak on The 

Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2010. Mr. Speaker, for some 

years members of this Assembly have been working with the 

Canadian cancer agency and many other stakeholders to limit 

tobacco utilization in our province, and through that try to 

improve the general health of people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have worked collectively on tobacco 

control legislation, and we have continued to work on what we 

would see as both the positive steps to reduce the utilization of 

tobacco, but also through detrimental steps to cost increases and 

other factors to limit the utilization of tobacco from the point of 

view of it being more costly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see this as another step in trying to improve 

the general health of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. We all benefit if we have healthier communities 

and if we reduce the utilization of tobacco and smoke and 

second-hand smoke in our homes, in our communities, and in 

public places, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are concerns as there always are with any piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. There are concerns about the level of 

consultation, who was consulted, what considerations from 

those consultations were taken in in the drafting of the 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. Were, as an example, the cancer 

agencies consulted? Were other stakeholders consulted that 

have a vested interest in seeing the reduction of tobacco 

utilization, Mr. Speaker? 

 

As you and other members of this Assembly will know, I 

believe it was about five years ago we had an all-party 

committee that undertook a detailed examination of the use of 

tobacco in our communities, particularly focusing on how to 

reduce tobacco and what impact . . . What things we could do to 

impact the utilization of tobacco and use of tobacco in our 

communities, and particularly among young people, was a 

major concern. Mr. Speaker, so were those agencies consulted? 

And is this another step in trying to once again limit the 

utilization or the use of tobacco in our communities and among 

people? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular legislation also impacts groups in 

our society from a health perspective as well. Was the health 

stakeholders consulted, Mr. Speaker? Because we‟re all well 

aware that as tobacco use decreases, Mr. Speaker, there are 

generally corresponding decreases in health utilization as a 

result of things like lung cancer and other forms of cancer that 

come about as a result of smoking as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it isn‟t clear to us what consultations were done, Mr. 

Speaker. Were First Nations consulted? Were health 

stakeholders consulted, Mr. Speaker? And of course were third 

party agencies like the Cancer Society consulted, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Those are all questions that we will have in some detail, Mr. 

Speaker, as we move through this legislation. This being a 

budget Bill brought forward by the Minister of Finance, it will 

require a little more detailed questioning in committee, Mr. 

Speaker. We will want to undertake in some detail the 

consultation process that was undertaken, Mr. Speaker. Who 

was consulted? Why weren‟t people consulted, Mr. Speaker? 

And what legal opinions may have been rendered on various 

sides of the issues that are undertaken in this particular 

legislation, Mr. Speaker? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, because of the detailed nature of the questions 

we‟re going to have to have in committee, Mr. Speaker, I would 

undertake at this time to move this Bill to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

question presented by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 143, 

The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 143, The 

Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 121 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 121 — The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m glad 

to enter into the debate today on Bill 121, An Act respecting the 

Management and Protection of the Environment, repealing The 

Clean Air Act, The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002, The Litter Control Act and The State of the 

Environment Report Act and making consequential amendments 

to certain Acts. 

 

This is quite a thorough piece of legislation. It marks a real sea 

change in how the province of Saskatchewan will now approach 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5141 

environmental management and assessment. And of course we 

have some concerns and some questions, and of course we‟ll 

raise those during questions in committee. 

 

But I do have to say right off the bat that I am deeply, deeply 

concerned about this because this is something that, while I 

know the minister will say there‟s been consultations, there‟s 

been narrow groups of consultations. The public at large has not 

been engaged in this process. It was not something that was out 

there in terms of the election. 

 

It‟s something that came about, and of course we see many Acts 

that are tied together, tied together as this government 

unfortunately makes its mark on the environmental landscape. 

And it‟s not one that will be a proud mark, not one that they 

will be able to look forward in the decades to come and say, 

that was a real turning point back in 2010 when we changed 

how we did business in Saskatchewan. 

 

And in fact I think the key word is business. We agree, we 

agree with the interface of the economy and the environment, 

and in fact you cannot separate the two. And in fact if you take 

a look at what the economy really is, it‟s about how we meet 

our needs. And essentially how we meet our needs dictates how 

we live in our world. And clearly we need to make sure that 

when we live in our world, that is in a sustainable fashion, in 

fact that we leave it better than how we found it. 

 

[09:00] 

 

This sea change that we see happening now really is one that 

talks about, that really focuses on, on the marketplace. And in 

fact in our economy, many people have remarked about how it 

is in fact changing from how we meet our needs to how we 

meet our wants, how we meet our desires. And in this world, 

especially in the Western world, our wants and our desires are 

putting a huge pressure on our environment. It‟s one that we 

can see in terms of climate change, in terms of degradation, in 

terms of the biodiversity, and it‟s one that we really have to take 

seriously. 

 

And so we have some deep, deep concerns about the work 

that‟s going on because it is so deeply based on the market. And 

we see attempts by this government really, I think, the term 

that‟s being used often is greenwash, that they‟re not deeply 

committed to what the main mandate of the ministry should be, 

and that is clean air, clean land, clean water, a rich biodiversity 

in our province, in our world. And we are stewards of some 

fantastic, wonderful landscapes and water. Of course our 

province is home to over 100,000 lakes right across this 

province, and it‟s an important thing that we do this right. 

 

And we‟ve seen over the last couple of days some debates on 

other Bills — I‟m thinking of The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act — that have come to light that we‟re moving so fast, but we 

don‟t really have an overarching view of this saved 

environment, other than that this government views it as a way 

to make sure the marketplace thrives. We have no problem with 

a thriving marketplace, but it cannot be at the expense of the 

environment. In fact we believe, we fully believe that they are 

not mutually exclusive. And sometimes I think that this 

government thinks that they are and they will do whatever it 

takes to make sure some in the market have their way. I want to 

underline “some” because we know that there are many, many 

people within the market who see that the future of the market 

depends on the future of our environment. 

 

And we think this government has no credibility when it comes 

to environmental matters. We see this, as I said, with just 

recently in terms of wildlife habitat, the things that they‟re 

talking about. The comments were made, many people heard on 

the radio the comments that were made by Colin Maxwell, a 

former minister of wildlife resources here in Saskatchewan, the 

good work that was actually done, some of the good work that 

was done in the ‟80s in that area. It‟s amazing that there was a 

lot of stuff that we have a lot of problems with, but here was 

one piece of legislation we can say, this is good work. And Mr. 

Maxwell‟s comments this morning talking about how you 

cannot have thriving wildlife unless you have the landscape for 

it. And so here you have a minister who can‟t seem to put that 

together and a ministry that seems to be unable to connect the 

two. 

 

And so we saw that when it came to climate change. The 

ministry really fumbled and continues to fumble the ball on 

that, and really strives to blame anyone else, everyone else 

who‟s in the area, for their problems around this CO2 emissions. 

The issue is that they are now the government. They are now 

and they have been the government for several months — two 

and a half years now — that they should be stepping up to the 

plate, and we should be able to be seeing by now, by now, 

results. I mean it was part of the Sask Party campaign. They did 

campaign on standards that they abandoned right away. And we 

see them lining up with the federal government who now are, in 

many ways, establishing themselves as one of the worst records 

in terms of environmental management at the federal level. And 

unfortunately we see this government lining themselves up with 

their federal people in the same way. 

 

So here‟s a government that‟s having hard time managing, 

stabilizing greenhouse gas emissions. And we have a Premier 

who‟s talked about ragging the puck on this issue, who doesn‟t 

want to take the responsibility for this. And now they want to 

talk about a new environmental code, and we simply don‟t 

know what that‟ll look like. And here is where the 

greenwashing comes in. They like to tie it to what‟s happening 

in Europe, and many good things are happening in Europe, but 

they won‟t tell us exactly what they‟re talking about. 

 

We know Sweden, in many ways the former prime minister of 

Sweden was a real leader, in terms of sustainability in the work 

that she had done in the ‟80s and even in the ‟90s. We know 

Jim MacNeill from Canada was the secretary-general of the 

common ground research. And if that‟s tied to that, that‟s 

wonderful. But we don‟t know. We don‟t know. They just 

throw out the word, we‟re doing it like Sweden. Well what does 

that mean? What does that mean? We see the nifty little 

PowerPoints and we have some real questions about that 

because we‟ve heard stories about how you get a PowerPoint 

presentation if you‟re with this one type of stakeholder, a 

different PowerPoint if you‟re in with another type of 

stakeholder. 

 

Everybody‟s getting different messages. Sometimes that‟s 

called spin, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you spin for a certain 

public that you want to engage with; and another public you 



5142 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

want to engage with, you give them a different message. We 

think people in Saskatchewan deserve a consistent message. 

 

So what does this environmental code look like? And they use 

terms like, this‟ll be like the National Building Code. And we 

all have a lot of faith in the National Building Code, and of 

course it harkens back to a time, harkens back to a time, when 

in Canada we had a national housing strategy. You can‟t have a 

building code without a strategy. And so here you have a 

situation here, and I hope that if they‟re using a building code 

and talking like that, what is the strategy? 

 

So I digress there because I‟m pretty passionate about housing. 

And when you‟re cherry-picking times from times gone by that 

were really great, when we had a full housing strategy led by a 

federal government that was deeply committed to that, and the 

building code really reflected that. But we see today — to 

continue to talk a little bit about the building code — new 

initiatives that are not being embraced by the building code.  

 

And I‟m talking about LEEDs [leadership in energy and 

environmental design]. And for many years now people have 

been talking and admiring the good work that comes out of the 

LEEDs initiative, and that‟s for the building for environmental 

efficiency. And different standards, and we know that there are 

buildings, in fact the STC [Saskatchewan Transportation 

Company] facility here in Regina was built to LEEDs 

standards. And we‟re really proud of that and it‟s a fine, fine 

facility. But it‟s not part of the National Building Code. 

 

So if you‟re going to talk about a standard, a code, and say 

that‟s what we want to do it like, except the one problem with 

the building code is it doesn‟t get amended very easily. It‟s hard 

to amend, and it‟s hard for it to be innovative. And so you have 

other things that come along that are very, very strong but yet 

you can‟t make a part of how we get things done. 

 

And so I have some real questions here for the minister. If she‟s 

going to have this code, how is it going to be innovative and 

rise to the challenges that we have in our society? And we also 

talked about you know, here‟s another example of the 

government claiming that it‟ll be setting baseline emissions 

requirements for major industrial emitters as part of its new air 

management system. And this is a little more than ironic, 

coming from a government that introduced, that introduced 

climate change legislation that contains no year, no year when 

greenhouse gasses will stabilize and no baseline year against 

which reductions engage, greenhouse gasses can be measured, 

and no greenhouse gas reduction targets in the Bill itself. 

 

So you have to wonder, and I hate to use the metaphor, is this 

little more than hot air? And we get excited about terminology 

and greenwash and we‟re doing certain things, but what are you 

really doing if you don‟t have baselines and that type of thing? 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do agree that industry should be 

held accountable for the damage that they do to the 

environment, and that clearly that‟s one of the key principles in 

sustainability in environmental management of course is simply 

called, the polluter pays. And it should be done. The 

environmental degradation remediation should be done by the 

polluters who are responsible and making sure that they 

understand this upfront. So we agree with that completely, and 

so it‟s important that that be brought forward through this 

legislation. 

 

But the question then becomes how far do you let them take 

over this? And we‟ll talk more about this because in many ways 

we need to make sure that the people of Saskatchewan have 

confidence that the regulations, that the standards are being met. 

And if you‟re letting industry go too far down the road by 

monitoring themselves in this results-based new paradigm, we 

have some real questions about that because for sure 

self-interest and conflict of interest enters into this discussion. 

And when we‟re talking about the future of our environment, 

it‟s one that you don‟t want to leave to risk. And so it‟s really 

important that we watch this. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, we did, as a former government, 

we took this principle and we practised it ourselves. And in fact 

one piece of legislation we were proud of was ensuring that 

mining companies, particularly the uranium mining companies, 

took responsibility for their mines right upfront even before — 

and now we talk about it — before they commission new 

mines, is what‟s happening with the decommissioning and the 

final environmental reclamation. This is really, really important. 

 

One other principle that I want to make sure, that I don‟t see 

present here, is the precautionary principle. And clearly when 

you have a ministry that is focused on the marketplace and 

making sure the marketplace has as few barriers as possible . . . 

And I don‟t think, in fact, I don‟t think environmental standards 

are barriers. I think in fact they enhance the quality of business 

and enhance the quality of the marketplace, but some see it as a 

barrier. I think that the precautionary principle has a real place 

in this discussion and I do worry that this minister, this ministry 

has forgotten about this principle because we do not see this as 

present. 

 

I just want to take a moment and quote from the Clifton report 

that was used extensively and the company used extensively by 

this ministry, I understand, in fact at a great cost. I understand 

that there was several hundred thousand dollars paid to the 

Clifton company for the work that they‟ve done over the past 

year or two. And of course we want to make sure we get good 

value out of that, because it‟s quite a price tag to be paying a 

consulting company. 

 

But they say, and I quote: “Saskatchewan does not have . . . [the 

current] staff capacity or capability to monitor and regulate the 

current industry and oversee the social license.” And it goes on 

to say that the Environment ministry is short of certain 

important skill sets — engineers, hydrogeologists, water quality 

and air quality specialists, toxologists, epidemiologists, and risk 

assessment specialists. 

 

So there‟s a whole host, a whole cadre of specialists in 

environmental protection that the ministry is short on, and yet 

we see in this current budget a cut, a significant cut in this 

ministry. So how do you square this sea change, this new 

paradigm shift doing this, not telling the people particularly 

what you‟re going to do — and your examples are full of blanks 

— you‟re going to do this change. We‟re not sure what it‟s 

going to look like, but at the same time you‟re short of the 

resources to make that happen. 

 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5143 

I mean, they‟re asking for a lot of trust and faith and, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, a lot of people simply do not have the trust or 

faith in this government, in this Premier, in this minister to 

actually see it happen. 

 

We see questions being raised by former ministers of the 

Conservative Party this morning and we will continue to see . . . 

We saw it raised in the papers today by several conservation 

groups who have some real questions about the intent and the 

capability of this ministry to make sure that the environment is 

protected. So before we launch into this, there are some deep, 

deep concerns people have. And so I have some real, real 

concern about this. 

 

And so I have some real concern with this and I have some real 

concern that this government may in fact be looking at — as it 

has with the Clifton group — to look at some outside source, 

some third-party supplier that will provide this specialization. 

And I have deep, deep concerns about that. And in fact Clifton 

does make a recommendation, and in fact and I‟ll quote here 

again: 

 

. . . the Ministry of Environment should consider 

developing a long-term “preferred supplier” relationship 

with a private sector firm who could be kept on retainer to 

provide these capabilities. 

 

[09:15] 

 

And of course the government, not surprisingly, has agreed in 

its response and so I worry about that. I worry about that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because here we should be developing the 

capacity within the government, within the public sector to do 

these types of things. Because this is ongoing work. This is 

ongoing work. And if you‟re paying a preferred supplier 

relationship, I‟m not sure what that means. Is it a retainer that 

you pay an ongoing fee just in case you may need a certain 

specialist? Why not have that person on staff doing work 

continually? 

 

And we‟ve seen very good people within the ministry, and I 

hope many are still there. But I understand that there is a 

shortage, as Clifton has pointed out, and of course many groups, 

many organizations are feeling the pinch as we hit retirement. 

But I know this government has been particularly hard on some 

of the technical staff. And so I hope this is not a sign or a signal 

to people, particularly young people, that there is no future in 

public service here — that you can stand up to the polluters and 

make sure that they understand what the regulations are, and if 

they are breaking the regulations they will be penalized. 

 

We were very proud on this side of the government to enact and 

to put into place an environmental prosecutor. And I understand 

that position has continued on, and that‟s very, very good to see 

because we think that they do just a great job. And we continue 

to see and we continue to read about that in the papers, about 

the good work this prosecutor and their group do to bring 

people who are breaking laws forward. But they need the 

background. They need the people in there. They need the 

public service there to support the prosecutor because the 

prosecutor can‟t do it by themselves. The prosecutor cannot do 

the technical work. They need the staff at the ministry level to 

be able to do the kind of work to make sure if there are laws 

broken when it comes to environmental protection and 

assessment, that, you know, have the background. So we have 

some real, real concerns. 

 

So in many ways, some people might say that in fact this 

results-based environmental management is privatization by 

another name. And so we are deeply concerned about that. 

Because when it comes to results-based, we have some real, real 

concerns. And as someone who‟s watched this over the course 

of time, we know that there are debates about the best processes 

forward. A lot of people get very upset with the command- 

and-control-based way of environmental assessment and 

protection regulations. And I think that‟s a very fair comment. I 

think we need to take a look at command and control. 

 

When it was brought in in the late ‟60s and ‟70s and first with 

the American environmental management protection Act, 

groundbreaking legislation in the ‟60s under Lyndon B. 

Johnson — wonderful stuff, amazing stuff. But as time evolves, 

we have to continue to look at best practices, and how can we 

make sure that interface between environment and the economy 

is true about making sure this province, this world is 

sustainable? 

 

But I‟m not sure a results-based paradigm is the way to go. 

Because when you‟re focusing only on results, there is a lot of 

questions about confidence, a lot of questions about the 

processes, a lot of questions as I‟ve just been raising in terms of 

those who are able to monitor this, to give the best advice to 

those who have been elected. 

 

We feel that it‟s important that it‟s actually elected officials 

who are making some of the final decisions. I know the role of 

the minister is a hugely important one. I hate to see that 

diminished too much. But I think there is a way that we can do 

things better. 

 

And in many ways when we were talking about the green 

strategy . . . and I think our landmark study, the Great Sand 

Hills study, which talked about a holistic approach to 

environmental assessment, is the way to go. It was a very 

innovative, new way of thinking about, how do we take a look 

at a certain area of our province? We know where there‟s going 

to be huge challenges in terms of environmental protection — 

particularly because it‟s so rich in natural gas resources — that 

we need to do the right thing. And so the Great Sand Hills 

afforded us a wonderful opportunity to test run some new ways 

of doing environmental assessment and protection, a holistic, 

landscape-based approach. We are very worried that that‟s gone 

out the window, and now we‟re talking about results-based only 

— and the end of the tailpipe is another way some people have 

called it. 

 

And unfortunately it becomes much more secretive. It becomes 

a process removed from the public, so people have less 

confidence. It‟s not one that local people have a lot of faith in 

because they‟re removed from asking the questions. The people 

they elected, whether they‟ve elected them to the provincial 

legislature or the federal House of Commons or their local RM 

[rural municipality] council or their local municipal council, it‟s 

removed. And so I have some real concerns. 

 

I was really, really impressed by the good work that was done 



5144 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

by the Great Sand Hills Planning Commission. It was much 

more place-based, it was much more reflective of the local 

needs. And they‟ve done some outstanding work, but how can 

you have a local economy thrive and yet still protect its 

environment and in fact have pride in its environment? And one 

of the big things in this — and I just have to say this is one that 

came really to mind at the Great Sand Hills — was the work 

with the First Nations in developing capacity for them to be 

able to participate in that planning process, in that evaluation 

process, and developing the capacity and working with the 

FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] and the 

local band, Nekaneet, and did some outstanding work. 

 

And so we see now, in fact, steps backwards. And we know that 

the FSIN is deeply concerned about their relationship with the 

ministry and the minister, the Premier, about the recent cuts in 

the budget for the FSIN in the program that was allowing them 

to develop capacity so they could participate fully in these types 

of projects. It‟s really important that when you have the public 

and key stakeholders such as the First Nations, that they have 

the capacity to participate. And this government actually is 

stepping back from that. And so when you‟re having this code, 

developing this code . . . And the minister will say it‟s all about 

the science, but yet we don‟t want to develop the capacity 

internally and we don‟t want to help groups, particularly key 

stakeholders like the First Nations, develop capacity. It‟s a 

problem. It‟s a real problem. 

 

And so you wonder, where is the trust? We see a Bill coming 

forward. Where is the trust? We don‟t know. They want a blank 

cheque to develop this code and we have some serious, serious 

questions about that. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have some 

real concerns. We think this is a lot of . . . like I say, a blank 

cheque, worst maybe greenwash at the middle. We have some 

real, real, real concerns. 

 

And so it is the role of the government to prevent environmental 

degradation where possible and not simply provide a judgment 

after the fact or way after the fact as to whether the damage has 

taken place. And particularly from if they are branching this out 

to the private sector, we have some real concerns. So the 

government has a role right up front to do this. And I think that 

there is a real missed opportunity. 

 

And we know in the documents we‟ve seen some talk about an 

environmental assessment commissioner, someone higher up, I 

think equal to the level of an assistant deputy minister. We have 

some . . . or associate deputy minister. And we‟ve seen some 

really innovative things throughout this country in the last 10 

years around environmental commissioner. Perhaps this is the 

worst example of greenwash because we know BC [British 

Columbia] had an environmental assessment commissioner and 

the government actually took it out, I understand, because it 

wasn‟t meeting their needs and they felt that it was just another 

cog in the wheel. 

 

But we‟ve seen examples of environmental commissioners do 

fantastic work, incredible work, and I‟m thinking of Manitoba, 

Ontario, and actually the federal environmental commissioner. 

And that commissioner, at the federal level, works within the 

audit group at the federal level and works as an auditor. Did 

some outstanding work, some real leadership in being able to 

signal concerns about what‟s happening both within the 

government‟s realm and concerns about what may be 

happening in how they should be monitoring better things that 

are happening at the federal level. 

 

But again we see a federal government that‟s ignoring much of 

what the federal environmental commissioner has said. And we 

have some real deep, deep concerns about that. We see at the 

Ontario level and the Ontario circumstance where the 

environmental commissioner‟s actually an officer of the 

legislature, and I think that‟s an innovative idea and I wouldn‟t 

mind seeing that. I would have entertained that in our time. 

 

I think this is an innovative way to make sure you have a third 

party, much like we have some of our officers of this legislature 

provide us some very sound information, some sound 

forewarnings about directions we‟re going. I just think about 

the Ombudsman and the good work that the Ombudsman has 

done, particularly around corrections. I know this last report last 

week was outstanding, but also the work that he had done a few 

years ago talking about overcrowding in jails which led to the 

building of new facilities. 

 

And of course I do have to remark on the outstanding work of 

the Children‟s Advocate and their work around foster care, and 

I think we can all agree that we benefited an awful lot by the 

leadership of the Children‟s Advocate in flagging concerns and 

providing that third party, non-partisan view about the concerns 

we should have. 

 

And so I think there‟s been a missed opportunity by the minister 

to engage in that type of environmental commissioner, as 

opposed to an environmental assessment commissioner. While 

it‟s high up in the bureaucracy, it‟s kind of low down in the 

priorities, and I‟m not sure exactly how much work and how 

much we‟re going to see from that. And of course that person 

does report to the minister, reports to the deputy minister, and 

works for this government and so clearly is not totally unbiased, 

and we think that we have some deep concerns about that. And 

so we have a missed opportunity about what the role of an 

environmental commissioner could be doing here. I think it‟s a 

real missed opportunity. 

 

I think that the Clifton report also notes, and I will quote, 

“Saskatchewan does not have . . . [the current] staff capacity or 

capability to monitor and regulate the current industry and 

oversee the social license.” And so it goes on, and here we have 

that same thing about having the expertise. And so we have . . . 

And I want to say, I do want to say that, as I‟ve said earlier, that 

the ministry does have a strong cadre of people immersed in the 

science of environment, and they do good work. But we want to 

make sure that there‟s enough coming up, and we‟ve seen, and 

clearly this government has said that it‟s looking for a reduction 

of staff, some 16 per cent over the next four or five years or 

even more, and what impact that will have on the scientists in 

the department. So clearly we have some questions about that. 

 

[09:30] 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟ve thought a lot about this issue and 

one of the concerns I have . . . And there was this very good 

book, a very good book called Unnatural Law. It was written by 

a professor from the University of Victoria and one that, as you 

can see — and I won‟t use it as props but I do want to quote 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5145 

from it — that it talks about some of the things that have 

happened in Saskatchewan, right across Canada. And so I do 

want to take some quotes out of this, so I‟ll be reading directly 

from that. 

 

But it does talk about . . . Now we‟re not talking about The 

Forest Resources Management Act. But I do want to take a 

quote here that says . . . And this book was just written, I think 

it‟s 2004, 2003, David R. Boyd, and the book Unnatural Law: 

Rethinking Canadian Environmental Law and Policy. And a 

very outstanding piece of work here because he really has a 

chance to look back, look right across the Canadian landscape 

and what is the best thinking about environmental assessment 

here in Canada. And I think we can take a lot from this book.  

 

Well he writes about Saskatchewan, and he‟s talking about The 

Forest Resources Management Act. And he says, and I quote: 

 

In 1996 Saskatchewan enacted the Forest Resources 

Management Act, described by the provincial government 

as “the most comprehensive, forward looking forest 

management legislation in . . . [Canada]. The innovative 

aspects of the Act include a commitment to create a 

provincial accord every ten years to outline broad 

principles to guide forest planning and management. 

 

And he goes on to say, Saskatchewan has been praised, and I 

quote: 

 

Saskatchewan has been praised for its “more holistic and 

participatory approach to forest management,” which 

recognizes “Aboriginal peoples, local communities, and 

the general public as legitimate players in forestry 

policy-making. 

 

So it recognizes, he recognizes the whole idea of the general 

public, and I think that‟s huge. I think that‟s very important 

when we talk about this. Stakeholders play a real role, a critical 

role, in how we shape policy, but we cannot forget the general 

public. 

 

Well David Boyd goes on in his chapter, chapter 8, systematic 

weaknesses, and he talks about six weaknesses that seem to 

plague Canadian policy-makers when it comes to making good 

environmental assessment policy, and I‟d like to quote: 

 

While it is encouraging to recognize that Canada has 

make progress in some aspects of environmental 

protection, the reality is that on most environmental issues 

Canada is performing poorly. On seventeen of 

twenty-five environmental indicators, Canada is among 

the five worst nations of the OECD. The failure of 

Canadian environmental laws and policies results, in large 

part, from six systemic weaknesses. First, Canada still 

lacks a number of important environmental laws that are 

commonplace in other industrialized nations. Second, 

existing Canadian laws and regulations are undermined 

by excessive discretion. Third, environmental laws and 

policies fail to reflect contemporary scientific knowledge 

and principles. Fourth, Canadian environmental law 

suffers from inadequate resources for implementation and 

enforcement. Weak implementation and enforcement are 

exacerbated by budget cuts, the downloading of 

environmental responsibilities (from the federal 

government to provinces, and from provinces to 

municipalities), and excessive reliance on voluntary 

initiatives. Fifth, the public has insufficient opportunities 

to participate meaningfully in developing and enforcing 

environmental laws. Sixth, Canadian governments rely on 

an unduly narrow range of law and policy options in their 

efforts to protect the environment. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here you have six systematic 

weaknesses. And I would like to take a few minutes to go 

through each one to talk about where this minister and this 

ministry has failed because we see, even though this book was 

written in 2003 — some seven years ago — we‟re seeing it 

repeat itself today. 

 

You can just take a look at the budget cuts. Here we are, and 

he‟s saying, Dr. Boyd is saying, budgets cuts, how can you have 

effective laws when you‟re cutting budgets in that department? 

And I have some questions about that. 

 

All right, so I want to talk a little bit about the excessive 

discretion. And I see . . . And I don‟t have it in front of me, but 

I know that one of the other Bills we‟re talking about is The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. And the discretion that is taken 

out of this legislature and placed into regulations is just one 

example of the discretion that David Boyd is talking about. It‟s 

shameful when you have a body like ours who can work 

through this. And it‟s not been a problem. We‟ve been able to 

work through the amended . . . We can work through 

amendments when we take out pieces of land that the 

government has determined should be taken out and they have 

land to put back in, this no net loss policy that has been a 

time-honoured policy for many decades now. 

 

But we see the removal of the powers of this legislature into the 

hands of the minister. And what‟s even shocking about that . . . 

Because I know one of the consequential pieces to the wildlife 

habitat protection amendment Act is the conservation easements 

where she says, the minister will say, that there will be no . . . 

for sure the easements will stay in place. Except for, if you read 

the conservation easements, one of the sections talk about how 

she can let those easements go. And if she decides to let the 

easements go, if, if, if she decides to let those easements go, her 

decision is final, is final. I cannot believe that. 

 

So that‟s just one example. And we can go to many more 

examples of how this government is taking things out of the 

legislation and putting it into their own discretion. And how is 

that strengthening environmental management and assessment? 

We can go through many, many examples, but clearly that‟s a 

problem.  

 

And third, environmental laws and policies fail to reflect 

contemporary scientific knowledge and principles. Well here 

we have great work, great work done in the Great Sand Hills, an 

amazing study that has been done by the Canadian Plains 

Research Centre. We contracted with the research centre to do 

this work. We have not heard a word from this minister about 

this. They say that it‟s still in consultations and stuff, but they 

can be doing other things. They can be doing other things. 

Many of the people from the area are actually very concerned 

that all that work has been done and out the door. 



5146 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

And in fact we had, we had some very important . . . We had an 

outside, an external examiner from Florida come up to make 

sure the work that was doing reflected the best science, the best 

science. And I cannot believe that this minister, in terms of the 

greenwash that‟s happening, you know, cuts funding from the 

FSIN to help them develop the capacity in terms of the 

technical knowledge and then yet has the nerve to say it‟s 

science based. You know, the things that they do. There‟s so 

many mixed messages here about science. It is deeply, deeply 

alarming, deeply alarming. 

 

And of course, you know, the budget cuts. It‟s just amazing 

when you have a government, a government, a Premier who 

oversees one of the largest budget cuts in this department and 

then says, we are all for this. And then at the same time, farms 

out significant contracts to the private sector, significant 

contracts to the private sector while they should be developing 

their own capacity within the department. I think this is 

alarming. And it‟s an alarming thing because we know, 

particularly for young people, for people coming up, that the 

environment continues to be a significant issue. But the signal 

from the province of Saskatchewan is, you won‟t be hired from 

us. You won‟t find a role in the public sector. You will have to 

work in the private sector. And of course that is a concern 

because we know when it comes to enforcement that we need to 

have a strong public sector. And this creates all sorts of 

problems. 

 

And of course Dr. Boyd talks about the opportunity for the 

public to have an opportunity to participate. And we see this as 

a real problem because we know that this government has a real 

track record, a strong track record of actually not consulting 

with people and in fact particularly with the public at large. 

They will say, stakeholders are the people to consult with. And 

when they do that . . . And we‟ve heard stories about this — 

because we don‟t get invited to many of these things, we don‟t 

know when they‟re actually happening, when the Ministry of 

Environment‟s doing their consultations — but we‟ve heard 

stories about the consultations, about how they‟ve been tuned, 

tuned to the stakeholder that they‟re playing to. 

 

Now they may say, well that‟s appropriate because you want to 

make sure you have the relevant information or as some people 

might say, spin. Because we all have to live under . . . We all 

are going to have to live under this code, aren‟t we. So why 

reflect on this one view, one spin of the code and not be hearing 

other people? I think we‟d all benefit from a rich discussion 

around the state of our environment and how we‟re going to 

make sure that it‟s sustainable, and not have us clustered off 

into silos and say, listen you just pay attention to this, you pay 

attention to that, and you pay attention to that. That doesn‟t 

work. That doesn‟t work in the environment. That doesn‟t 

work. We all know that. And so this silo approach to 

communications is significant, and it‟s alarming because we‟re 

going to have problems down the road. 

 

Because we know in the economy it‟s all working together. And 

we all want to work together. We all want to make this province 

the best place to be, the best place. And we‟ve often said, best 

place to live and raise a family, and we think we all agree on 

that. We all agree on that and one of the best things about 

Saskatchewan is our environment. 

 

But it‟s terribly at risk because, because our environment is so 

driven by the resources of this province, and that‟s not a bad 

thing. We‟ve been able to develop some real expertise in that 

area. We have some of the best standards when it comes to 

labour standards, particularly when it comes to 

resource-oriented sectors — thinking of mining. We do have 

some questions now about how strong that it is, but we‟ve had a 

strong history of that. 

 

And so in the last reason we talked about . . . was around 

Canadian governments relying on an unduly narrow range of 

law and policy options in their efforts to protect the 

environment. And I know I can talk about Canada, but you 

could just interject Saskatchewan every time I say Canada. But 

in this case, this minister‟s looking to Canada for its national 

building code as an example. 

 

And of course we all think that‟s a good building code because 

in many ways we‟ve seen what‟s happened around the world 

when you have tragic circumstances whether it‟s hurricanes or 

earthquakes. Now we aren‟t, in Saskatchewan, subject to those, 

but we are subject to other natural disasters whether it‟s 

particularly the cold. We think about how important it is to have 

strong building codes when it comes to how strong our houses 

can withstand the natural environment. 

 

But as David Boyd talks about the narrow focus and as I talked 

about with the building code, in fact it has a narrow focus and 

doesn‟t lead to innovation, and we see out-liers such as LEEDs, 

where you have building designs where you actually are 

improving on how buildings can be built. But it‟s not part of the 

building code, and it‟s not required. It‟s voluntary. It‟s 

voluntary. 

 

And yet in many ways, many people would suggest that we 

should be looking at that conservation as being part of the 

building code. But as best as I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that‟s not part of the building code, and it‟s unfortunate. It‟s 

very unfortunate that innovation is left out. So where is the role 

of innovation in this code? So we have some deep, deep 

concerns about this. 

 

And I could go on about this, and I know that there is some 

really strong parts about this that where we have flagged some 

real concerns. And I guess I will, I just want to talk a little about 

this excessive reliances on voluntary initiatives. 

 

[09:45] 

 

And I know . . . and again, this conservation easement is a 

perfect example of voluntary initiative because what we‟re 

asking landowners to do is to voluntarily do the work that the 

government should be doing. And well, you know, the first 

landowner may say, I‟m up for that. I‟m good for that. The 

second or third landowner may say, hey I don‟t quite remember 

all the details of how we made this agreement, and so I‟m 

looking for some changes here. And so this has been a real 

problem. This has been a problem. 

 

And another example, and we started this initiative around the 

low-flush toilets, but yet we don‟t see anything done in terms of 

stringent regulations about water consumption. And I know the 

minister the other day . . . And I do want to say that I do agree 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5147 

that if you can have clear, understandable water bills so those 

who are using less actually pay less, that‟s a very good idea. 

That‟s a very good idea. And I think that if we can have clear 

water bills that other things aren‟t attached on it — because we 

have a problem when you have water bills being used as almost 

a form of taxation to pay for other things where taxes should be 

actually charged for — that‟s a good thing. But we do have a 

concern about excessive reliance on voluntary initiatives. 

 

And I just want to quote here from David Boyd because I think 

he says this so well. 

 

For example, instead of passing laws and regulations to 

govern greenhouse gas emissions, reduce smog, increase 

motor vehicle fuel efficiency, or require energy-efficient 

buildings, the federal government made voluntary 

agreements with industry. Advocates of voluntary 

agreements claim that they are more flexible and can 

achieve progress faster and more efficiently than 

regulations. [But] Critics argue that voluntary initiatives 

lack transparency and accountability, encourage free 

riders, undermine the role of government, maintain the 

status quo, have high administrative costs, and preempt 

more effective measures to protect the environment. 

 

[And he goes on] Despite their promise, voluntary 

agreements in Canada have largely failed, and we see 

particularly greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise . . . 

[in spite of some of the voluntary things]. 

 

And so this a concern we have, particularly around 

results-based standards and how you have this voluntary 

approach. Now they won‟t use the word voluntary because in 

their greenwashing, that‟s not the word. But they talked about 

all these things that they‟re doing, but where are the standards? 

Where are the regulations? Where is the legislation? 

Particularly, where‟s the legislation? We see them talk about 

the climate change piece with no baseline, no targets. So what‟s 

happening with that? How can you have it both ways? You talk 

about results-based, but you don‟t want to have any results. Or 

the word results seems to be a pretty nebulous word. We‟re not 

sure what that means. And so we have some real concerns about 

the greenwash that‟s happening over there. 

 

This faith and trust that we‟re supposed to have in this 

government that continually is burning up its social capital, Mr. 

Speaker, quite frankly burning it up because we‟ve seen on so 

many fronts where people are expected to trust this government, 

and they‟ve let them down. And you can go through it, whether 

it‟s labour and the International Labour Organization that‟s 

cited this government for breaking trust with labour in terms of 

how to do proper consultations, how to properly develop new 

laws. We‟ve seen that at the international level. 

 

And we‟ve seen it gone right down in my own circumstance 

where we have people calling about breaking the trust around 

the domestic abuse outreach program. I mean, you take any 

example and you see a government that is saying trust me. Trust 

me. And I have to tell you; it‟s very hard, very hard to trust this 

government because clearly you have some real problems. 

 

So as I‟ve said, we have a government that doesn‟t want to 

develop its own public service here in saying this, and we‟re 

more interested in developing a private sector that we will pay. 

And is that sustainable? Is that sustainable, especially when the 

rubber hits the road and you have to do some tough work? This 

puts us in a very awkward, compromising position. 

 

But at worst though, I mean we really do want a stronger . . . 

We have such a reputation here. We can have the potential for 

doing good work here in Saskatchewan, but we seem to have 

lost its way. The government has lost its way here. And while 

they‟re shifting this to a market-driven Environment 

department, we have some real, real concerns with that. 

 

And I do want to say, from my perspective — and I know 

sometimes people think that I talked a little bit about this — the 

lack of meaningful opportunity for public participation or 

enforcement and we just see this, that we think that there needs 

to be more work here. David Boyd talks about: “In 1990 the 

Canadian Bar Association (CBA) observed that greater public 

participation in environmental decision making would produce 

[and he quotes] „fairer decision making and better decisions‟ 

but that citizens are „either excluded from the process or treated 

as second-class citizens.‟” 

 

And here you have a government that seems bent on doing that. 

And still now he goes on to say, “While access to information 

has increased in recent years . . .” And of course that was before 

Harper became Prime Minister, and it‟s actually decreased. He 

goes on to say “. . . the public‟s role is still largely restricted to 

being notified of government decisions and provided with an 

opportunity to comment upon proposed decisions.” 

 

And in fact we‟re seeing the exact opposite of that. We are not 

even seeing the proposed decisions. We are seeing that there 

will be proposed something decision. We don‟t know what the 

code is, but we want you to have, the public needs to have faith 

in this. This is a real problem. 

 

And I talked about the narrow view that this government is 

taking about the results-based legislation and framing it in terms 

of a code, and wouldn‟t it be better if we just had a code. And in 

many ways, there is a strong argument. Of course our biggest 

argument is we don‟t know what that code is. We haven‟t seen 

what it looks like. We know that they say it will look like 

something between the Canada‟s building code and the Swedish 

code of environment. But we have not seen that. And I have not 

seen that, and unfortunately I would like to see more of that 

because I‟m intrigued by that. 

 

But, David Boyd, and I just want to quote here again: 

 

Canada is paralyzed by a longstanding and intractable 

debate between two polar extremes: the strict 

command-and-control environmental laws on one hand, 

and deregulation accompanied by voluntary measures on 

the other hand. 

 

And so you know, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is a 

prime example of that, where we‟ve seen deregulation and 

voluntary measures. I mean, I wonder what David Boyd would 

have to say about the things that are happening today in 

Saskatchewan because it‟s such a textbook example of how 

you‟re deregulating The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and 

you‟re asking people to step up and voluntarily do their part for 



5148 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

wildlife biodiversity in Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, that‟s an example — a clear example — of this 

problem, of the two extremes. And as I said, what we did in the 

Great Sand Hills, where we did a place-based environmental 

impact or environmental research project, engaging the local 

people, engaging the First Nations, and making sure, engaging 

the scientific community from the University of Regina and the 

external examiner from the United States, University of Florida, 

and giving them the resources to do a proper job. There‟s 

somewhere in the middle where we can say this is good work. 

This is good work. And everybody‟s feeling good about it, but 

it‟s being stranded because we‟re going from one extreme to 

another. 

 

We‟re saying we don‟t want the command and control; that‟s 

old style. And there are problems with that. We could do better 

because the world is much more complex. But until we have the 

resources and the expertise, we better watch what we‟re doing 

around this new deregulation, privatization, market-based 

environmental assessment way of doing business. So we have 

some real problems with that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to end my comments in just a few 

minutes here, but I do want to say, I do want to end with a quote 

from a book that a student, not my student, that said, when I 

was minister of Environment, said you should have this book on 

your desk. And it was a fantastic observation. And I just want to 

read this into the record. This person attended Marion Graham 

and was part of the environmental classes there, and she said 

this is just a wonderful book by professor, former professor — I 

believe he‟s now passed away — Stan Rowe, Home Place: 

Essays on Ecology. 

 

And I think that we have to take a look and think about the 

bigger picture. We really are, Mr. Speaker, at a crossroads here. 

And we have an opportunity, and we do have an opportunity to 

do the right thing in Saskatchewan. This Act here really is about 

a sea change about how we do environment in Saskatchewan. 

We were hoping for one that was based truly on the economy 

about how we meet our needs, not about how we meet our 

wants and desires, not based on a market-based economy, but 

on a true economy of everyone‟s needs. 

 

But I just want to quote from Stan Rowe and here‟s the quote: 

 

Yet we have our moments of enlightenment. Collectively 

and recurrently we show our truer colours, banding 

together to accomplish worthy goals, freely giving in the 

interests of . . . higher good, responding to prophetic 

visions in times of crisis. 

 

Oh I‟ll continue, “One such time is . . . upon us [now], and its 

demands are not excessive.” So, Mr. Speaker, we have the 

opportunity to do the right thing. And we could be doing the 

right thing, and I hope that we take that opportunity to do the 

right thing. So, Mr. Speaker, with that I will take my seat. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say a few 

words about Bill 121, an Act representing the management and 

protection of the environment that also repeals The Clean Air 

Act, The Environmental Management and Protection Act, The 

Litter Control Act, and The State of the Environment Report 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few remarks following the 

member from Saskatoon Centre, who I hope members were 

paying close attention to. I‟ve known the member from 

Saskatoon Centre for a little over 20 years, Mr. Speaker. I 

know, as many in Saskatchewan know, that his reputation on 

environmental matters is very strong. He has a great deal of 

credibility in the province, Mr. Speaker, in environmental 

circles, and I would ask members opposite to pay very close 

attention to the remarks that he just entered into the record. Mr. 

Speaker, I can tell you that when the member from Saskatoon 

Centre speaks and says that he has concerns about this and 

further questions about this Act, really, Mr. Speaker, the 

government should, should be listening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act for all intents and purposes serves to 

change the way in which environmental protection, 

environmental management, combined with other changes in 

other Acts, Mr. Speaker, essentially changes the way in which 

government looks at environmental matters and responds to 

concerns that may exist throughout the province. We see the 

development of some new language as this Act comes forward, 

Mr. Speaker. The key Act in all of this is, the key language is 

results-based environmental regulatory framework. Sounds 

good on the surface, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s why Saskatchewan 

people have to spend some time trying to understand exactly 

what it means, results-based environmental regulatory 

framework. 

 

[10:00] 

 

Bottom line, Mr. Speaker, essentially it means less government. 

It means less government, Mr. Speaker, coming from the Sask 

Party. The Minister of the Environment is indicating that it‟s 

exactly what New Democrats were looking at, Mr. Speaker. I 

think the environmental community in Saskatchewan knows 

that if New Democrats do something, it‟s going to have a 

positive effect. If Sask Party members do something, it‟ll have a 

negative effect, Mr. Speaker. So essentially you have to 

understand exactly what‟s behind the language. 

 

More importantly, Mr. Speaker — and this is, I think, very 

interesting — there‟s other phrases and language that comes 

through in this legislation and this package, Mr. Speaker. We 

hear the minister and the Sask Party members talking about a 

new air management system. I think that‟s very interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, an air management system. It sounds like indeed 

they‟re going to control air flows, etc. The Act does recognize 

that pollutants in the air can come in from other jurisdictions. 

 

But while on the one hand when they make environmental 

speeches and talk about air management systems on one hand, 

the Premier is at a conference talking to other provinces about a 

Western Economic Partnership Agreement that could in fact if 

signed — we haven‟t seen this agreement, Mr. Speaker, so we 

don‟t know exactly what‟s there — but the Western Economic 

Partnership Agreement could in fact jeopardize Saskatchewan‟s 

ability to manage air that moves in from other jurisdictions, Mr. 

Speaker. And that would be a significant negative element for 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5149 

Saskatchewan people to have to cope with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So an environmental speech on the one hand talking about air 

quality and an agreement signed on the other hand that may 

have a negative effect on air quality, Mr. Speaker — do one 

thing; say another. It‟s just typical of what we‟ve been seeing 

from the Sask Party government since their election in 2007. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, think about those words again: air 

management system. Where have we heard something like this 

before? The Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and 

Labour liked to talk about his tuition management system. What 

happened with the tuition management system, Mr. Speaker? It 

made university less accessible to Saskatchewan people, Mr. 

Speaker, because it increased the tuition at the universities in 

Saskatchewan. The tuition management system was actually a 

negative effect in Saskatchewan. So air management system, 

perhaps we can think of that as a negative connotation for the 

province. 

 

And what about their financial management system, Mr. 

Speaker? Oh my goodness, 2.3 billion in the bank to a 

billion-dollar deficit, Mr. Speaker, potash projections that were 

wildly out of whack, cutbacks that are occurring across the 

piece in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — their financial 

management system hasn‟t been very good. And this last week, 

what about their legislation management system, Mr. Speaker? 

We‟re seeing this government panicking as they try to build 

support for their legislative agenda, a legislative agenda, Mr. 

Speaker, that is receiving a fairly negative response from 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve got catch phrases — results-based 

environmental regulatory framework, air management system 

— phrases that help to make you feel better when all things 

around, all things around you are collapsing, Mr. Speaker. It‟s 

just the way in which we can expect this government to work. 

They want you to feel good; that‟s where the cheerleading and 

pompoms come in. But when it comes to action and doing the 

work that needs to be done, Mr. Speaker, tremendous failure on 

the part of the members opposite. 

 

More importantly, Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about 

consultation and talks about discussing these matters with 

people throughout Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, consultation is 

becoming something that the public is — what should I say? — 

the public is skeptical when the government says there have 

been consultations. So Mr. Speaker, there‟s got to be evidence. 

 

Speaking of results-based, Mr. Speaker, let‟s have a 

results-based consultation process in which those who are 

consulted feel like they‟ve been listened to. That‟s the key part 

of consultation, Mr. Speaker, is that those who have been 

consulted feel that they‟ve been listened to. The bottom line in 

my review of the consultation process opposite, Mr. Speaker, is 

that the government has failed miserably. Just for example, we 

know that this legislation was tabled towards the end of the fall 

sitting, towards the end, in fact almost the last day, of 

November of 2009, Mr. Speaker. The government tabled the 

legislation after what it said was some consultation. 

 

In the November issue of the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation‟s magazine — it‟s called The Outdoor Edge — the 

executive director of the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, 

Darrell Crabbe, wrote the following. And Mr. Speaker, it 

specifically related to consultations that the ministry and the 

minister were paid doing with regards to this piece of 

legislation and others that we can refer to. Here‟s what Darrell 

Crabbe wrote in November: “. . . the SWF was recently invited 

by the Ministry of Environment to participate in a 

comprehensive review of the Province‟s environmental 

legislation with a stated goal of „most effectively protecting the 

environment and managing resources.‟” I continue to quote, Mr. 

Speaker, from his writing in the magazine. 

 

There were just over 20 groups that were consulted. Only 

two of these groups were conservation or environmental 

organizations with the overwhelming majority being 

made up of industry. The presentation was designed to 

promote a results based system that would streamline the 

regulatory review requirements to accommodate resource 

development and, supposedly, enhance the protection of 

the environment. 

 

Mr. Crabbe continues, and I continue his quote: 

 

I don‟t think anyone is opposed to the responsible 

development of our province‟s resources and the 

economic benefits that will be enjoyed by the residents of 

Saskatchewan. But one only has to consider the 

importance that the environment has had in the last 

Provincial and Federal election to understand that 

environmental protection is paramount in the long term, 

sustainable development of our resource rich Province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Wildlife Federation was saying back prior 

to this legislation being introduced that the consultation was 

inadequate. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, the government brought 

in a number of other Bills, including one called the habitat 

protection designated lands Act, Mr. Speaker. And for all 

intents and purposes this Act, designed to protect habitat, is also 

moving matters from a legislated-based, government 

responsibility to a regulated base, Mr. Speaker, which is cabinet 

making decisions behind closed doors, going from a 

transparent, public process to a not transparent, unaccountable 

process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what is the Wildlife Federation now saying, Mr. Speaker? 

Conservation and wildlife groups are urging — and this is 

today, Mr. Speaker — this is in today‟s newspaper, the Regina 

Leader-Post, first paragraph: “Conservation and wildlife groups 

are urging the provincial government to hold off on changes to 

the Wildlife Habitat Protection Act that would allow some 

protected Saskatchewan land to be sold.” Darrell Crabbe again, 

of the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation says, “This is a huge 

issue for us . . .” More consultation is necessary before trying to 

pass those amendments. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on this whole process of changing the way in 

which environmental matters are handled, going from a public, 

transparent process to a non-transparent, cabinet, unaccountable 

process, Mr. Speaker, the Wildlife Federation, as back as long 

as two years ago, saying the consultation isn‟t adequate and 

now they‟re saying following the introduction of the Bills and a 



5150 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

review and a discussion amongst their membership and the 

public, they‟re saying the consultation was not good enough, 

Mr. Speaker, and the results shown in these pieces of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, are indeed false and wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, consultation is absolutely critical to getting it 

right. And we‟re seeing quite a number of circumstances where, 

Mr. Speaker, they haven‟t got it right. On this piece of 

legislation, the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations has 

had something to say about it. And just a little over a month and 

a half ago, the minister received a letter from the Vice-chief of 

the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Lyle Whitefish, 

who had this to say, and I want to quote from his letter: “The 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations has identified a 

number of questions and concerns with regard to 

„Results-Based‟ regulatory review, and Bills 121 [which we‟re 

talking about today, Mr. Speaker], 122, and 123.” 

 

And he says, “Please see the attached submission outlining the 

concern about the impact of these Bills to First Nations rights.” 

The letter goes on: 

 

Given that the Ministry of Environment has indicated to 

the FSIN that no substantive changes can be made to the 

Bills after second reading, without having the Bills 

repealed, we expect that the Crown will seriously 

consider and substantively address the concerns outlined 

in our submission prior to second reading of Bill 121, 

122, and 123, so that measures to accommodate our 

concerns about the impact to our rights can be 

incorporated into the Bills. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they are asking before the second reading 

speeches occur that these concerns be taken into account. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, obviously that hasn‟t happened. But more 

importantly, there is some concern that the FSIN was told that 

no changes could be made to the Bills after second reading. The 

ministry can‟t be saying that, Mr. Speaker, because, of course, 

in committee all sorts of changes can take place within the 

Bills, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So number one, the minister and the ministry haven‟t listened to 

First Nations to begin with. Secondly, they‟re providing them 

with information that says go away. The process is started 

because . . . and you can‟t change it now so don‟t say anything 

more. And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, they‟re not considering the 

request by the First Nations to hold back on these changes until 

their issues and concerns have been raised. 

 

So on the one hand, you‟ve got the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation whose membership, by the way, exceeds that of all 

political parties in this province, Mr. Speaker. The Wildlife 

Federation is saying back off on legislation that‟s in front of us. 

The Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Mr. Speaker, 

is also saying back off the legislation. Let‟s do more 

consultation, and let‟s get it right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the letter from Lyle Whitefish continues, and I 

will quote: 

 

The law developed in the last several years makes it clear 

that meaningful consultation must take place on 

procedural and substantive issues related to conduct 

which may affect First Nations rights, inclusive of the 

development of regulatory regimes. First Nations have 

directed the FSIN to work with the Ministry of the 

Environment to develop a mutually agreeable and 

comprehensively funded consultation process with respect 

to the regulatory review. 

 

The letter goes on to say, “Minister Heppner, while I have not 

received a response from you with respect to my previous 

request for a meeting to move forward with such [a] 

consultation . . .” I repeat this request today. I look forward to 

the Crown‟s response, etc. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, all of this is very interesting because this 

government says to us, as we are to consider the second reading 

of Bill 121, that consultation has occurred. But, Mr. Speaker, as 

I said earlier, consultation has value when those who have been 

consulted feel they‟ve been listened to. And we have two major 

organizations, groups and representative groups, Mr. Speaker, 

who are saying they do not feel that the consultation resulted in 

their issues having been listened to. 

 

So it‟s not just the member from Saskatoon Centre who is 

saying we have some concerns and questions about this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker. It‟s the people of Saskatchewan who 

are saying that. This whole business of act first and consult later 

that we‟ve seen on so many things like Bills 5 and 6, Bill 80, 

the wildlife habitat Act, Mr. Speaker, are all an indication that 

this government does not take consultation very seriously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill moves matters, so I don‟t want to . . . I 

won‟t spend much time getting into the substantive nature of 

the Bill, Mr. Speaker. My colleague from Saskatoon Centre did 

a good job of that. But essentially it moves things out of 

legislation, and it moves things into an area of more discretion. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, even if the members of the public had 

confidence in this group of government members, Mr. Speaker, 

which I know that confidence is failing, but even if the public 

had confidence in this group of members, Mr. Speaker, would 

they continue to have confidence in future groups of members, 

Mr. Speaker, to have the discretion to protect our environment, 

to protect our habitat, to protect our rights, Mr. Speaker? I don‟t 

believe that that‟s the case. That‟s why a legislated process has 

always been valued by the public in Saskatchewan. 

 

[10:15] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think indeed we‟ve been able to put the 

arguments that we have picked up from the public on the 

record, Mr. Speaker. The questions and the concerns have been 

put. I think some of the significant and serious questions that 

we have now need to be asked of the minister, and therefore, 

Mr. Speaker, when I am concluding my remarks here in a 

couple of minutes, we are ready now to have this Bill in 

committee where the questions can be asked. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say in conclusion that people 

need to have trust and confidence in their government. Actions 

that have been taken on this Bill, on the habitat Bill, on 

financial matters, and on managing the legislative process here, 

is decreasing confidence that people have in the Sask Party 

government. There‟s no evidence, Mr. Speaker, that a building 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5151 

of confidence and trust can be achieved by this government. 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to raise issues. 

We will continue to ask questions, and we will continue to 

remind the government that they need to have the confidence 

and the trust of the people of Saskatchewan, sadly lacking 

today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So with that, I will conclude my remarks and indicate that the 

New Democratic Party opposition is prepared to send Bill 121 

to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister of the Environment, that Bill 

No. 121, The Environmental Management and Protection Act, 

2009 be now read the second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 121, The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009 be 

referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 122 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 122 — The 

Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009 be now read 

a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I get to speak on 

Bill 122, The Environmental Assessment Amendment Act. Mr. 

Speaker, this Act is nearly 30 years old. It was brought in some 

30, roughly 30 years ago to provide some surety. It‟s to cover 

two essential purposes. One is to protect the environment from 

industrial and commercial and residential encroachment that is 

undue or that unduly degrades the environment. So 

environmental assessment has to be done before you have a 

development, and the whole purpose of that was to, Mr. 

Speaker, to help protect the environment. It was that 

recognition, believe it or not, 30 years ago. Some of us thought 

that that recognition was too late even 30 years ago, but that 

was one of the purposes of this Bill 30 years ago. 

 

The second purpose was to provide some understandable rules 

for industrial, commercial, and residential development that 

would enable essentially anyone interested in going through, 

going through the same steps, if I can describe it that way, to 

make sure that my proposal and someone else‟s proposal would 

receive the same consideration. And that consideration, of 

course, would be protection of the environment and to make 

sure the developers in the example I just used would have 

essentially the same hoops to jump through or the same 

questions to answer, the same environmental protection 

considerations to have. 

 

There‟s a lack of trust on our side for this Bill, and it‟s quite 

simple to understand why we‟d have a lack of trust. We have a 

government that has proven over and over, the Sask Party 

government has proved over and over that they‟re not 

consulting with people. The member for The Battlefords, just 

moments ago, gave an example of the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations being left out in the cold with 

respect to environmental Bills, and this, this despite the fact that 

laws that have been developed over the last several years have 

made it quite clear that meaningful consultation must take place 

on procedural and substantive issues related to conduct which 

may affect First Nations rights inclusive of the development of 

the regulatory regimes. 

 

The law is becoming increasingly clear that there is a duty to 

consult. Common sense would tell you that there‟s a duty to 

consult. Common sense would tell us that it‟s pointless to 

pretend to be benevolent dictators and say it‟s my way or the 

highway. And yet that‟s what‟s going on, Mr. Speaker, with 

respect to this piece of environmental legislation. 

 

In the minister‟s first reading speech, the minister says, “The 

purpose of this Act is to ensure that economic development . . . 

proceeds . . .” Economic development proceeds — pretty clear 

where the minister was coming from in her second paragraph. 

 

In the next paragraph, the minister says, “The amendments 

proposed provide a formal process allowing a proponent to 

voluntarily apply for a . . . [ministerial] screening decision . . .” 

In other words, just apply to the minister, and the minister can 

do a quick screen and say yes to that development. And this is, 

according to the minister, to provide “. . . predictable review 

processes by the ministry.” Predictable. Yes, pretty predictable. 

 

We have a Sask Party ministry that, in 2007 during the last 

provincial election, the Sask Party promised that they would 

honour the outgoing — what turned out to be outgoing — New 

Democrat government‟s carbon dioxide targets. And they said 

absolutely us too, going so far as to leave the people of 

Saskatchewan with the impression that that was a minimum 

standard and that if they could, they would exceed those CO2 
reductions. That‟s what they said then, some two and a half, just 

over two and a half years ago. 

 

Since then we‟ve seen no action. We‟ve seen carbon dioxide 

emissions in Saskatchewan continue to rise. We‟ve seen a 

change in the target that not only took the base year but moved 

it up two years thereby dropping two years of carbon dioxide 

increase, building that into the base, then reducing the target 

from 32 per cent to 20 per cent reduction of a bigger base. So 

it‟s just absolutely watering down and treating the environment 

with disdain. 



5152 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

And that‟s why, when we get into this piece of legislation, this 

piece with the demonstrable lack of consultation with First 

Nations, with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, 

and others, that‟s why we have a lack of belief that this Bill is 

going to protect the environment in any meaningful way. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can‟t imagine anything much worse for an 

opposition than to have a government jam legislation through 

that in the name of the environment, for Heaven‟s sake. 

They‟ve said in the media that we have to pass this legislation, 

have to pass these environmental Bills. Well why on earth 

would we be in a rush to pass environmental Bills that not only 

do so little to protect the environment, but they‟re major steps 

backwards? 

 

The government can do much better. They can do much better 

than they‟re doing right now, and they should be doing much 

better than they‟re doing right now. And they would enjoy the 

support of not only the opposition but of the people of 

Saskatchewan if they would move on the environment because 

in the coming years, Mr. Speaker, people, residents of not only 

Saskatchewan but all provinces in Canada and territories and 

countries of the world aren‟t going to be suggesting that their 

governments have moved too slow on issues of the environment 

. . . Or pardon me, they‟re not going to be suggesting that 

governments have moved too fast. I misspoke. I want to be very 

clear about that. People are not going to say governments have 

moved too fast in protection of the environment in reducing 

CO2 emissions. People are going to worldwide be saying 

governments were asleep at the switch. Governments allowed 

the continued denigration of the environment. Governments 

allowed CO2 emissions to rise at unprecedented rates, and 

governments had an obligation to do better. 

 

And that‟s going to be what many legislators are going to be 

remembered for. And that‟s a shame because we can do better. 

We can, in fact on environmental protection Bills, we can make 

meaningful steps forward. Never, ever in the history of 

Saskatchewan have we had more ability financially to do better 

than we have in the past. The financial capability of this 

province are greater today than they‟ve been at any time in the 

history of Saskatchewan. 

 

So a lack of resources is absolutely not an excuse. Well it‟s an 

excuse, but it‟s not a legitimate reason to arguably do nothing 

or to do what the government wants, and that is that we should 

rag the puck on addressing climate change. And that‟s straight 

from the Sask Party government, straight from the Premier‟s 

mouth. They want to rag the puck on addressing climate 

change. And that‟s a terrible shame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have in this Bill 122, The Environmental Assessment 

Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, the minister in her first reading 

speech saying as a quote — incidentally this is found on page 

3929, December 2nd, 2009 Hansard just if anyone wants to 

follow the quotes — the minister closed, “Mr. Speaker, in 

closing, extensive consultations have occurred with industry 

and stakeholders, and we are acting on their key 

recommendations.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this flies in the face of the reality. This 

absolutely defies the reality. I don‟t know how in the world a 

minister of the Crown in Saskatchewan could say that when the 

reality is we‟ve got fourth Vice-chief Lyle Whitefish who . . . 

Let me just remind members what his absolute closing 

paragraph in a letter that he wrote February 25th this year to the 

Hon. Minister of the Environment. The final paragraph is, and I 

quote because this is worth noting, Mr. Speaker: 

 

I look forward to receiving the Crown‟s response, and 

working together with the Ministry of Environment to 

ensure that First Nations Treaty rights are protected, for 

present and future generations. 

 

I can think of nothing that Vice-chief Whitefish could have 

written that would be any clearer than that. I look forward to 

working with the ministry. I look forward to working together 

for the protection of current and future generations. And yet that 

letter, written February 25th. And on March 30th again this 

year, same fourth Vice-chief Whitefish had to write, and I‟m 

just going to look for the quote here: 

 

Firstly, I must express serious concern that you did not 

provide due consideration and respect to my office by 

contacting me personally to discuss the decision prior to 

such a decision being made. 

 

[10:30] 

 

This was a decision, Mr. Speaker, to terminate an agreement, an 

agreement that had been in place for 16 years, an agreement that 

had been put in place between the Government of 

Saskatchewan and partnering with the First Nations respecting 

environment. There was a unilateral termination done by the 

Ministry of Environment that ended a 16-year relationship that 

had much promise, that had done some very good work, Mr. 

Speaker, and that needs to do some more extremely good work 

in the future. 

 

Absolutely there is no way that we can proceed without a 

partnership, without enjoying the confidence of having our First 

Nations, the FSIN on board, the First Nations chiefs, and the 

people that they properly represent. They have to be on board, 

Mr. Speaker. And how do you get somebody on board? You 

talk to them. You exchange letters. Vice-chief Whitefish has 

exchanged two very well-written letters; I thought both of them, 

in the face of the cold shoulder they‟re getting from the Sask 

Party, in the face of that, I thought very generous in tone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m not sure I could have been as generous in tone 

if the Sask Party unilaterally ended a 16-year consultative 

relationship, just unilaterally yanked that relationship out and 

said, it‟s over; we‟re done. I‟m not sure I could be as generous. 

And I‟m sure not trying to second-guess Chief Whitefish. I‟m 

actually complimenting him on his generosity and his clarity, 

his clear desire, his clear desire, Mr. Speaker, when he says: 

 

I look forward to receiving the Crown‟s response, and 

working together with the Ministry of Environment to 

ensure that First Nations Treaty rights are protected, for 

present and future generations.  

 

That‟s his job. That‟s what he‟s elected to do. And you note the 

words, together. Not it‟s my way or the highway, not like the 

Sask Party government, not like the Ministry of Environment, 

Mr. Speaker, who clearly says not only is it my way or the 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5153 

highway, they said take a hike. Don‟t even care if it‟s on a 

highway, just take a hike. Go away and don‟t come back. Go 

away. We‟ll call you, they say. But we‟ll call you when the 

Sask Party government is darn good and ready. 

 

Well what a disgraceful shame it is. And it‟s just small wonder, 

Mr. Speaker, why there is concern around environmental Bills. 

We have a Sask Party government that says, we‟re the 

champions of environment. At least that‟s what they were 

saying in 2007 in the lead-up to the election. They were saying 

trust us, we have the environment in mind. Now they‟re saying, 

we‟re doing consultations around The Environmental 

Assessment Amendment Act. They say they‟ve done extensive 

consultation. 

 

Vice-chief Lyle Whitefish who, it‟s in his jurisdiction to be 

doing, being part of this consultation, has reached out and said, 

I want to be part of this. We want to discuss it. We need to be 

certain that we‟re not unduly stopping progress, but we need to 

be sure that some treaty rights are honoured. We need to be sure 

that there is some guarantees for the present and into the future. 

We‟re not prepared to unilaterally give up. That‟s what 

Vice-chief Whitefish is saying, and I think he‟s very wise in 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve got the opportunity, the government has an 

opportunity to do the right thing when it comes to Bill 122, The 

Environmental Assessment Amendment Act. The Act has stood 

the test for 30 years. It has stood the test of time for 30 years. 

The environment deserves better than what‟s being proposed 

here. The people of Saskatchewan clearly deserve better than 

what‟s being proposed in this legislation. The Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations deserve much better than the 

action that they‟re getting from the Sask Party government and 

the Ministry of Environment. They deserve much, much better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need the government to listen. We need the 

government to do what they‟ve said, what the minister said had 

happened in her first reading speech where the minister says, 

and I quote, “Mr. Speaker, in closing, extensive consultations 

have occurred with industry and stakeholders, and we are acting 

on their key recommendations.” And yet all the information we 

have says that‟s just not so. Just not so. That‟s not the reality. 

And I thought, I always thought, sir, that in this legislature we 

have an obligation to say it as it is. Certainly say it as we see it. 

Certainly say it as we see it. 

 

But how can there have been extensive consultations in the face 

of not one, but two letters that we have here. And generous 

letters, where Vice-chief Lyle Whitefish says, I look forward to 

receiving the Crown‟s response and working together with the 

Ministry of Environment. That‟s pretty darn generous words, 

working together. He doesn‟t say, gee we‟ve had extensive 

consultations, I‟m glad we were able to address some issues and 

we‟ve got a few little outstanding issues. He said, it‟s time to 

start. Time to start. And in his letter, in one of the letters that 

Vice-chief Whitefish wrote he says, the Ministry has said there 

can be no substantive changes in legislation after the second 

reading speeches. 

 

Well when is the time to consult? When interested parties say 

we‟re ready to consult? Or after the legislation is passed and 

then the Ministry of Environment, the Sask Party government 

can say, too late, where were you some months ago when the 

legislation was being considered? Too late, they‟ll say. I can 

hear it now. Too late. We can‟t change a thing, they‟re going to 

say, despite the fact that the opposition is, I hate to use the word 

begging, but certainly pleading with the government to do the 

consultation that they promised. Do the consultation that the 

law clearly says they have to do with respect to First Nations. 

Do the consultation now, before you pass the legislation. Do the 

consultation that you said you had done. Not, not consultation 

that might take place somewhere in the future. Do what you 

said you‟d already done. That‟s what we‟re saying. Vice-chief 

Whitefish is saying much the same. He‟s saying, willing to 

work with, want to work together, with the Ministry of 

Environment. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, once this Bill is passed. It‟s too late. What‟s 

the purpose of consulting other than to say, well little boy, little 

girl, little whatever, this is what the law says. Why? Because 

daddy says it‟s so. Why? Because I say it‟s so. Well that‟s not 

very satisfactory. It just doesn‟t work well. It doesn‟t sit well. It 

doesn‟t feel very democratic. I‟m fortunate. I‟m able to stand in 

my place in this Legislative Assembly and speak my piece, try 

and speak on behalf of some others, trying to get some common 

sense into the government. 

 

But we‟ve got not one, but three environmental Bills where the 

consultation hasn‟t taken place, where the consultation has not 

been in place. Because the letter from fourth Vice-chief 

Whitefish says, “Dear Minister Heppner, re impact on rights, 

regulatory review Bills 121, 122 [this Bill] and 123”. So there‟s 

three Bills that the FSIN are interested in having that 

consultation take place in. They‟re asking for it. This is sort of 

the last appeal to the Sask Party government. This is sort of the 

last appeal we can do to the ministry to allow us to proceed as 

we must, Mr. Speaker, to allow the province of Saskatchewan 

and the Crown to proceed together with the FSIN — together. 

And they‟ve expressed a desire to work together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s not much more that I think worthy of 

saying on this Bill. This Act is 30 years old. It was put in place 

to protect the environment. It was arguably some of the first 

steps to protect the environment, to put in place an 

environmental assessment regime before there could be any 

development, either by business or commercial or residential. 

But any development that encroached on land had to go through 

an environmental assessment first. And that was about 30 years 

ago. 

 

It‟s time for an update. Nobody will argue that it‟s not time to 

update the Act, but what I‟ve tried to convey is that this Act is 

clearly designed to work to the benefit only of industry. Only of 

industry. It‟s designed to knock out any environmental 

considerations. It‟s designed to make it so that development can 

proceed. There‟s a point in this Bill where you can get a 

ministerial — I want to get it right — a minister‟s screening 

decision. A business can apply for a ministerial screening 

decision, and then away they go. Go ahead with the 

development. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that‟s not a step forward in the protection of 

the environment. It‟s a step backwards. It‟s a step backwards. 

Even if, even if I and the opposition believed that this Minister 

of Environment would protect the environment, we don‟t know 



5154 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

who‟s the next minister of Environment nor the one after. So 

even . . . It just matters not. 

 

We need protections for the environment. We need clear rules. 

We need rules that have involved the people that it should 

involve, anyone that‟s involved in this decision. And clearly it 

should involve Vice-chief Lyle Whitefish and the FSIN, who 

have so clearly asked for the ability to consult and who . . . 

Earlier this year, Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Environment tore 

up a 16-year agreement to look at environmental issues, tore up 

a 16-year agreement that‟s been in place since the early ‟90s. 

 

And what a shame. At a time when we need to be proceeding 

together, we have a Sask Party government that says, no. No. 

We‟re the big brother, is what they‟re saying. We‟re the big 

brother, the big sister, and we‟ll tell you exactly how it‟s going 

to be. And that‟s what this legislation does. That‟s what this 

legislation does. 

 

And I just, I just say again that what we‟ve got now is a 

government that‟s determined to have members here from 8 in 

the morning till midnight, five days a week. That‟s okay. That‟s 

okay. I‟m not complaining for me, not so much for me. I‟m 

complaining for my constituents. I‟m complaining for the FSIN 

that deserves so much better than this. I‟m complaining for the 

people of Saskatchewan that deserve, Mr. Speaker, for us to 

have the ability to review legislation in a very meaningful 

manner and have the ability for the Sask Party government, 

instead of heckling, you‟re invited . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Members, all members, Mr. Speaker, have the right to speak 

in second reading. And I would so welcome the Minister of 

Social Services comments on this legislation. I would so 

welcome her comments. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, this is our opportunity to point out 

what‟s wrong with the Bill. And I‟ve pointed out a number of 

things that is wrong with the Bill. It‟s my opportunity to point 

out what‟s wrong with the process. And frankly, there‟s more 

wrong with the process of passing Bill 121, 122, and 123 by the 

Sask Party, there‟s more wrong with the jamming of the process 

of passage of these Bills than there is with the legislation itself. 

And there‟s plenty wrong with the legislation. 

 

We can do better. The job of the opposition is to point out 

where we can in fact do better. I‟ve tried to do that to the best of 

my ability. Mr. Speaker, I hope, I hope that somewhere in the 

Ministry of Environment, someone is listening. I hope 

somewhere in the Ministry of Environment there‟s a call put 

through, an apology to Vice-chief Lyle Whitefish for ending a 

16-year relationship that needs to continue. In one form or 

another, it absolutely needs to be in place if we‟re to have any 

progress. 

 

This isn‟t just a case of the opposition versus the government. 

This is a case, it‟s a matter of law. It‟s a matter of the way that 

the duty to consult with First Nations is being upheld by the 

courts, and that is developing, and it seems to be strengthening 

in recent years. It‟s just a matter of doing good business. It‟s a 

matter of providing good government. 

 

And it‟s a matter, Mr. Speaker, where Vice-chief Whitefish has 

said, I‟m looking forward to working together with the Ministry 

of Environment. He‟s not saying, go away; or gee, this is my 

bottom line; or gosh, we‟ve got to have this. Here‟s our list of 

one, two, or six or whatever items we have to have. He said, 

I‟m looking forward to working with the Ministry of 

Environment, together. And instead he gets brushed off, 

essentially slapped in the face, and a 16-year consultation 

program ended. 

 

The people deserve better. There‟s much wrong with this and 

even more wrong with the process. The people of Saskatchewan 

deserve better. I hope that someone is listening. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to take my place. I‟ve registered my 

major concerns around this Bill. I hope, again I‟ll end by saying 

I hope that somebody in the ministry, maybe the Minister of 

Environment herself, will pick up the telephone and contact 

Vice-chief Lyle Whitefish, apologize for the appalling treatment 

that has been meted out and ask, how can we work together? 

How can we mend this relationship? How can we work together 

for the benefit of, not just First Nations people, but all 

Saskatchewan people, all Canadians? How can we make The 

Environmental Assessment Amendment Act a model that could 

be used in other jurisdictions, but at very minimum, a model of 

legislation that would work well here? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m not at all pleased with this Act. I‟m frustrated 

and I‟m disgusted with the way it has proceeded so far. Thank 

you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was 

listening to the remarks just made by the member from Regina 

Coronation Park on Bill 122 and some of the chatter going on in 

the Chamber, Mr. Speaker, which was, I think, at an acceptable 

level. But I clearly heard the government member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook call on a number of occasions, while the 

member was speaking and referencing letters from the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, for the member 

from Regina Coronation Park to read the entire correspondence, 

Mr. Speaker. And I‟m going to do so. 

 

I don‟t know whether the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook 

doesn‟t know what‟s in the correspondence and believes that 

the member from Regina Coronation Park was making selective 

quotations that if read in context would not have carried the 

same impact and intent, and that the letters in full would have a 

different meaning than the quotations that the member from 

Regina Coronation Park was using, or whether the member 

from Rosthern-Shellbrook is not aware of the relationship that 

his government and particularly the Ministry of the 

Environment has developed with the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, or whether the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook is aware, Mr. Speaker, and is proud of that 

relationship, but does not intend to rise himself and enter this 

correspondence into the record. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, both these letters, the letter of February 25, 

2010, and even the letter of March 30, 2010 are on point with 

the legislation. And so I am going to take up the member‟s 

invitation, the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook, take up his 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5155 

invitation and read both of these letters into the record, Mr. 

Speaker. I intend not to make any comment on the letters. I 

think the letters speak for themselves. 

 

First of all, the letter February 25, 2010 to the Hon. Nancy 

Heppner, Minister of Environment. 

 

Dear Minister Heppner, 

 

Re: Impact on Rights — Regulatory Review Bills 121, 

122, and 123. 

 

The Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations has 

identified a number of questions and concerns with 

regards to the “Results-Based” regulatory review, and 

Bills 121, 122, and 123. Please see the attached 

submission outlining the concern about the impact of 

these Bills to First Nations rights. 

 

Given that the Ministry of Environment has indicated to 

the FSIN that no substantive changes can be made to the 

Bills after second reading, without having the Bills 

repealed, we expect that the Crown will seriously 

consider and substantively address the concerns outlined 

in our submission prior to second reading of the Bill 121, 

122, and 123, so that measures to accommodate our 

concerns about the impact to our rights can be 

incorporated into the Bills. 

 

The law developed in the last several years makes it clear 

that meaningful consultation must take place on 

procedural and substantive issues related to the conduct 

which may affect First Nations rights, inclusive of the 

development of regulatory regimes. First Nations have 

dedicated the FSIN to work with the Ministry of the 

Environment to develop a mutually-agreeable and 

comprehensively funded consultation process with respect 

to the regulatory review. 

 

Minister Heppner, while I have not received a response 

from you with respect to my previous request for a 

meeting to move forward with such consultation process, 

I repeat this request today. 

 

I look forward to receiving the Crown‟s response, and 

working together with the Ministry of the Environment to 

ensure that First Nations Treaty rights are protected, for 

present and future generations. 

 

Yours truly, 

 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, 

 

Lyle Whitefish, fourth Vice Chief.  

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the chief and the FSIN did receive a 

response, and the response was a cancellation of the agreement 

between the FSIN and the Ministry of the Environment, leading 

to the second correspondence that the government member 

from Shellbrook Rosthern wants read in its entirety into record: 

 

March 30th, 2010 

 

Nancy Heppner, Ministry of the Environment 

 

Dear Ms. Heppner, 

 

This is in response to the telephone conversation I had 

with Elizabeth Quarshie, Deputy Minister of Environment 

on March 24th, 2010. On this date Ms. Quarshie advised 

me that the Ministry of Environment would be 

terminating funding to the Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations under the FSIN-Ministry of the 

Environment Partnership Agreement that was entered into 

for the 2009-2010 fiscal year. 

 

Firstly, I must express serious concern that you did not 

provide due consideration and respect to my office by 

contacting me personally to discuss this decision prior to 

such decision being made.  

 

Secondly, I am extremely disappointed with your actions 

as a Minister of the provincial Crown particularly in 

breeching the terms within our partnership agreement. For 

your information, pursuant to section 6 of the partnership 

agreement, it provides that:  

 

6.1 This agreement may be terminated on 60 days 

written notice to the other party with or without cause. 

 

As you can surely appreciate, such above-noted telephone 

conversation took me by complete surprise. The decision 

by the Ministry of Environment to terminate funding 

essentially terminates our agreement. At no time have 

either you, or representatives of the Ministry, indicated 

that any major decisions regarding our agreement were 

being contemplated. As such, I would have expected your 

office to respect our long standing relationship by the 

very least, engaging the FSIN in discussions. 

 

For your enlightenment, in 1994, the FSIN and 

Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management 

entered into a protocol agreement for the purpose of 

fostering and establishing a co-operative working 

relationship between First Nations in Saskatchewan and 

the provincial Crown. This included engaging in 

co-operative work on matters respecting the land, 

environment and the management of wildlife resources. 

Since then our office moved forward by establishing the 

Bi-lateral task force that provided a forum for discussion 

between First Nations and the Ministry on matters of 

mutual concern. Furthermore, the protocol agreement 

promoted proactive approaches between First Nations and 

your ministry towards resolving issues before they 

became problematic. 

 

The telephone call on March 24th, 2010, advising that 

your Ministry will no longer provide funding illustrates 

insensitivity and lack of appreciation of First Nations 

people in Saskatchewan. We see it as a clear indication 

that the Ministry of Environment has no regard for the 

Inherent and Treaty rights of First Nations people in 

Saskatchewan and that First Nations people in 

Saskatchewan are to be further excluded from 

participating in the protection of the environment, and 

benefiting from the economic growth of the province. 



5156 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

This is made evident through the recent correspondence 

between our offices whereby the FSIN has been asserting 

a great deal of involvement of First Nations in the 

Ministry‟s current results-based regulatory review of the 

provincial Crown‟s environmental legislative framework. 

The responses from your Ministry, since you have taken 

office, have been dismissive and have argued for a 

reduced role of First Nations in the government‟s 

consultation processes  

 

The First Nations leadership in Saskatchewan are fully 

aware that the Ministry‟s position and approach on the 

duty to consult and accommodate First Nations is not 

supported by the legal principles, as pronounced by the 

courts. The message you are sending to First Nations 

leadership is that the Ministry would prefer an adversarial 

approach on dealing with matters between First Nations 

and the provincial Crown. 

 

The FSIN will continue to support First Nations in 

Saskatchewan to ensure the ministry respects the legal 

and constitutional obligations as it relates to the duty to 

consult and accommodate First Nations, and that any 

proposed legislative changes on provincial environmental 

laws will be resisted until you consult with and 

accommodate, if necessary, the First Nations regarding 

their Inherent and Treaty rights. Furthermore, the FSIN 

will ensure that all industry and resource development 

proponents in Saskatchewan will be made aware that the 

issues regarding the Inherent and Treaty rights of First 

Nations people to the land are still outstanding and that 

your government has failed to seek a resolution to these 

matters. 

 

The FSIN remains committed to the promotion, 

protection and implementation of the Inherent and Treaty 

rights of First Nations in Saskatchewan and to the 

protection and promotion of a healthy environment so that 

First Nations people may continue to practice their Treaty 

right to hunt, fish, trap and gather on lands and waters in 

Saskatchewan.  

 

My previous experience in working with provincial 

Ministers and Ministries has been very different than 

what has occurred in this situation. I am therefore 

dismayed with your Ministry‟s actions, which brings into 

question whether the First Nations can trust the Ministry 

of Environment to live up to its commitments. This is 

illustrated in the unilateral action to terminate a sixteen 

(16) year relationship. 

 

It is a further indication that . . . [the] ministry does not 

value partnerships with First Nations people. I believe 

that the FSIN-Environment partnership was on the right 

path and together, we could have worked around these 

funding hurdles.  

 

Sincerely, 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 

 

Lyle Whitefish 

Office of the Fourth Vice Chief  

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it was a government member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook who called for the entire correspondence 

to be read into the record, and I said that I wouldn‟t comment 

upon that correspondence, that it spoke for itself. But I would 

only state through you, Mr. Speaker, to the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook that one should always be careful of what 

one asks for . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — You just might get it. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — You just might get it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I was going to speak primarily on the issue of assessment, risk 

assessment in contrast to risk management, Mr. Speaker, and 

perhaps I will comment on that briefly. It‟s an area that‟s, I 

think, easily confused, and I don‟t pretend that I don‟t confuse it 

on occasion, Mr. Speaker. But we have a number of 

environmental Bills before the House, one concerning 

environmental management and protection — or at least that‟s 

its title — another in environmental assessment. Or at least, 

again, that‟s its title, and that‟s the Bill that I am immediately 

speaking to. 

 

Risk assessment and risk management are two very different 

things, and risk assessment really involves, simply put, an 

assessment of the probability of an occurrence and the costs of 

the occurrence if it was to take place. So when you‟re assessing 

risk, you‟re trying to determine how likely it is that an 

occurrence will take place and how harmful it would be if that 

occurrence took place.  

 

[11:00] 

 

And there are obviously different combinations. There may be 

some events that are very unlikely and if they did occur, not 

very harmful, Mr. Speaker. And in assessing risk, those risks 

would be considered to be relatively of less concern than the 

other possibilities, one of which is a risk that might be highly 

probable in occurring because it‟s a risk that is undertaken in an 

inherently dangerous activity. And if the risk, if the occurrence 

took place, it would be extremely harmful, perhaps in an 

occupational health and safety situation, fatal, Mr. Speaker. Or 

even in an environmental situation, perhaps fatal, and fatal even 

to human beings, Mr. Speaker. And so risks that are assessed as 

being highly probable and also highly harmful would be at the 

other end. 

 

And of course there would be also risks that would be quite 

harmful, of occurrences quite harmful if they occurred, but are 

improbable. And of course then there are probable occurrences, 

or probable risks of occurrences that aren‟t necessarily so 

harmful. 

 

So we are primarily concerned in making risk assessments, Mr. 

Speaker, primarily concerned with occurrences that if they 

occur are harmful, and particularly concerned with occurrences 

that are highly probable, Mr. Speaker. So in both occupational 

health and safety for example and in environmental assessment, 

although we should be concerned about all harm, we want to be 

concerned mostly about great harm so that we manage our 

resources properly. And we want to be concerned specifically 

about the risk of great harm that is more probable and more 

likely than other situations where the risk might be less 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5157 

probable but still possible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is to be differentiated from risk management which comes, 

I think, at the second stage. Once the assessments are made of 

both the probability and the risk of harm — the quantity of 

harm, the quality of harm that could take place — then those 

risks need to be managed. And more resources and attention are 

brought to those risks that are more likely and more dangerous 

than to those risks of occurrences that are less likely and less 

dangerous, or just less dangerous even if more likely, Mr. 

Speaker. And that‟s the important role of assessment, is to 

decide where to place your management resources, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I would argue that with the ministry‟s move towards what they 

call results-oriented regulatory review, that it might be 

understandable that you wish to move to the private sector the 

management of risk, Mr. Speaker. They‟re on the ground, and 

they may not bear the greatest cost of risk, Mr. Speaker. The 

greatest cost might be to the environment. The greatest costs 

might be to the public. But they bear the cost of the penalties 

that are set out in this legislation, the environmental protection 

legislation, the environmental management legislation. They 

bear the cost of those penalties, and they have therefore that 

incentive at least to manage the risk, and arguably greater 

opportunity to manage the risk.  

 

To a certain extent these Bills represent a figurative throwing 

up of the hands of the Ministry of the Environment saying, we 

do not have the resources, we argue. That‟s the defence for this 

legislation. We do not have the resources to manage the 

environment, and we have to allow developers to take a major 

role in managing those risks. 

 

But I would still argue that there is . . . Even if one takes that 

approach, that the assessment of risk, the assessment of dangers 

to the public and to the environment — which is a public trust, 

not a private trust of any developer — the assessment of risk is 

for the public and for the public‟s government to play. 

 

And I have a greater concern, not to suggest that I have no 

concern about the environmental management legislation. I do, 

Mr. Speaker. But I have greater concern about the farming out 

of risk assessment by the government. And the concern is 

represented, if I had to give an example of how the concern 

arises, is highlighted perhaps by the creation of class 

assessment by this legislation, so that projects are not assessed 

based upon where they are and the specifics of that project and 

perhaps idiosyncrasies of that development in that specific 

environment within the province of Saskatchewan, but they‟re 

assessed on the basis that they are similar to other projects that 

may take place in other places and that really should‟ve been 

assessed on a different basis because the risks are different. And 

perhaps, Mr. Speaker, if the developer is different — the 

industry is the same but the actual company engaged in the 

project is different — perhaps the probability of a dangerous 

occurrence may be different as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the Act sees not just the throwing up of hands as to the 

ministry‟s ability to manage the environment, but the ministry‟s 

ability to do individual assessments on individual projects and 

to have these class assessments. And if one proponent of a type 

of a project can persuade the government that the project is, the 

risk in the project is properly managed, the assessment of the 

risk is properly done, the management that . . . the due diligence 

that the proponent will put in place to manage those risks are all 

appropriate, then it appears everybody else in the class can 

piggyback on that, whether it‟s appropriate or not in their 

particular situation with their particular project in their 

particular environment in the ecological niche in which they are 

operating, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that kind of highlights the concern that the opposition has, 

that certainly I have, I think my colleagues share, that the 

government doesn‟t necessary appreciate the public role in risk 

assessment in respect to the environment and doesn‟t 

necessarily understand the difference between risk assessment 

and risk management in dealing with the environment or 

probably in dealing with occupational health and safety. I mean 

I know the opposition has a number of members of the 

opposition including . . . I have a number of concerns about 

whether the government has the proper level of concern in that 

respect as well. 

 

And the issue of class assessments, it does take us back to the 

lack of consultation that actually took place, the failure to 

consult with First Nations in respect to this legislation. The 

government would have held out, the minister held on the 

second reading, those consultations took place. The letters that 

the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook wanted me to read in 

full made it clear that that consultation did not take place, Mr. 

Speaker. If anything, the FSIN was met with their request for 

consultation on these Bills by a phone call — improper notice 

under the law, improper notice under the agreement, improper 

notice that the funding for the partnership agreement on the 

environment was being cancelled. That was the response to the 

FSIN‟s request for consultation on these Bills, was to have the 

partnership agreement effectively cancelled, and I would argue 

illegally cancelled because it wasn‟t cancelled pursuant to the 

terms of the agreement. 

 

That was the response. That was the consultations in this case, 

Mr. Speaker. And I know members of the government would 

say when we get up and we talk about consultations, well 

you‟re wrong. We consulted. And there‟s no evidence on one 

side or the other for that in many cases, Mr. Speaker. And you 

can‟t prove a negative, except in this case there‟s a lot of 

evidence for the negative, Mr. Speaker. There‟s a lot of 

evidence that the consultations didn‟t take place. 

 

And if they had taken place, Mr. Speaker, and they had been 

taken seriously, this issue of class assessments would have been 

addressed. It may have still been in the legislation, but I think 

that the government would have been better able to respond to 

why it still was there. Because to have a class assessment and 

then say that, well the entire class is now deemed to have 

consulted with First Nations even though the projects may take 

place on different traditional lands of different First Nations, 

and therefore it meets that requirement and that the 

development can now occur, is to I think miss the point on duty 

to consult, Mr. Speaker, as it‟s been established by the courts. 

 

And I appreciate that since the Supreme Court has set out that 

duty certainly on governments, Mr. Speaker, that only five 

years have passed. But there have a number of decisions 

following that establishment of that duty by the courts. And this 



5158 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

government is fond of the slogan, Mr. Speaker — they were 

fond of it in opposition, and they are fond of it in government 

— that they would respect the duty to consult, Mr. Speaker. But 

that is all it is, is a slogan. And I think the fact that that‟s all it 

is, is a slogan, is evidenced both by the consultation on Bill 122 

and the response of the government to the request for 

consultation on Bill 122. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, those are some of our concerns in respect 

to this legislation. I appreciate that the government member‟s 

request, made to the opposition, to read the entire 

correspondence into the record. I think the correspondence from 

the FSIN on these Bills is relevant, highly relevant and very 

clarifying of the government‟s understanding, certainly in 

respect to environmental legislation, of their duties and 

responsibilities to the people who not only have a legal right to 

consultation, Mr. Speaker, but as Chief Whitefish points out, a 

specific and long-standing interest in a healthy environment. 

And again, I won‟t quote from the correspondence, having read 

the entire amount of it into the record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The chief was correct, I‟m sure, when he said that the Ministry 

of the Environment said that there would be no substantive 

changes to these Bills after they receive second reading. The 

government, in its second reading speech, said their 

consultations had taken place. If they have not indeed taken 

place — and the correspondence suggests that they have not, 

Mr. Speaker — they will not take place now. 

 

If this legislation would have been essentially the same after 

these concerns had been addressed by the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations or anybody else, the 

government‟s holding out that they consulted. But it did not in 

fact consult. Because there very well could be correspondence 

of this nature that we have not seen, Mr. Speaker. Then it‟s too 

late, and we can‟t proceed with confidence that the legislation 

would have been the same if the government had behaved the 

way the minister held out in her second reading speech instead 

of the way that it appears the ministry actually conducted itself, 

according to the correspondence between the ministry and the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations. 

 

So that said, Mr. Speaker, I think other members may very well 

have comments about this legislation along similar lines and 

perhaps other concerns. I hope some government members are a 

little bit more aware of the relationship their government has 

established and built — if those are the right words — and 

particularly the Ministry of the Environment have built with the 

First Nations of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The question before the 

Assembly is the motion by the minister that Bill No. 122, The 

Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

[11:15] 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — To which committee 

shall this Bill be referred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 122, The 

Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009 be referred to 

the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — This Bill stands 

referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 123 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 123 — The 

Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2009 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 

Committees. It‟s good to participate in this debate today and to 

follow in the train of other of my colleagues on this side that 

have been putting the lie to the misrepresentations on the part of 

this government opposite in terms of what‟s happened around 

Bills 121, 122, and 123. 

 

And as particularly regards Bill 123, Mr. Speaker, I would refer 

to December 2nd‟s second reading speech on the part of the 

Minister of the Environment, wherein she stated on behalf of 

that government in the introduction of Bill 123: 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these amendments have been 

developed following extensive discussions that include 

industry, both large and small; environmental groups; and 

forest professionals. These discussions revealed broad 

support for the general approach and for specific changes 

that we are proposing. We continue to work [and note this 

very carefully, Mr. Chair of Committees — “we continue 

to work”] with First Nation and Métis people to find 

meaningful approaches to incorporate their interests as we 

move forward on the results-based environmental 

regulatory system. 

 

Taken as a whole, that paragraph would seem to indicate that 

there has been consultation that has taken place, that there are 

interests being incorporated, and that this piece of legislation 

along with its companion pieces would be the product of a 

thoroughgoing consultation process. 

 

And again, I‟m going to talk in my remarks today, Mr. Speaker, 

a bit about the process and a bit about the substance of the 

legislation. But certainly the impression that one would take 

from the minister‟s speech and from the remarks as I have 

related them here from Hansard, December 2nd, page 3931, is 

that everything was great and this is legislation that deserved to 

move forward. 

 

But as we find out, and as we find out on many fronts when it 

comes to the actions of this government, Mr. Chair of 

Committees, things aren‟t quite as they seem. You can‟t take 

the word at face value when it comes to especially consultation 

on the part of this government. 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5159 

So I would then refer folks to a letter from . . . that was copied 

out and that accompanied a fairly significant submission on the 

part of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations on 

regulatory review, Bills 121, 122, and 123, dated February 25th. 

And I know that other of my colleagues have touched upon this 

in their remarks, but I‟d like to get this on the record as regards 

Bill 123 again, Mr. Chair of Committees: 

 

The Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations has 

identified a number of questions and concerns with 

regards to the results-based regulatory review and Bills 

121, 122, and 123. Please see the attached submission 

outlining the concern about the impact of these Bills to 

First Nations rights. 

 

And I‟ll get into that submission as it relates to the Bill 123, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, if I might add parenthetically. Continuing the 

quotes from the letter: 

 

Given that the Minister of the Environment has indicated 

to the FSIN that no substantive changes can be made to 

the Bills after the second reading without having the Bills 

repealed, we expect that the Crown will seriously 

consider and substantively address the concerns outlined 

in our submission prior to second reading of the Bill 121, 

122, and 123, so that measures to accommodate our 

concerns about the impact to our rights can be 

incorporated into the Bills. 

 

The law developed in the last several years makes it clear 

that meaningful consultation must take place on 

procedural and substantive issues related to conduct 

which may affect First Nations rights inclusive of the 

development of regulatory regimes. 

 

First Nations have directed the FSIN [and that‟s a very 

important thing to note, Mr. Speaker — “First Nations 

have directed the FSIN”] to work with the Ministry of the 

Environment to develop a mutually agreeable and 

comprehensively funded consultation process with respect 

to the regulatory review. 

 

Minister Heppner, while I have not received a response 

from you with respect to my previous request for a 

meeting to move forward with such a consultation 

process, I repeat this request today. 

 

So there you see, Mr. Speaker, that already they‟ve been left 

hanging. 

 

I look forward to receiving the Crown‟s response and 

working together with the Ministry of Environment to 

ensure that First Nations treaty rights are protected for 

present and future generations. 

 

Yours truly, 

 

Lyle Whitefish 

fourth Vice-Chief 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 

 

And it‟s copied to Premier Brad Wall, Minister Bill Hutchinson, 

and different Ministry of the Environment officials. 

Now the thing that‟s interesting about that, Mr. Speaker, is that 

there was then another lag time in terms of response being made 

to the correspondence and part of the FSIN. And the next time 

that, of course, the FSIN hears from the ministry is the day of 

the budget. Now this leads us to wonder, is it the substance of 

the concerns that were being brought forward as opposed to the 

supposed mandate review that the Department of Environment 

had undertaken to find savings? 

 

Or is it about, you know, they didn‟t agree with us on the 

changes being brought forward through legislation; they‟re 

being troublesome. So what we‟ll do is we‟ll tear up a protocol 

that‟s been in place for 16 years, which is meant for meaningful 

capacity on the part of First Nations to develop a perspective on 

environmental issues, land, and resource management. 

 

And, of course, the next letter that we enter into this 

consideration of events concerns the call that was received by 

the Vice-chief Whitefish from the deputy minister — not from 

the minister, mind you, but from the deputy minister — to the 

vice-chief, saying that, well you know, it‟s not about the 

concerns that were raised around Bills 121, 122 and 123. It‟s 

not about that. What we‟re going to do in response is tear up a 

16-year-old environmental protocol between the FSI 

[Federation of Saskatchewan Indians] and the province of 

Saskatchewan, you know, regardless of the fact that there‟s a 

60-day notice clause in the protocol, which had been signed in 

good faith, and just last year by that minister opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There‟s a 60-day notice, written notice termination clause in it 

that was, you know, obviously ignored. It makes you wonder 

the value of even the signature when you get things down in 

black and white from that minister in terms of the good faith at 

work. Because if there was good faith in this protocol that‟s . . . 

even the termination clause is not being honoured in this case, 

Mr. Speaker, let alone the protocol itself. 

 

So you see the $282,000 that were attached to it, the capacity 

that that built on the part of FSI and the way that they 

backstopped the work of individual First Nations who of course 

were the treaty signatories in terms of making sure that they are 

able to provide a meaningful response to exercises undertaken 

under duty to consult and accommodate. Again, something that 

we‟ve heard a lot about from members opposite in terms of the 

importance of that process over the years. 

 

But when it gets down to the brass tacks of how it‟s responded 

to in this budget, and in terms of the actions of a very important 

minister in terms of the scheme of things around duty to 

consult, the Minister of the Environment, well they don‟t get a 

response to their request for information. What they do get 

instead is a long-standing agreement being torn up unilaterally 

without the proper notices outlined under the protocol. And, 

you know, let alone any sort of meaningful address to the 

concerns that have been raised. 

 

So my colleague, the member from Saskatoon Meewasin, has 

entered this letter into the record so I‟ll not dwell on that any 

further, but what I do want to reference, Mr. Chair of 

Committees, is the concerns that were raised in the submission 

made by the FSI concerning Bills 121, 122, and particularly 

123. And the part that I‟d like to quote from is the introduction 



5160 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

to the submission that‟s accompanied the letter of February 25, 

and again it talks about the process and the difficulty that the 

FSIN and that the vice-chief and his officials have had in 

working with this Minister of the Environment. 

 

The submission is many pages long, and again I‟ll refer to some 

things from the introduction that particularly touch on the way 

the consultation has been not discharged by that minister, not 

discharged by this government. And then I‟ll get into some 

specific questions that they have around the legislation itself as 

regards Bill 123 in this case. 

 

This submissions is being made . . . To quote from the 

submission: 

 

Despite a lack of developing a meaningful consultation 

process with the First Nations and FSIN to 

comprehensively assess the impact of these Bills on our 

rights . . .  

 

And again, referring to 121, 122, 123: 

 

The Ministry of the Environment has informed the FSIN 

that not only will the Bills not be repealed, but that no 

substantive changes can be made to the Bills unless they 

are repealed, and once the Bills are in second reading that 

leaves no opportunity for accommodation and defeating 

the purpose of consultation.  

 

Again, that lays it out fairly clearly, Mr. Speaker. You proclaim 

consultation on the one hand, but provide no opportunity for 

meaningful consultation on the other. So what does that add up 

to? It means they‟re making a mockery of the consultation 

process. To return to their letter: 

 

Nonetheless, it is necessary to raise the following 

common concerns which will impact all First Nations in 

Saskatchewan and to call upon the Crown to 

accommodate our concerns in the spirit of reconciliation. 

 

The FSIN and First Nations in Saskatchewan are very 

concerned that Bills 121, 122, and 123 are being put 

forward into second reading without proper consultation 

with First Nations. The Province has a legal obligation to 

take into account First Nations‟ constitutionally-protected 

rights, including in land use and strategic-level planning 

processes such as the development of the “Results-Based” 

approach and the drafting of Bills 121, 122, and 123, 

which set the foundation for implementing the approach. 

As a result, consultation must occur before any of the 

Bills are in second reading; otherwise, there is no 

possibility of accommodation. As the court stated in 

Mikisew Cree First Nation v. Canada (Minister of 

Canadian Heritage), [2005]: “Consultation that excludes 

from the outset any form of accommodation would be 

meaningless.” [That states it pretty pithily there, Mr. 

Speaker.] “The contemplated process is not simply one of 

giving the Mikisew an opportunity to blow off steam 

before the Minister proceeds to do what she intended to 

do all along.” 

 

And again that certainly rings true to the approach of that 

minister opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

Moreover, the Supreme Court of Canada has stated that 

the honor of the Crown infuses every treaty, which gives 

rise to both procedural rights (e.g. consultation) as well as 

substantive rights, (e.g. hunting, fishing, and trapping 

rights). As such, conduct such as the regulatory review, 

conducted without consultation, constitutes a breach of 

First Nations procedural rights, quite apart from any 

substantive treaty obligations . . . There is a need to 

ensure that the direct, indirect, and cumulative impacts of 

Bills 121, 122, and 123 are assessed on our ability to 

exercise both our procedural right to consultation and 

accommodation, and on our substantive rights, and First 

Nations must be given a meaningful opportunity to 

provide input into the environmental conditions and 

resources necessary for the exercise of those rights. 

 

The FSIN and the First Nations of Saskatchewan agree 

that adequate resources need to be provided to First 

Nations in order to undertake research and hire advisers 

so that they can properly understand the impact of the 

move to a “Results-based” regime, and of Bills 121, 122, 

and 123, which are a culmination of strategic planning, 

and have the potential to adversely impact First Nations 

rights. To date, and of concern, is that there has been no 

comprehensively funded consultation process to ensure 

that First Nations are included in the regulatory review. 

 

Rather than establishing a meaningful consultation 

process through negotiations with the FSIN and First 

Nations, the Ministry proceeded with ad-hoc information 

meetings with First Nations in early November, 2009 . . . 

 

Again, early November 2009. The legislation hits the floor in 

this Chamber December 2nd. 

 

. . . which did not adequately discharge the Government 

of Saskatchewan‟s legal duty to consult. This is 

particularly so, given that at the time of the meetings, the 

Ministry was in possession of the FSIN‟s Proposal for 

First Nations involvement in the regulatory review, which 

was submitted at the Bi-Lateral Task Force meeting on 

August 27, 2009. 

 

August 27th, Mr. Speaker, 2009. And again, the bilateral task 

force was the body that met pursuant to the protocol that those 

members opposite tore up unilaterally via a phone call on 

budget day. 

 

[11:30] 

 

At the time of the Ad-hoc meetings, the Ministry had not 

yet responded to the FSIN [had not responded] or to First 

Nations as to the direction of the consultation process in 

relation to the FSIN Proposal. Rather, the Ministry 

responded on November 17, [November 17, you know, 

two weeks before the legislation hits the floor here] by 

stating that Ministry officials are working with the FSIN 

to develop a consultation process for First Nations 

inclusion in the review, after the ad-hoc meetings had 

already occurred. 

 

However, it was not until December 1, 2009, that the 

FSIN was informed by the Ministry, that not only had the 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5161 

Bills been tabled on November 30, 2009, prior to the 

release of the Bills to First Nations, and prior to 

establishing a consultation procedure before the 

introduction of the Bills, as requested by [FSIN] 

Resolution # 1680; but, moreover, that the Ministry had 

determined unilaterally that it would conduct 

consultations, at which time a senior Ministry official 

stated to the FSIN that: “We haven‟t designed the 

consultation approach specifically yet”. The FSIN was 

later informed that November 16, 2009, was the date the 

Ministry decided to consult rather than to agree to a 

comprehensively funded consultation process. As such, 

the Ad-hoc sessions in early November occurred prior to 

the Ministry even determining that it would be the entity 

facilitating consultations. This was at the same time the 

Ministry led First Nations to believe that it was in good 

faith negotiations with the FSIN on the development of a 

consultation process for First Nations inclusion in the 

review. 

 

Again making a sham of the consultation process, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

“To date, the FSIN . . .” and this is as of February 25th and I 

don‟t believe anything has changed since then, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, except for the fact that of course the protocol was torn 

up unilaterally. 

 

To date, the FSIN and First Nations have maintained that 

consultation is required with regard to the 

“Results-Based” regulatory review. Inclusive of the 

earliest point in time and during every step of the process, 

including: the decision to adopt the “Results-Based” 

review (stated at the Bi-Lateral Task Force meeting [on] 

August 27, 2009, when the FSIN proposal was 

submitted); during the development of the Bills and prior 

to their introduction into the Legislature (stated in 

Resolution # 1680 [of the FSIN Assembly]); and in terms 

of every subsequent step, including but not limited to the 

development of the Environmental Code. 

 

However, the messages that First Nations have received 

from the Ministry of the Environment have been 

confusing at best, and do not uphold the Crown honor, at 

worst. Even though the Ministry of Environment admitted 

it had a duty to consult at the Bi-Lateral Task Force 

meeting on August 27, 2009, and solicited the FSIN 

Proposal for consultation with First Nations prior to that 

date, the later actions of the Ministry are contradictory. 

 

After submission and rejection of the FSIN Proposal, and 

a subsequent meeting [was held] between Minister 

Heppner, Minister Hutchinson and Vice Chief Whitefish, 

on January 18, 2010, the Ministry committed to working 

together to develop a mutually-acceptable consultation 

process for First Nations. However, that evening, 

Ministry officials informed the FSIN that not only was the 

Ministry not going to seek a mutually-acceptable process, 

but moreover, that the Ministry had no duty to consult on 

the regulatory review and the Bills at all [at all]. Rather, 

the Ministry provided it would be only consulting with 

regards to site-specific impacts as they arose, and directly 

with First Nations. 

Nonetheless, the position of the FSIN and First Nations in 

Saskatchewan has been, and continues to be, that 

consultation and accommodation is required in regard to 

the entire regulatory review process. Thus, despite the 

lack of commitment that the FSIN and First Nations have 

received from the Ministry of Environment, we feel that it 

is imperative to set out a number of preliminary concerns 

that we have identified. However, our analysis is by no 

means complete, given the lack of time, resources, and 

the lack of meetings between the Ministry, First Nations, 

and the FSIN in a meaningful consultation and 

accommodation process, which we have been attempting 

to establish since prior to August, 2009. 

 

This submission shall in no way be taken to constitute 

consultation or accommodation, as there has been no 

meeting of the minds with regard to an acceptable 

process, which would provide the FSIN and First Nations 

with the necessary resources and capacity to fully identify 

our concerns regarding the impact of Bills on First 

Nations rights. Rather, we have requested, and 

respectfully request again, that Minister Heppner meet 

with the FSIN to establish a comprehensive consultation 

process for First Nations involvement in the regulatory 

review, prior to the second reading of Bills 121, 122 and 

123. 

 

And again, to recap how that turned out, Mr. Chair of 

Committees, that respectful request was met with, you know, 

confusion, with misrepresentation, and with ultimately valid 

concerns being brought forward to be responded to by tearing 

up the environmental protocol between the FSI and the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And again it‟s interesting to . . . I‟m going to veer away from 

quoting the letter at further length at this point, Mr. Speaker. 

But it‟s interesting to go back to look at the meeting that was 

held on January 18th, 2010. And again, to establish a bit of the 

timeline here, Mr. Speaker, there‟s a meeting of the bilateral 

task force at the end of August. These concerns had been 

brewing for some time. There‟s some undertakings made at that 

time to work on an agreed upon process. 

 

There are more meetings that take place in November, but these 

of course are taking place against the backdrop of decisions that 

have already been made on the part of the province of 

Saskatchewan and the Ministry of Environment and, in terms of 

the legislation, then being brought forward without the 

consultation process being agreed upon. So again they‟ll claim 

consultation, Mr. Chair of Committees, but again what is 

practised is something very different. 

 

And it‟s very hard to take the members opposite and 

particularly that Minister of the Environment at her word, be it 

in the black and white as represented by signing off on a 

protocol that was arbitrarily and unilaterally terminated on 

budget day by a phone call in contravention of the termination 

clause of their own agreement that they had signed, or what the 

minister has to say in a second reading speech in terms of the 

work that‟s gone on in terms of the bringing forward of 

legislation. 

 

So and further to that, we have a meeting on January 18th, 2010 



5162 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

wherein it would seem that there‟s a habit perhaps of the 

minister saying one thing in the meeting and then officials 

being delegated to do the dirty work after the meeting. So 

they‟ll nod and smile and agree and bobble-head their way 

through a meeting, Mr. Chair of Committees. But then, come 

the time to actually implement the decision or to live up to their 

word, then it‟s off to the officials to deliver the bad news that, 

well that isn‟t what the minister really meant. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, that‟s an amazing way to do business 

— and I say amazing with, you know, no end of irony. Because 

there‟s only so long a government can do business like that 

before it catches up with them, Mr. Speaker. And I think that 

the bill is coming due on these people very, very soon. 

 

I want to touch upon the specific questions that were raised in 

the submission from the FSIN. And the minister opposite has 

this document, has had it for months and hasn‟t seen fit to 

respond to it yet, Mr. Chair of Committees. But we‟ll get these 

questions on the record here in the Assembly. And again there 

are a number of questions that relate to Bills 121 and 122. But 

as we‟re talking about Bill 123, I‟ll limit my questions or 

quoting from the questions that they raise in their submission to 

Bill 123 at this time. 

 

So from part III of their submission, “The Impact of Bill No. 

123, An Act to amend The Forest Resources Management Act 

and to make related amendments to The Parks Act, on First 

Nations Rights and The Need to Meaningfully Consult and 

Accommodate First Nations Concerns.” 

 

The first section is exercise of rights. Question 30: 

 

30. How will the proposed amendments to The Forest 

Resources Management Act affect, impact or infringe on 

First Nations treaty rights? Please provide a detailed 

description of your process and findings. 

 

31. Does Saskatchewan dispute whether or not First 

Nations have existing, constitutionally-protected rights 

with regard to forest resources and management? 

 

32. Has Saskatchewan conducted a preliminary assessment 

of the strength of claim of First Nations‟ rights throughout 

parts of the First Nations traditional lands where forestry 

development is contemplated? 

 

33. Does Saskatchewan agree that one of the purposes of 

planning and forest management and land use plans is to 

ensure the meaningful exercise of First Nations 

constitutionally-protected rights now and into the future? 

 

34. Is Saskatchewan prepared to work cooperatively with 

First Nations to develop forest management plans and 

integrated forest plans, which would identify traditionally 

used species by First Nations, assess the baseline levels for 

those resources and set benchmarks for the protection of 

those resources to preserve our ability to exercise our 

rights? In our view, such plans would provide a 

meaningful and sound foundation for the assessment of 

impacts, mitigation and reclamation strategies in respect of 

decision making and the management of resources in 

Saskatchewan as it relates to First Nations specific 

interests and concerns. 

 

35. What steps has Saskatchewan taken to determine the 

extent to which approval of any forestry projects have 

already been approved and/or applied for within First 

Nations traditional lands, which would deprive those First 

Nations of a meaningful opportunity to exercise their 

rights? 

 

36. Is Saskatchewan of the view that there will be or 

already is increased human and financial hardship and 

expense to First Nation members to exercise their rights as 

a result of forestry development within First Nations 

traditional lands? 

 

37. Has Saskatchewan assessed what lands and associated 

forestry, vegetative, water, air quality, access, First 

Nations require to carry out their 

constitutionally-protected rights now and into the future? 

If so, what specific information did you assess? 

 

38. Have you identified any lands within the First Nations 

traditional lands that will permit First Nations to exercise 

their rights now and into the future? If no, why not? If yes, 

what criteria did you use to make this determination and 

did you consider what use other First Nations, Métis and 

other persons are making of these areas and what their 

future needs are? Did you consider the direct and 

cumulative impact of forestry activities within First Nation 

traditional lands when making that assessment? Are you 

prepared to consult with First Nations to protect lands that 

the First Nation requires to carry out their rights, prior to 

any further approvals of licenses and plans, based on the 

information requested above, and if not, why not? 

 

39. Do you have a record of any consultation between 

Saskatchewan and First Nations related to the 

development of Bill 123? Please provide copies of the 

existing consultation record. 

 

And again, if I might add parenthetically, Mr. Speaker, you 

know, is this such an unreasonable question? Are these 

unreasonable questions that couldn‟t be answered by the 

ministry that has a vast number of civil servants and has had a 

proclaimed interest in working co-operatively and productively 

with First Nations and Métis people in this province? These 

aren‟t questions that are, you know, it‟s not like they have to go 

to the moon to get them, and in some of these cases, a simple 

yes or no will do. 

 

But is it that they don‟t want to get on the record with what 

their policy actually is and they want to keep things as a moving 

target? It‟s hard to figure what the actual intent is of the 

government in regards to stonewalling on some very legitimate 

requests for information. 

 

To return to the submission, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

Section 2 amended 

 

40. With regards to section 2(1)(o) and the removal of the 

reference to licensing requirements for processing 

facilities. First Nations are concerned that removing a 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5163 

definite trigger for consultation and accommodation (i.e., a 

licence) will adversely affect First Nations ability to be 

included in decision-making processes and identifying the 

impact of activity on their constitutionally-protected 

rights. 

 

41. With regard to the proposed section 3(1)(b)(a.11), how 

does Saskatchewan and/or the minister propose to consult 

with First Nations regarding the activities of a licensee and 

approved plans? In the context of audits? [In what 

context.] 

 

42. With regard to proposed section 3(1)(f), how might the 

re-definition of „forest land‟ to exclude Crown mineral and 

Crown mineral lands impact the right of First Nations to 

inclusion in management and planning with regard to 

minerals which were not surrendered at Treaty or in the 

Treaty making process. 

 

43. With regard to the proposed section 3(1)(9M)(x2), 

how did Saskatchewan involve First Nations in developing 

the definition of who constitutes a „qualified person‟, 

given that the decision of qualified persons have the 

potential to adversely impact First Nations rights?  

 

Section 6 amended 

 

44. Generally, the amendments to section 6 and the powers 

of the Minister are significantly reduced in planning and 

approvals. The narrowing of the authority for the minister 

to make decisions is due to increased discretion being 

given to industry, or qualified persons, to conduct its 

business. Industry has no duty to consult First Nations. It 

is a concern that there is a move away from transparency 

and towards industry discretion, which will come at the 

expense of the long-term sustainability of section 35 

constitutionally protected rights. 

 

45. With regard to proposed section 6(b)(ii) and (iii), what 

steps has Saskatchewan taken to determine the extent to 

which changing the definition of „Crown resource land‟ 

and substituting it with „land within the provincial forest‟ 

may impact First Nations rights to minerals, resources, 

revenue sharing; and to ensure that First Nations benefit 

from inclusion in planning regarding the lands and 

resources in all First Nations traditional territories? 

 

[11:45] 

 

46. With regard to proposed section 6(b)(iv), how will 

Saskatchewan include First Nations in any advisory 

committee established pursuant to subsection 11(1)? 

 

47. How will Saskatchewan work with First Nations to 

determine an appropriate procedure or method for 

appointing members to such committees? For assigning 

duties? For developing procedures for the operation of 

such committee? 

 

48. How will such advisory committees be integrated or 

included into any Haida consultation with First Nations? 

[And for course referring to the Haida decision of the 

Supreme Court, Mr. Deputy Speaker.] 

49. How will Saskatchewan communicate with First 

Nations, the discussions and recommendations arising 

from the committee? 

 

50. How will the advice of the advisory committee be 

coordinated and/or weighed against the input of First 

Nations obtained through Haida consultation with respect 

to matters under The Forest Resources Management Act? 

 

51. What powers and responsibilities will the advisory 

committee have under the Act? 

 

52. With regard to the proposed section 6(c)(2), how will 

Saskatchewan and/or the Minister consult with First 

Nations with regard to the development, adoption, and 

implementation of the code? 

 

53. What process or procedure will be used in such 

consultation? 

 

54. How will Saskatchewan ensure that First Nations have 

the adequate time, resources, and capacity to participate in 

the development, review, and adoption of the code? 

 

55. What measures will Saskatchewan provide with regard 

to disputes arising with regard to the development of the 

code? 

 

56. What role will First Nations have in jointly drafting the 

code, and monitoring enforcement should the code 

proceed to be implemented? 

 

57. With regard to the proposed section 6(c)(3), how does 

Saskatchewan and/or the Minister propose to effectively 

communicate with First Nations, in their language and in 

an understandable format, the notice of any standards or 

requirements that are developed or established pursuant to 

clause (1)(1.3) and that are set out in the code, and of any 

amendments to those standards and requirements? 

 

58. How does Saskatchewan and/or the minister propose 

to consult with and accommodate First Nations concerns, 

comments, and feedback into any proposed amendments 

to the standards and requirements? 

 

59. With regards to the proposed section 6(c)(4), the 

Minister is given the authority to approve “criteria, terms, 

conditions, or requirements submitted by that person as an 

alternative to those set out in the code”. How does 

Saskatchewan and/or the Minister propose to consult with 

First Nations regarding alternate criteria, terms, 

conditions, or requirements which are proposed to be 

accepted rather than those set out in the code? 

 

60. With regard to proposed section 6(c)(4)(a), the 

decision of the Minister to approve such criteria, terms, 

conditions, or requirements is conduct which may 

adversely affect First Nations. How will Saskatchewan 

and/or the Minister consult with First Nations to ensure 

that First Nations input is received and demonstrably 

integrated into the criteria, in order to verify, from a First 

Nations perspective, that such alternative criteria will 

“provide an equivalent or better level of protection” to 



5164 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

forest products and Crown lands? 

 

61. If First Nations are of the perspective that the 

alternative criteria will not, “provide an equivalent or 

better level of protection” to forest products and Crown 

lands, how does Saskatchewan and/or the Minister 

propose to incorporate or address First Nations concerns in 

the decision on whether to utilize the alternative criteria as 

opposed to the code? 

 

62. With regard to the proposed section 6(c)(4)(b), the 

minister may make a decision if he/she is satisfied that “it 

is in the public interest to do so.”How does Saskatchewan 

and/or the Minister propose to satisfy its constitutional 

duty to consult with and accommodate First Nations, 

against the power to make decisions in the “public 

interest” which may not adequately address and/or protect 

First Nations constitutionally-protected rights and 

interests? 

 

63. How does Saskatchewan propose to consult with First 

Nations to address the concern that, in the proposed 

amendment, while the minister is provided discretion to 

make decisions in the public interest, there is no mention 

that the minister is required to consult with and 

accommodate First Nations prior to making such 

determination? 

 

64. Does Saskatchewan and/or the Minister propose to 

consult with and accommodate First Nations prior to 

making such a determination? If so, what is the process? 

What are the timelines? 

 

65. What are the levels of opportunity for First Nations to 

be involved in determining whether or not the alternative 

criteria is in the public interest? 

 

66. Given that in section 6(c)(5), persons may comply with 

the alternative criteria approved by the minister pursuant 

to section 6(c)(4), how will Saskatchewan ensure that 

compliance is achieved in a way that upholds Crown 

honour, and appropriately and meaningfully addresses and 

accommodates outstanding First Nations concerns with 

regard to alternate criteria and the impact upon Treaty 

rights? 

 

Section 11 amended 

 

67. With regard to section 11(1), does the minister propose 

to establish a First Nations advisory committee to advise 

the minister on Aboriginal consultation with regard to The 

Forest Resources Management Act? 

 

68. If so, how will the input and the advice be considered? 

 

69. Will the advisory committee have decision-making 

powers? 

 

70. How will the advice from the advisory committee be 

considered and/or weighed in relation to any other 

non-First Nation advisory committee? 

 

71. Will non-First Nation advisory committees have 

decision-making powers or the ability to make 

recommendations or decisions related to Aboriginal 

consultation? 

 

72. How will the First Nations advisory committee, if 

established, weigh against the requirements of the licensee 

with regards to Aboriginal consultation and forest 

management plans? 

 

73. What remedies will be available with regard to 

disputes arising under The Forest Resources Management 

Act and how will the advisory committees function in 

terms of dispute resolution? 

 

74. How may the requirement that the advisory 

committees report to the Minister within the time that the 

Minister may direct adversely impact upon the ability of 

First Nations in advisory committee to fully and 

comprehensively identify rights, concerns, and interests 

requiring further consultation and accommodation? 

 

Section 12 amended 

 

75. With regard to section 12, has Saskatchewan 

conducted an assessment on the impact upon First Nations 

rights of withdrawing lands from the provincial forest, and 

how doing so may affect First Nations Treaty rights to 

hunt, trap, and gather, and to live sustainably off of the 

land and make a livelihood? 

 

76. Given that withdrawing land from the provincial forest 

will not subject it to the same level of assessment and 

regulation with regard to The Forest Resources 

Management Act, how will such land be planned for and 

managed? 

 

77. How will First Nations be consulted with regard to the 

short- and long-term land use planning, and management 

decisions on such lands, and the impact of conduct upon 

these lands or which may impact these lands on First 

Nations rights? 

 

Section 13 and 14 amended 

 

78. There is a concern that the mandatory requirement for 

an integrated forest land use plan is being changed to an 

enabling provision, removing the obligation for the 

minister to revise the plan when such a plan is being 

revised. It is our concern that it is an attempt of 

Saskatchewan and/or the Minister to reduce its duty to 

consult and accommodate First Nations by leaving power 

with industry or qualified persons, even though revisions 

of the plan will have the same effect on both the 

environment and First Nations rights, albeit without First 

Nations inclusion. 

 

79. With regard to section 13, how does the minister plan 

to consult with and accommodate First Nations in his/her 

decision to divide a provincial forest into one or more 

areas and designate those areas as planning areas? Given 

that forest management and planning has the potential to 

both directly and indirectly impact First Nations Treaty 

rights, how will the division of the forest potentially 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5165 

fragment habitat and impact the environment in which 

First Nations Treaty rights are exercised, thereby 

potentially impacting First Nations‟ preferred means of 

exercising their treaty rights? 

 

80. With regards to section 14, how does the minister plan 

to consult with and accommodate First Nations with 

regards to integrated forest land use plans? What are the 

factors which would create incentive for the minister to 

require an integrated plan as opposed to another kind of 

forest management plan? 

 

81. How will the minister coordinate policies, programs, 

and activities of Saskatchewan with policies, programs, 

and activities of First Nations? 

 

82. How does Saskatchewan and/or the minister propose 

to regulate existing and potential use of land within the 

planning area in accordance with its obligations to consult 

with and accommodate First Nations rights, interests, and 

concerns? 

 

Section 16 amended 

 

83. What is the impact of Saskatchewan eliminating the 

public review process [eliminating the public review 

process], and how does this impact the information which 

will be available to First Nations with regard to First 

Nations rights to be consulted and accommodated? 

 

Section 17 amended 

 

84. It is concerning that Saskatchewan is moving away 

from licence requirements to promoting best practices, 

which are not enforceable and do not provide any 

incentive for environmental protection or the protection of 

First Nations rights. 

 

85. Section 17(3) permitting a person to engage in 

subsistence gathering without a licence may adversely 

affect First Nations rights to gather. 

 

86. How does Saskatchewan and/or the minister propose 

to consult with First Nations regarding this proposed 

amendment? 

 

87. What are the methods and steps being proposed by 

Saskatchewan to alleviate the concern about the impact of 

this section on the environment and the Treaty right to 

gather? 

 

88. What type of monitoring program will be in place to 

ensure that permitting people to engage in subsistence 

gathering without a licence will not create cumulative and 

adverse effects to First Nations and the Treaty right to 

gather? 

 

89. How does Saskatchewan propose to consult with First 

Nations regarding the definition in section 17(4) of 

subsistence gathering and who is entitled to gather and 

what are they entitled to gather? 

 

90. How will this definition complement or derogate from 

a First Nations perspective in gathering and on the treaty 

right to gather? 

 

91. How can this section be redefined so as to ensure that 

it protects, promotes, and respects First Nations 

indigenous knowledge and First Nations Treaty rights to 

gather? 

 

92. What elders did Saskatchewan and/or the minister 

speak with in drafting and developing this proposed 

section of the Act? [Pretty good question, Mr. Speaker.] 

 

93. Section 17(5) permits persons to gather without a 

licence, certain berries, fruits, etc., What Indigenous 

knowledge did Saskatchewan integrate into developing 

this proposed section of the Act? 

 

94. How does Saskatchewan propose to consult with First 

Nations with regard to harvesting rights contained in 

section 17 to ensure the First Nations Treaty right to 

gather is protected and accommodated in the context of 

potentially scarce resources, development, and changing 

habitat? 

 

95. Section 17.1 permits the minister to allow persons to 

harvest timber without a licence when, in the opinion of 

that minister, the forest land is suitable for certain 

purposes.  

 

96. What Indigenous knowledge will be informing the 

opinion of the minister? 

 

97. How does Saskatchewan propose to incorporate 

Indigenous knowledge and its duty to consult and 

accommodate First Nations in the minister‟s 

decision-making power pursuant to section 17.1? 

 

98. If there is no licence, pursuant to section 17.1, how can 

the decision be changed or modified if the environmental 

conditions change? What monitoring will be in effect to 

ensure that the forest land remains suitable for clearing the 

timber? How is indigenous knowledge and consultation to 

be incorporated in these aspects? 

 

Section 18.2 

 

99. It is concerning that the requirement for a processing 

facility to be licensed is repealed. given the concern with 

regard to the relationship between licensing and 

consultation with First Nations. 

 

100. With regards to section 18.2 and processing facilities, 

how will the records maintained be available to First 

Nations in order to ensure that First Nations have 

continuous access to full, credible, and reliable 

information from which to determine the impact upon 

rights? 

 

Section 19.1 

 

101. There is potential for the code to not adequately 

outline consultation and accommodation requirements 

with First Nations. Given that section 19.1 states that the 



5166 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

licensees shall comply with the code, this may adversely 

affect First Nations rights if the code does not adequately 

protect First Nations rights? 

 

102. How does Saskatchewan handle . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. According to order, this House stands 

recessed until 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 13:30.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 136 — The Technical Safety Authority of Saskatchewan Act 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5133 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5134 

 Bill No. 137 — The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2010 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5136 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5137 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5139 

 Bill No. 143 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5139 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5140 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5140 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 121 — The Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5140 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5148 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5151 

 Bill No. 122 — The Environmental Assessment Amendment Act, 2009 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5151 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5154 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5158 

 Bill No. 123 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2009 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5158 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


