




















































Hansard: November 03, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 5A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5821 

 November 3, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I take great pride in being able to introduce to you and 

through you and to the rest of the Assembly a group of 38 grade 

10 students from Winston Knoll Collegiate in the constituency 

of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. They are here with their teacher, 

Michelle McKillop. 

 

Winston Knoll is a wonderful school with great students and 

staff, and we had a chance to meet and discuss the coming 

events with the students today. They were very interested, and I 

hope they are now fairly well informed. Accompanying these 

students today we have Cathie Hunchuk, Brittany Raedake, and 

Lori Benoit. Please, if each and every one of you could join in a 

welcome to these wonderful students from Winston Knoll. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the member from Saskatoon Fairview and myself, I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members two special 

guests that are seated in your gallery — if they could give a 

wave when I call them — Sharleen Rayner and her daughter, 

Morgan. 

 

I should tell you a little bit about Morgan. They’re both looking 

forward to seeing democracy in action here. Morgan is a grade 

9 student at Tommy Douglas Collegiate in Saskatoon and a 

constituent of Saskatoon Fairview. She enjoys playing piano, 

basketball, and attending functions like the SFL [Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour] kids camp, the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] convention, the Saskatchewan Young New Democrats 

convention. So I ask all members in joining me in welcoming 

Morgan Haarstad and Sharleen to their legislature. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone, the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, I have two separate introductions to make. The 

first introduction I would like to introduce in the west gallery 

would be Christopher Florizone, who is 14 years old — just 

stand or wave — from Moose Jaw Vanier High School. He is 

accompanying his dad who has brought his son to work today. 

It’s take your child to work today. 

 

And you know, I admire you, Dan, able to have your son join 

you. I’ve asked our boys, and they just don’t seem to want to 

come with me. Anyway, I just would like all members to 

welcome Christopher to the Legislative Assembly, and 

probably see the proceedings and question period. And 

hopefully maybe we’ll have a chance to visit back in my office 

after. So if everybody could welcome them to the Assembly 

please. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, also sitting in the west gallery are 

two special people in my life. First of all, and I’ll just get my 

big brother — older brother, but bigger brother — to wave. 

John McMorris is here from Moose Jaw. John has had a very 

interesting life. He has had the opportunity to travel the world 

pretty much in the grain handling business. Spent a lot of time 

in Kazakhstan, lots of time in Mexico. He’s been around the 

world in the grain industry and farms very close to the family 

farm as well, so welcome him here. And why he is here is he 

brought my mother into Regina today from Fort Qu’Appelle for 

a eye appointment. It’s good to see you here, mom. I don’t 

know if I’ve ever had the opportunity to introduce you to my 

friends in the House here, on both sides. 

 

Anyway I just wanted to say that when I meet people around 

the Fort Qu’Appelle area, they normally say . . . I say, hi, I’m 

the member from Indian Head-Milestone. I don’t know if I can 

even use my own name in here. I’m the member from Indian 

Head-Milestone. And they go, oh yes, we know your mom. She 

is a very avid bridge player and does a very good job of PR 

[public relations] for me around the Fort Qu’Appelle area. So 

I’d like all members to welcome my brother and mom to the 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I’d 

like to introduce a young man that’s here in the west gallery 

seated. His name is Brett Angus. He’s actually been in Regina 

for a while, getting an education, doing some work. And I’m 

very pleased that he’s here and got an opportunity to come to 

the House and see the proceedings. And I just want to mention, 

I was very pleased and honoured to hear that he’s actually 

moving back home to La Ronge in December. When he’s 

finished up doing what he wants to do in Regina, he’s coming 

home. So I just want to welcome him to his legislative and say 

all the best in your future endeavours. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of this House, seated in your 

gallery is an unexpected guest and a friend of mine, also a 

constituent of mine from the great city of Swift Current. He’s 

currently serving as a school board trustee in Swift Current for 

Swift Current and area in the Chinook School Division. He has 

been a youth pastor. He has pursued other endeavours as well. 

And right now he’s working in the area of addictions in terms 

of the young people of our province. His name is Tim Ramage. 

And I’d like all members to welcome him to his Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 

pleasure today to introduce a group of students and their faculty 



5822 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2010 

of the school who are here from Prince Albert today. They are 

extremely dedicated students in the field of health care, and it’s 

incredible to have them down here today for a very good 

purpose. We had a great meeting with them. The member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place and I met with them for lunch, and 

they’re a tremendously talented and thoughtful group. And once 

again, I hope that all members will welcome them here to their 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone and the Minister Responsible for Advanced 

Education and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 

to just follow the member’s welcome to these students that are 

visiting their legislature. Obviously they’re involved in very, 

very serious work and important work on behalf of the people 

of this province. We’re delighted to join with the opposition 

and everyone here in welcoming them to their legislature. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my honour again this session to 

introduce the person I’ve introduced most often, if we did a 

count. Gunnar Passmore is seated in the east gallery. Gunnar is 

political liaison for the Saskatchewan Building Trades, and 

Gunnar and his wife, Dee, are long-time friends of my wife, 

Lorna, and I. And I just want to welcome Gunnar once again to 

the legislature, and it’s always a pleasure to see him. And I ask 

all hon. members to join me in welcoming Gunnar Passmore to 

the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast, the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 

member opposite in welcoming Mr. Passmore to the legislature. 

I met with him as well as a number of SFL executive members 

earlier and enjoyed a frank and candid discussion with him and 

very much appreciated his keen sense of humour, which was 

directed at a member whose mother is here today. So I’ll not 

repeat what was said, but it was good humour and it was much 

appreciated. And I would ask all members to join in welcoming 

Mr. Passmore. 

 

The Speaker: — Members, as well it’s my pleasure to 

introduce some guests who’ve joined us. Seated in the 

Speaker’s gallery in the front row is my son, Byron, a youth 

pastor here in the city at Westhill, joined by one of his youth, 

young people, Cassie Josephson, who happens to be hosting a 

young gal from France, Delphine Bénistant. 

 

And Delphine’s been here since August in Saskatchewan. And I 

know that Cassie and her family have made an extreme effort to 

show her a good part of our province. She’ll be leaving us on 

Friday, going home. And Cassie, in the early spring — I believe 

it’s the end of February, March through April — she will be 

then returning to France on an exchange. So if they would rise, 

be recognized, and I’d ask members to welcome them to this 

Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are 

concerned about the deteriorating conditions of our highway 

system and the safety factor. This particular petition pertains to 

Highway 135 through the community of Pelican Narrows. And 

if you’ve ever had the opportunity to drive through that 

community, you’ll find that it’s a very dangerous road through 

the community itself as well as a health problem with the large, 

huge amounts of dust that are raised off that road. And the 

people living in those communities have to endure that each 

and every day. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to pave the 7 kilometres of Highway 135 

through the community of Pelican Narrows as committed 

on August the 24th, 2007. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Pelican Narrows, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today again to 

present petitions on behalf of the people of Wawota and 

surrounding area who oppose the closure of the beds in Wawota 

Deer View Lodge, many of whom have family members placed 

outside of the community, and they find that this separating of 

family is unfair and dangerous. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to stop the closure of these beds. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This is another 250 signatures to add to the many I’ve already 

presented. And the signatures are from Carlyle, Kenosee Lake, 

Wawota, Langbank, Kennedy, Kipling, Saskatoon, Windthorst, 

Glenavon, Maryfield, Moosomin, Wapella, Rocanville, 

Fleming, Regina, Strasbourg, Whitewood, Yorkton, Tantallon, 

and Fairlight. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present yet another petition in support of eliminating 

poverty in Saskatchewan. And we know Saskatchewan’s 

income gap between the rich and the poor continues to grow 

and now one in five children in Saskatchewan live in deepening 

poverty. And we also know that when governments reduce 

spending, often supports for social supports are cut first. I’d like 

to read the prayer: 

 



November 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5823 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

that the Government of Saskatchewan act as quickly as 

possible to develop an effective and sustainable poverty 

elimination strategy for the benefit of all Saskatchewan 

citizens. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Saskatoon, Regina, Earl Grey, Melfort, and Tisdale. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 

petition in support of fairness for Saskatchewan university 

students through the needed expansion of the graduate retention 

program. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition with respect to the future of Saskatchewan’s 

potash resource. The petition is signed and circulated because 

Saskatchewan has a thousand-year supply of the world’s 

highest quality potash and that the people are owners of this 

strategic resource and deserve to receive the maximum benefit 

from its development, mining, processing, and sale. And the 

petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Saskatchewan Party government to publicly demand 

the following terms and conditions on behalf of the people 

of Saskatchewan of any foreign owners bidding to take 

over PCS: to ensure that Saskatchewan people receive the 

maximum net benefit, a golden share and preferred shares 

so that the public participates in both the corporation’s 

future decision making and its profitability, public 

guarantees on a strengthened head office presence, support 

for Canpotex, and long-term targets for potash production 

and employment, Saskatchewan representation on the 

board of directors, public agreements to ensure no loss of 

royalties, public commitments to meet world-class 

standards of corporate and social responsibility, and an 

independent potash review commission with the power to 

monitor and enforce all of these terms and conditions. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petition is signed by good folks from 

Saskatoon and Dundurn. I so present. 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive deficit budgets, the billions of dollars of 

debt loading under the Sask Party. And they note that this has 

all occurred at a time of record revenues making it 

unexplainable, reckless, and damaging to Saskatchewan’s 

future. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens from across 

Regina, Mr. Speaker. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to present a petition for 

a private Bill on behalf of petitioners from the Sisters of 

Presentation. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to 

repeal An Act to incorporate The Sisters of the 

Presentation, being chapter 71 of the Statutes of 

Saskatchewan, 1923 and replace it with the proposed 

private Bill. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the directors of the 

corporation, the Sisters of the Presentation, and I’m pleased to 

present it on their behalf. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Jim Brady Honoured 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 

honour the Year of the Métis and to mention one of the many 

events that have happened over the summer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Jim Brady was a well-known respected Métis 

politician during the 1950s and ’60s. He disappeared on a 

prospecting expedition on July 6th, 1967. 

 

On July 10th this summer, the La Ronge Métis local, known as 

Jim Brady Métis local, commemorated the disappearance and 



5824 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2010 

contributions of Jim Brady by erecting a monument in his 

honour. Jim Brady served in the Canadian Armed Forces in 

World War II. He helped in the foundation of many Métis 

organizations in western Canada. These include the Métis 

Association of Alberta, the Métis Association of Saskatchewan, 

and the Métis local of La Ronge. 

 

The disappearance of Jim Brady along with his friend, Abbie 

Halkett, continues to be a controversial subject to this day. Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to congratulate Jim Brady Métis local for 

their good work in honouring this historic Saskatchewan icon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Premier of British Columbia Resigns 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Earlier 

this day, Premier Gordon Campbell of the province of British 

Columbia tendered his resignation, indicating that he’ll be 

moving on from public life, pending the selection of a new 

leader of the BC Liberal Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may, on behalf of the Government of 

Saskatchewan, offer a few thoughts on this news. Mr. Speaker, 

I think most in the country would agree that Premier Gordon 

Campbell has been a very effective premier for his province. 

There has been a transformation that occurred under his watch 

in the province of British Columbia, Mr. Speaker, including 

400,000 new jobs from the time that he took over as premier, 

numerous and historic tax cuts, Mr. Speaker, the creation of 

36,000 new full-time post-secondary student spaces in BC’s 11 

universities, a new medical services plan and pharmacare help, 

and the 2010 Vancouver Whistler winter Olympics — the 

most-watched winter games in the history of the games. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, significant for us, the New West Partnership. 

Premier Campbell, along with Alberta, pioneered the notion 

that provinces should be co-operating in terms of delivering 

service to their people, Mr. Speaker. And in my experience with 

Premier Campbell, at every occasion at the national table with 

the Prime Minister and other premiers, yes he made the case for 

BC [British Columbia], but he always made the passionate case 

for the interests of Canada, Mr. Speaker. We need more leaders 

like Premier Campbell, and we wish him well in his future 

endeavours. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Rawlco Centre for Mother Baby Care 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday my colleague, the 

member from Regina Lakeview and I, along with the Premier 

and other members of government, attended the grand opening 

of the Rawlco Centre for Mother Baby Care at the Regina 

General Hospital. The centre is a state-of-the-art facility which 

will change how mother-baby care is delivered in our province. 

 

It includes major enhancements for the neonatal intensive care 

unit, the labour and birth unit, and the mother-baby unit. Over 

seven years ago, a major gift from Gordon and Doug 

Rawlinson, owners of Rawlco Radio, launched the Small is Big 

campaign for the Hospitals of Regina Foundation under the 

leadership of CEO [chief executive officer] Judy Davis. With 

the support of many other generous donors, the campaign raised 

$6 million in furnishings and equipment. The project received 

strong support from both the previous NDP administration, as 

well as the current government, with the provincial contribution 

being $28.4 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Lakeview and I had the 

opportunity to tour the facilities, and the list of improvements is 

impressive. The mother-baby unit now has 36 private rooms 

each equipped with a tub, toilet, shower, and sink. The labour 

and birth unit has eight spacious birthing rooms, each equipped 

with a Panda radiant warmer and an electronic birthing bed that 

patients can control, as well as six outpatient assessment rooms. 

And the neonatal intensive care unit has much more space and 

other comforts to allow parents to spend more time with their 

babies. 

 

I would like to ask all of my colleagues to express our sincere 

gratitude to the generosity of Doug and Gordon Rawlinson for 

kick-starting the campaign, to Rawlco Radio and the Hospitals 

of Regina Foundation for their perseverance, and to all those 

who contributed to this amazing success story. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Leader’s Actions 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 1994 the 

Leader of the Opposition gave up on Saskatchewan when he 

gave away the golden share for potash. 

 

He gave up on Saskatchewan again in 2001 when he got the 

NDP to change the Wascana Energy Act, meaning Nexen could 

move its head office and his job to Calgary. Again he gave up 

on Saskatchewan a couple of weeks ago when he waved the 

white flag and announced his terms of surrender in the potash 

fight before the fight had barely begun. 

 

And yesterday he gave up on Saskatchewan one more time by 

running off to Ottawa. Why did he go there, Mr. Speaker? Is he 

there to try and get the federal government to block the 

takeover bid? No. According to the news reports, he left 

Saskatchewan to talk election strategy with Jack Layton. 

Instead of worrying about the best interests of this province, he 

focused on seats for the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Premier is still standing up for Saskatchewan. 

The Leader of the Opposition is off to Ottawa to try and find 

out what’s in the will for him. This is a crass political 

opportunism of the worst kind, and it’s why the people of 

Saskatchewan will always choose our Premier, who stands up 

for Saskatchewan, rather than the NDP leader, who gives up on 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Health Care Providers’ Week 

 

Ms. Junor: — This is health providers’ appreciation week. A 

recent member’s statement from the Sask Party stating the 

government’s appreciation for the work that these 



November 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5825 

Saskatchewan citizens do to provide care and services for our 

children, mothers, fathers, spouses, and partners, friends, and 

neighbours was cold comfort to them. 

 

As my colleague from Saskatoon Fairview and I travelled 

around the province this summer, we met with hundreds and 

hundreds of health care workers. They were from 

housekeeping, laundry, food services, ambulance services, 

maintenance, lab, and X-ray, and nursing, RNs [registered 

nurse], RPNs [registered practical nurse], LPNs [licensed 

practical nurse], special care aides, and nurse practitioners. 

 

We heard consistently how understaffed, underappreciated, and 

downright disrespected workers are feeling. The Sask Party 

government with Bills 5 and 6 set the stage for the most toxic 

bargaining anyone can remember. The rights of workers were 

undermined and collective bargaining was set back for decades. 

Two years of hostile bargaining resulted in a contract that 

pleased no one. 

 

We heard how the Premier’s war on workers has translated into 

bullying and intimidation in the workplace. A culture of 

disrespect has been the result of the Premier’s attitude, and it is 

showing up everywhere in facilities and health regions. Mr. 

Speaker, when one health region can say to its workers, if you 

don’t like your job, Tim Hortons is hiring, you can see the 

erosion of the working relationship between employees and 

employers in health facilities. And this was in the Premier’s 

own area of Swift Current. 

 

If the Sask Party really does appreciate health care workers, 

they have a very long way to go to repair the damage done over 

the last three years under their government. A single member’s 

statement is not nearly enough. Actions speak far louder than 

the words, and government actions are screaming disrespect. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Potash Corporation Golden Share 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the choice couldn’t be more 

clear. We have a Premier who stands up for Saskatchewan and 

an Opposition Leader who gives up on Saskatchewan. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition gave up on Saskatchewan back in 

1994 when he gutted the golden share in the PCS [Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] legislation. At the time, the 

legislation said that the provincial government could impose 

any terms and conditions it chose on a purchaser corporation. It 

said the majority of the directors of the purchaser corporation 

were required to be Canadian. Mr. Speaker, at least three had to 

be from Saskatchewan, and Canadians had to own at least 55 

per cent of the voting shares. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1994, the NDP government and that NDP 

leader let down the people of Saskatchewan by repealing all of 

those provisions. He gave away the golden share and now he 

says he wants it back. Mr. Speaker, that leader didn’t just give 

away the golden share when he gave up on Saskatchewan; he 

gave away his credibility, and he’ll be a long time getting that 

back. The people of Saskatchewan will let him know how they 

feel about a leader who gives up on their province next 

November. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Proposed Sale of Potash Corporation 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 

representative of the people who mine Saskatchewan’s potash 

offered a comment today on the Premier’s leadership in 

standing up for Saskatchewan’s interest. It was Stephen Hunt, 

western Canadian director for the United Steelworkers, and the 

Leader-Post quotes him this way: 

 

I wish he would have come forward with some courage 

earlier in this thing and perhaps it would be a different 

picture right now. 

 

I think (Wall) is a little slow to react — it’s not as if BHP 

hasn’t announced this to the world and it hasn’t been in 

the newspaper every single day, so it’s not that he didn’t 

know it was happening. 

 

It’s clear, Mr. Speaker, that by waiting until the last minute to 

send two letters to Tony Clement, the Premier was sending 

another message as well. The interests of those who pull the 

potash out of the ground were of no urgency for him. Hastily 

arranged speeches, cancelled meetings, and last-minute letters 

are no way to protect the future of Saskatchewan’s 1,000 years 

of resource. 

 

Now by the Premier’s own reckoning, over 8,000 person-years 

of work are at risk and the verdict of the workers is in. Mr. 

Speaker, a lack of courage and initiative on the part of the 

Premier is responsible for the current predicament. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all that remains is for the voters to deliver their 

verdict on this Premier’s leadership in November 2011. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Proposed Sale of Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re hearing once 

again that the Premier’s position on potash in Saskatchewan has 

changed. Conservative MP [Member of Parliament] Brad Trost 

says today, “It’s hard to know what Brad Wall wants.” 

 

Has his position changed on this deal yet again? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of the 

province of Alberta, the Premier of the province of Quebec, the 

Minister of Finance in Ontario, the new Premier of the province 

of New Brunswick, the NDP Premier of Manitoba, late today 

Brett Wilson, Mr. Speaker, Roger Phillips, business leaders 

from . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’d ask the members to allow the 



5826 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2010 

Premier to respond to the question from the member of the 

opposition. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Dick Haskayne — for whom 

the Calgary school of business is named — and I would suspect 

every Member of Parliament on the opposition side and on the 

government side know unequivocally the position of this 

government and this party when it comes to this takeover. We 

have chosen to stand up for the interests of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. We have chosen to stand up for the strategic interests 

of a province blessed with all these natural resources. We’ve 

left the flip-flopping and the multiple positions, Mr. Speaker, to 

the NDP opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well I think, Mr. Speaker, we should check the 

record to see when he started to engage all of these folks to help 

him. And I think we’ll find out that it was directly after his $1.5 

billion shakedown with BHP didn’t work. Mr. Speaker, not 

only are we hearing that the Premier’s position on the deal has 

changed once again, it’s also being reported that he’s in talks to 

sell Saskatchewan’s potash industry to a consortium of Chinese 

and Brazilian buyers. 

 

To the Premier: how is it a good deal for the people of 

Saskatchewan to sell Saskatchewan’s potash industry to two of 

the largest buyers of potash in the world? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

think the people that the member is referring to are leaders of 

the First Nations group that has come forward with respect to a 

possible deal that they’re putting together. I indeed had a 

conversation with them yesterday, indicated that if they were 

coming forward with it, they had better do it pretty quickly, and 

that obviously if it is a deal that the people of Saskatchewan 

would be supportive of, the province would be supportive of it. 

We have not seen that bid as of yet. It’s something that may 

come forward; we don’t know. 

 

[14:00] 

 

I would just say to the member opposite that when it comes to 

the First Nations leaders coming forward with respect to 

anything that they have on their mind, this government is 

always willing to listen to their concerns and their questions 

about it. Much different than the Leader of the Opposition and 

that member, and their treatment of First Nations. And we can 

all think of examples of that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a prime example 

of not listening to First Nations people from the member 

opposite, who in 1995 ran on an election platform of beating up 

First Nations people in Saskatchewan. He should be 

embarrassed about it. So he should not talk about relationships 

with First Nations people in this province. 

And while the Premier is saying his minister is in talks with 

China and Brazil, his own report commissioned says that the 

consumers of potash are the worst-case scenario as owners of 

PSC, the worst-case scenario. Oh sorry, the Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan. It’s the worst-case scenario possible for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So to the Premier: what kind of leadership is he showing when 

he’s leading a deal with Brazil and China, who are the 

purchasers of potash, when it’s the worst-case scenario as 

reported in his own commissioned report? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

quite surprising that the member would want to talk about the 

1995 election campaign, where indeed there was a proposal that 

went forward to talk about taxation in terms of First Nations 

people. And it was also quite interesting to note that shortly 

after the 1995 election, the NDP implemented that proposal in 

full, implemented it in full, Mr. Speaker. Every member on that 

side voted in favour of it at that time in their very first budget 

after the 1995 election campaign. 

 

Mr. Speaker, First Nations leaders all across Saskatchewan 

know very well that when it comes to negotiating or having a 

discussion with the province of Saskatchewan, that that 

discussion is always welcome with this Premier and this 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, everyone in this province 

has known since August that BHP has put in their hostile 

takeover bid for PCS. The Premier has had ample time and all 

the resources of government to come up with some kind of a 

plan to ensure that the people of this province get maximum 

benefit from their potash resources. But instead he’s been a 

bystander, waiting on the sidelines while Stephen Harper, BHP, 

and PCS decide the future of our strategic resource. 

 

To the Premier: after two and a half months, does he have a 

long-term plan for potash, and will he table it here today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there has been support for the 

province’s position right across this country. Mr. Speaker, there 

has been public commentary about the fact that this province 

did its homework. This province commissioned a report to look 

at the fiscal impact on the province. This province met with all 

the parties involved — including Canpotex, including the 

companies — doing our homework, doing our due diligence 

before we made what was a very, very important decision on 

our position with respect to this takeover. And then when it was 

ready, Mr. Speaker, we presented that position. But we didn’t 

stop there, Mr. Speaker. We have continued to fight for this 

industry, Mr. Speaker. We continue to fight against the 

takeover. 

 

And compare that, if you will, to the NDP who in October 



November 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5827 

under their leader’s direction announced their plan for this 

takeover, Mr. Speaker. Their plan was simply this: they wanted 

to start negotiating the terms of surrender to BHP. That was 

their plan, and it ought not to surprise anybody because in 1994 

it was the NDP that gave away the golden share that this 

province held with respect to PotashCorp, which is a large 

reason why we are where we are today. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s conviction is 

commendable, but this is the guy whose name is on all the press 

releases when PCS was privatized in 1989. I mean it sounds 

good, but excuse me for not having a lot of faith in it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Premier has failed to deliver a long-term plan 

for potash — way different than some type of proposal or 

position — and he’s waited when he should have been acting. 

We asked him to recall the legislature to debate this two months 

ago. The Premier waited. Our leader wrote to the federal 

minister in August. The Premier waited, Mr. Speaker. We 

offered to go to Ottawa with him to present a united position. 

The Premier rejected that offer, and he didn’t even bother going 

himself, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And three weeks ago, we presented a comprehensive plan to get 

the maximum possible benefit for the people of this province, 

no matter who owns the company. It’s time for the Premier to 

stop waiting on the Prime Minister to decide our potash 

resource future. Mr. Speaker, what is the Premier’s plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, shortly after coming to office, 

we were presented with the NDP royalty structure which had 

some improvements that had been done lately to it. We knew 

that maybe some more improvements were necessary. The 

companies wanted to talk to us, and so we executed that plan 

together with the potash companies. And the net result, Mr. 

Speaker, is that, in part because of the royalty structure of this 

government, over $12 billion worth of expansion in the industry 

is under way today. Thousands of jobs are being created in the 

province today, Mr. Speaker. That’s the plan we’ve had for 

potash. 

 

It’s like the plan we’ve had for the rest of the economy in terms 

of growth . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

want to know who is doing some research. Here’s some 

research. In 1994 the province of Saskatchewan held the golden 

share in the wake of the privatization of PCS. It prescribed that 

PCS would not be able to sell securities without the permission 

of the government, Mr. Speaker. It was a true golden share. It 

prescribed that a majority of the owners of this company had to 

be from Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Who gutted that golden share? Who took away that protection 

for the people of this province? It was the NDP. That’s why 

today in this province the people of Saskatchewan and the 

people of Canada are saying our natural resource interests are 

best served with the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m even more nervous 

now because the Premier’s changes to the royalty rate dealt 

with greenfield mines, didn’t deal with expansion. That was 

something the former government had done. If he doesn’t even 

understand, if the Premier doesn’t understand his own royalty 

rates and he’s making a deal and protecting the resources, the 

guy that worked for the government and sold PotashCorp, I’m 

even more nervous. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is long past time for this Premier to lay a plan 

on the table for the potash resources that belong to the people of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, does he even have a plan or will he 

be supporting the NDP plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to invite members opposite to listen 

very carefully. What I said in my previous answer was that this 

government built on the royalty improvements that had been 

made by the previous government that are in part responsible 

for expansions in the industry. 

 

But do you know what the NDP are now saying just now that 

they’re in opposition? Part of their potash plan is they, 

unbelievably, Mr. Speaker, they would gut the very tax 

incentives that member just heralded and took credit for, Mr. 

Speaker. That would cost expansion in this province. It would 

cost jobs. 

 

Her final question in her rambling, in what she just had to say 

was this. She said, will we adopt the NDP plan? No, Mr. 

Speaker. The NDP plan means giving up on Potash Corp of 

Saskatchewan. And the NDP plan means gutting the royalty 

structure that is creating jobs and wealth in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this is the Premier that 

doesn’t even understand his own royalty structure that made the 

biggest blunder in our province’s history. He’s been too late on 

the scene. He’s been weak and simply not credible, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

At the eleventh hour of this critical debate, the Premier and his 

Minister of Energy and Resources have been meeting with — 

and in fact encouraging — a consortium of Chinese and 

Brazilian ownership of our potash resource. China and Brazil 

are consumers of our resource. Their aim is cheap potash — not 

profits, not royalties, not Canpotex, and not jobs. 

 

Supported even by the Premier’s own report, the one he paid 

for from the Conference Board of Canada, the absolute worst 

scenario for the people of Saskatchewan is to turn over control 



5828 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2010 

to the very consumers of our resource, financially and 

economically. Why is this government even contemplating such 

a damaging investment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 

Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday I had a conversation with First Nations leaders who 

brought forward a plan that they are considering. They’re 

saying that they may look at putting together a consortium of 

people which include Canadian pension plan . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the member from 

Athabasca to allow the minister to respond to the question from 

the member from Regina Rosemont. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The consortium 

that they are putting together, they indicated to me, may include 

Canadian pension plans of various types. It may include foreign 

investment. It may include a number of different components. 

First Nations involvement in a very significant way, they 

indicated. 

 

I said on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan that we 

were happy to take their representation at a time when they 

bring it forward. We’d be happy to comment on it when it 

becomes a public bid before the people of Saskatchewan and 

before the federal government. That is the position of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. We’re always willing to listen to 

First Nations leaders when they bring forward proposals. Just as 

we have done in the past, we’ll continue to do that in the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Irresponsible, Mr. Speaker, and pretty 

rich. Pretty righteous coming from that minister, the very 

minister and that very Premier who have disengaged 

completely in discussions about revenue sharing, duty to 

consult, and have had no authentic discussions as it relates to 

economic development with First Nations people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don’t know yet what the Harper Conservatives 

will do this afternoon. But we do know this. It’s the Premier’s 

job to have a plan no matter what the decision is. No matter 

what, the Premier needs to ensure that Saskatchewan people are 

getting the most out of our resources. So if the Harper 

Conservatives give the go-ahead today to BHP, what is the 

Premier’s plan to ensure that Saskatchewan people will get a 

better deal for our potash resource? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

When, at a time when the people of Saskatchewan, all of the 

people of Saskatchewan with a few notable exceptions, all of 

the people of Saskatchewan are fully supportive of the 

Premier’s position with respect to this takeover, we see the 

Leader of the Opposition running off to Ottawa to see if he can 

gain some sort of political advantage out of this, Mr. Speaker. It 

seems to me that’s the only thing that the NDP are interested 

here, is in how many seats they might be able to gain out of 

this, out of this event. 

 

Well I would say from our perspective that his leadership has 

been demonstrated to First Nations people on a number of 

occasions. He demonstrated it in Meadow Lake . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The minister can finalize 

his comments. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — The Leader of the Opposition has 

demonstrated his regard and respect for First Nations people on 

a number of occasions, Mr. Speaker. Whether it’s in a situation 

of the leadership of the NDP itself, in memberships, it’s clear 

that his respect for First Nations leaders simply is not there. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — This incompetent minister and 

incompetent Premier have been engaged in eleventh hour 

discussions with the Chinese and Brazilian consortium to 

purchase our resource, Mr. Speaker. They are doing so or are 

throwing huge challenge to the case they’re trying to make to 

simply say no, Mr. Speaker. But again we don’t know what the 

Harper government will do here today. But either way, the 

Premier’s responsibility is to have a plan regardless of all 

circumstances. He clearly does not have a plan if BHP, if that 

bid is approved. But if the bid is rejected this afternoon, the 

Premier still needs a plan to ensure Saskatchewan people get a 

better deal. 

 

In recent weeks PCS made a pledge to the people of 

Saskatchewan. What is the Premier’s plan to ensure that the 

commitments of PCS are legislated, enacted, and enforceable, 

and as it relates to employment, royalties control, and 

ownership, ensure that Saskatchewan people receive a better 

deal for our resource? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

understanding that the Leader of the Opposition is lobbying in 

Ottawa today for . . . seeing if he can, seeing if he can gain 

some sort of — lobbying the leader of the NDP, I would say — 

to see if he can gain some sort of political advantage out of this. 

One would also wonder if he’s also seeking another opportunity 

at a golden parachute similar to what he negotiated in the past 

for himself in terms of these types of deals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the deal that the member is referring to that has 

been brought forward by two First Nations leaders, Ken 

Thomas and Rick Gamble, supported by the FSIN [Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations], is a proposal that they are 

bringing forward on their own. It’s not something that has been 

solicited by the Government of Saskatchewan. It is something 

that they have put together. They’re suggesting that it may have 



November 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5829 

some opportunity. We’re taking opportunity to listen to the 

First Nations leaders here in Saskatchewan. We’ll do that on 

every occasion, Mr. Speaker, here in the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I just want to remind members and the 

minister that they’re not to refer to the absence of members of 

the Assembly. 

 

I recognize the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote. 

 

National School of Dental Therapy 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find it interesting 

that the member opposite would talk about meetings in Ottawa 

when his Premier couldn’t get one meeting in Ottawa on this 

subject. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have students here today who are among 

our province’s brightest and most dedicated. Many of them are 

committed to building their careers and lives in northern 

Saskatchewan. But the Saskatchewan Party government is 

ignoring them. 

 

To the minister, simply: why has this government failed to 

ensure that the National School of Dental Therapy remains 

open? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for the 

opportunity to provide a direct response, and that is to the 

National School of Dental Therapy. This was announced last 

year by the federal government. This is an initiative that’s 

profoundly important and, as a result, on November 30th last 

year, I began correspondence with the national Minister of 

Health, the federal Minister of Health. 

 

What I can say, Mr. Speaker, in subsequent correspondence I 

have made a request that the funding be restored because the 

rationale that was utilized is empirically inaccurate. That was 

that the federal government wasn’t going to be involved in 

post-secondary training. And what we certainly did is said 

certainly the federal government continues to be in a number of 

cases, both in this province and across the country. 

 

We’ve also said that the federal minister probably overlooked 

— unintentionally but overlooked importantly — that this 

clinical and community-based program actually helps to treat 

more than 3,000 people within our province, many of those 

First Nations and Métis students. That request is in and has 

been shared with the federal government, as well as numerous 

Saskatchewan stakeholders. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear here today that this 

program is important. What comes to mind and what’s 

frustrating with the people of Prince Albert is that the failure to 

close any deal is apparently contagious on that side of the 

House. 

 

He’s had a year and he’s written a few letters to their federal 

cousins. And apparently they’ve ignored them on this file as 

well, so we can add it to the long list of other times that they’ve 

been ignored by the Harper government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, but truthfully this isn’t just about the staff and 

students. It’s about the health of northern residents in 

Saskatchewan. A report on northern health identifies dental 

therapists as the third most needed health professionals in 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the Sask Party government is going to make the shortage 

of dental therapists worse by allowing the dental therapy school 

to die. This is short-sighted and irresponsible, Mr. Speaker. 

Why have they turned a blind eye to an important program that 

can help meet health care needs of the people in northern 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, it was in 

subsequent correspondence that I reiterated, and I quote: 

 

Importantly this decision from the federal government not 

only affects education training for Saskatchewan students 

which the federal government participates in on a regular 

basis within and beyond our province, but has serious 

consequences for the health care of Saskatchewan people, 

especially within our northern First Nations and Métis 

communities. 

 

I then go on to highlight, in fact, something that was 

overlooked in the rationale, and that is community-based and 

clinical care is provided, dental care is provided both within and 

beyond the Prince Albert area. Mr. Speaker, we continue to 

work on this file as we do on a number of files. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our track record in post-secondary education in 

the North is solid. It’s one of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, that you 

can see new residences under way or completed in Prince 

Albert, in Meadow Lake, in La Ronge, Mr. Speaker. The 

members opposite did nothing in this area. We continue to 

make sure that we’re serving the people of the North, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — It’s cold comfort to the students here today, 

Mr. Speaker, that he lists a bunch of other failures on the part of 

their government. It’s a sad case in Saskatchewan where they 

can’t get anything done with Ottawa even on a file as simple as 

this. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the students and staff who have come here 

today are calling on the Saskatchewan Party government to step 

up to the plate and consider the needs of northern and rural 

Saskatchewan. They’ve been informed by ministry officials that 

no help was on the way for this program because — get this, 

Mr. Speaker — they said that there was not enough public 

outcry. That’s what these folks were told. So they’re here today, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s about real students. It’s about real people and 



5830 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2010 

real communities. And they’ve come down to Regina today to 

express their public concern and to reflect the public outcry. 

 

And I want to ask the minister today: will he commit today to 

working with partners to ensure that this program is reinstated 

immediately? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to return to this. I think our track record in the 

North, Mr. Speaker, especially on a number of initiatives 

regarding First Nations and Métis learners, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister of Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Our 

track record, while we know there’s much to be done, Mr. 

Speaker, we stand on our track record. 

 

One of those vital partners, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to First 

Nations and Métis learners, relates to the federal government, 

Mr. Speaker, relates to the federal government. We continue to 

work on this file. 

 

But we have a number of successes. For example, we have four 

Aboriginal skills training initiatives across this province, the 

largest of which, Mr. Speaker, the largest of which, $33 million 

in the North where the private sector, the federal government, 

provincial government are all working together. Three others, 

Mr. Speaker. There’s more to do, but our successes speak for 

themselves. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is from the 

minister that cut the Aboriginal employment development 

program so his support for Aboriginal employment programs is 

again not true. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the students and staff who’ve come here today are 

on a noble pursuit. They’re going to finish their course before 

the school is closed. So they are here in a very noble way to 

ensure that the school stays open for future students. 

 

They come here with 18 letters of support from community 

leaders. They come here with 1,500 names on a petition that 

they put together in one week. And they come here with the 

blessing of the city council in Prince Albert. And they all want 

to know one thing. They understand that the federal 

government’s cut the program, that there’s no more money left 

in the program. They want to know this: will the provincial 

government pick up the funding for this program instead of 

pushing the blame off to the federal government on every 

occasion? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we know the federal 

government has responsibilities in our North, Mr. Speaker. We 

know the federal government has responsibilities for our First 

Nations and Métis student learners, Mr. Speaker. What we can’t 

do, Mr. Speaker, is simply turn a blind eye, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member from . . . 

Order. The member from the opposition had the opportunity to 

place the question. I ask the opposition members now to allow 

the minister to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s prudent for the province 

of Saskatchewan to ask a very simple, straightforward question 

to Ottawa: will you restore the funding for these students? Mr. 

Speaker, it’s vitally important, not just for their academics but 

for community-based health. Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite obviously would just turn a blind eye to that, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve seen that before, Mr. Speaker. We continue to 

work on this file on behalf of these students and future 

generations of students. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

REINSTATEMENT OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that pursuant to rule 90, Bill No. 144, The Litter Control 

Amendment Act, 2010 be reinstated to the order paper. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 

Environment that pursuant to rule 90, Bill No. 144, The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010 be reinstated to the order paper. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Gantefoer, seconded by Mr. 

Wyant, and the proposed amendment to the main motion 

moved by Mr. Broten.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 

resume this debate. I hope that I won’t have to reiterate too 

much of what I said last night for the benefit of my colleagues, 

but if that should happen I think it will be worth the effort, 

won’t it? 

 

Mr. Speaker, a Throne Speech by its very nature is intended to 

do more than one thing. There are several things that a 



November 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5831 

document of this type will do. One is to indicate where the 

government has been. It also informs the people of the province 

where the government is at today, and it also advises where the 

government would like to see the province move as part of their 

legislative agenda in the days and months and years to come. 

This document achieves all three of the express purposes of a 

Throne Speech. 

 

And as a matter of course, this Throne Speech has identified 

some clear victories, some obvious achievements that have 

been brought to fruition as a result of some very significant 

initiatives by this government early in its mandate. And it 

enunciates also where we are today, talks about what 

accomplishments we have made, how that sets the stage for 

where we want to go. 

 

But there are, I would say, half a dozen specifics in this 

document that talk to future plans that I believe are relevant, not 

just to the entire province, but more specifically to the people of 

the constituency of Cypress Hills. And so, as my time continues 

this afternoon, I want to elaborate on those specifics of unique 

interest to my constituents. 

 

If I turn to page 3 on the Throne Speech, I see that highways are 

identified as one of the important aspects of undertaking that 

this government will pursue in the next little while. Let me go 

back to the days prior to the 2007 election when almost all of 

rural Saskatchewan and much of urban Saskatchewan was 

disgusted beyond belief with the failed state of roads 

throughout the province. We had thousands of kilometres of 

thin membrane highway that had been allowed to deteriorate to 

the point where, in some instances, they were virtually 

impassable. 

 

And the constituency of Cypress Hill had a number of examples 

of roads just like that. We had Highway 32, for instance, Mr. 

Speaker, the infamous Highway 32 brought to the attention of 

the province in total exasperation by a group of 12 people from 

the community of Leader in the now well-known nude pothole 

calendar initiative — a calendar that brought ridicule and 

awareness, I guess, to that stretch of road from the community 

of Prelate right down through to Shackleton, which was so bad 

that people could actually hide in those potholes, buck naked 

mind you, and hardly be seen. And that calendar identified 

some of the worst areas of disrepair along Highway 32. 

 

[14:30] 

 

But not only that, Mr. Speaker, that calendar was sent around 

the world. In fact today if you google nude pothole calendar, if 

you google that, Mr. Speaker, you will find that story in 

languages you didn’t know existed. That story went around the 

world. I would say that you could still find probably 13, 14, 15 

examples of that story in probably in Croatian, in Greek, in a 

number of Far Eastern languages. You’d probably find it in 

French, German. You’ll find it in such a variety of languages. 

And that, in a novel sense, became the way people saw 

Saskatchewan. That story was believed to be representative of 

Saskatchewan roads. And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, we had 

a huge public relations issue to overcome. 

 

And when this government was given the opportunity to serve 

the people of Saskatchewan, one of the very first initiatives that 

we addressed — and I had the privilege of being the minister at 

that time — was the full repair of Highway 32. Some 50-odd 

kilometres of road that, as I said, had fallen into such disrepair 

it was more like a goat trail. I think the Premier once described 

it as like driving on the lunar surface — it was that irregular and 

rough. And the grooves in the road surface were so deep that if 

you were running a small car, you ran the risk of tearing the oil 

pan off your car. And in some instances mufflers and exhaust 

systems were left on the side of the road. Big hunks of 

pavement had been yanked out of the road by the heavy truck 

traffic that was running up and down that road. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we focused our investment on that road. 

We spent about $600,000 a kilometre for those 54, 55, 56 

kilometres, had a multi-million-dollar investment. And over the 

last three years I am pleased to report, Mr. Speaker, that that 

road has been completed. And as a matter of fact I am equally 

pleased to report in the . . . Well I was going to say in the 

absence of the Minister of Highways, but I can’t do that 

because he’s doing something just out of range here. So I’m 

going to say that on Friday we’re going to host a grand opening 

of Highway 32, the rebuilt Highway 32. 

 

We’ve invited a bunch of local dignitaries. We’ve invited the 

media. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve even invited the 12 original 

models for the pothole calendar to come back — fully clothed 

— for this opportunity for celebration. And I think it’s going to 

be an exciting time in the town of Lancer on Friday at 10 a.m. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the success stories around the 

provincial government’s highway initiative. When we had 

really good weather conditions in our first year of construction, 

we accomplished 1490 kilometres of roadwork in this province. 

Never had been achieved before. A record amount of roadwork. 

In the second year we did that much and more. And this last 

year we had some weather-related issues to address but we’ve 

almost accomplished the volume of work that we wanted to. 

 

And just this past year actually I think we had about 1129 

kilometres of roadwork tendered and we’ve got another close to 

800 kilometres of maintenance and safety-related work that’s 

completed by the Ministry of Highways. So these are 

monumental investments in rural infrastructure that for so many 

years was ignored entirely by the previous government. 

 

And so I’m very pleased to be able to say that Highway 32 is a 

symbol, a representation of this government’s will and 

determination to renew our rural infrastructure. I know that 

there are many projects around the province that still require 

that kind of attention, and I certainly wouldn’t want to 

minimize the communities that have not yet seen their 

roadwork accomplished. 

 

But there isn’t a single person who drives in this province who 

doesn’t recognize the volume of construction work that is 

happening, whether it is new highway construction, repaving, 

or rebuilding of bridges or the installation of new culverts. All 

of this work has been long overdue and is progressing in a 

manner in which is timely, efficient, effective, and affordable. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have many more good news items to talk 

about in that regard. 

 

I drive the No. 1 Highway each time I come into Regina and 



5832 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2010 

return to my constituency. And I’m pleased to report that so 

much of the No. 1 west of Moose Jaw has been repaved and 

worked on to the point of renewal that it’s a real pleasure to 

make that trip. And I know that much of the Trans-Canada 

Highway east of the city of Regina to the Manitoba border has 

also been renewed with paving and construction. 

 

So we’re focusing very diligently on highway routes that 

provide a significant economic benefit to the province of 

Saskatchewan. We all know the quality of the work on 

Highway 16 from Saskatoon to the Lloydminster area. We 

know that there are other highways in this province that are 

pushing for escalated and early twinning because of the 

increase in volume of traffic, especially truck traffic. 

 

But as we establish our priorities, as we move forward, our one 

goal is to provide a highway network that is building on our 

economic opportunity and responding to the increased truck 

traffic especially that is created by that economic growth and 

development. And so we’re pleased to be able to make those 

significant investments. 

 

One of the other areas of transportation and now distribution 

and warehousing logistics and that type of endeavour has been 

referenced by my colleague from Regina Wascana Plains. I’m 

referring, Mr. Speaker, to the Global Transportation Hub that is 

currently under development west of the city of Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a project that I believe has tremendous 

economic opportunity and benefit for the entire province of 

Saskatchewan. This project is not a Regina project. It happens 

to be located west of the city, but the impact and benefit of this 

project will accrue to the entire province. It’s intended to 

streamline the supply chain activities of companies that are 

going to use the Global Transportation Hub as a distribution 

base, but it’s also intended on the other side of the equation to 

provide a container capability and capacity to producers in 

Saskatchewan who are looking for a container access so they 

can ship their projects around the world. 

 

When we talk about the Global Transportation Hub, many 

people think that we’re being quite pretentious, that using the 

term global is a rather, well, elaborate way to describe what is 

basically a Saskatchewan prairie project. 

 

But here’s where the name came from, Mr. Speaker. As supply 

chains develop, as companies become more and more rigorous 

in their control of costs, as they source products from further 

and further afield, companies that are doing business in 

Western Canada need a warehousing and distribution logistics 

capability to serve the market in Saskatchewan, in Alberta, 

maybe as far west as BC, maybe as far east as northwestern 

Ontario and Manitoba. And that’s what makes Saskatchewan a 

very interesting location for the warehousing and distribution of 

many of those products. But those products are coming into this 

part of the continent from worldwide sources, some as distant 

as southeast Asia — China in particular — others are coming 

from India. But products from around the world are coming into 

Western Canada by container through the port of Vancouver, 

the port of Prince Rupert, being unloaded there, put on trains, 

and moved into the internal part of the North American 

continent. 

 

So we have an opportunity to provide distribution and 

warehousing facilities here in the city. But we also have the 

opportunity to reconfigure trains and truck traffic to send a lot 

of that international produce and production to other parts of 

North America, maybe further east into southern Ontario or 

Quebec, maybe into the Midwestern United States, maybe into 

the industrial heartland of the US [United States], such as the 

states of Illinois and Wisconsin and Indiana, those places that 

depend on a lot of the off-shore production for distribution to 

their consumers. And we are ideally located as we are in the 

heart of the North American continent, right here in 

Saskatchewan, to produce and provide those kind of 

warehousing and distribution services to a much large audience. 

 

So the word “global” really has a very specific meaning in 

terms of imports as part of the supply chain that has developed 

over the last number of years. But we also anticipate this 

project to be global in its outward projections because 

Saskatchewan-produced oilseeds, grains, manufactured goods 

are actually being exported around the world right now. In fact 

Saskatchewan’s short-line manufacturers are among the most 

successful in the entire world. And their products go all across 

Europe into Eastern Europe, into Russia, and into some of the 

former Soviet bloc nations that are finding that they have great 

agricultural potential and don’t have the equipment to 

maximize those potentialities. And so Saskatchewan 

manufacturers are seeing increased opportunities in far-off 

markets. 

 

An interesting story I hear from the CEO of the Saskatchewan 

Trade and Export Partnership, Lionel LaBelle, is how 

Saskatchewan lentils and those types of ag products that we are 

growing here, generally called pulse crops, that has become a 

huge market . . . I’m sorry, a huge export opportunity for 

producers here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And one of the most unique stories that he tells is how the very 

poor and most recently flood affected nation of Bangladesh has 

become one of our most important customers. And at one time, 

where they used to import a few million dollars worth of pulse 

crops, lentils and peas and those types of crops that we grow 

very successfully here, that nation by itself has now become a 

$300 million market for producers in the province of 

Saskatchewan. That’s just one success story, but we are sending 

products that we grow into North Africa in large volumes now, 

where we never had that opportunity previously. 

 

Our quality and our dependability in terms of production have 

made us a preferred source of some of these very unusual crops. 

And as a result, Saskatchewan is in greater and greater need, 

from the point of our agricultural producers, of containers. And 

containers don’t arrive in an area by accident. You have to 

organize the availability of containers. And by using containers 

that are coming in from offshore to provide products to our 

distribution centre here, we might be able to take some of those 

containers, capture them for reuse, fill them with 

Saskatchewan-developed product, and ship them back offshore. 

 

It’s a balancing act, Mr. Speaker, and we hope that by our 

choice of companies that we’ll be locating into the Global 

Transportation Hub and by the thorough and expert analysis of 

export potential that we believe is available to us that we’ll be 

able to balance the incoming containers with the outgoing 



November 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5833 

requirements of our producers. And if and when we accomplish 

that as effectively as we hope, we will have one of the most 

effective intermodal facilities in all of North America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this project isn’t pie in the sky. It was developed 

as a result of potential that we realized quickly and 

inspirationally, I guess, by the coming together of a number of 

important factors. The most successful inland terminals around 

North America, and even worldwide, have had two 

fundamental factors come into play. One of them is the 

availability of what is known as a class 1 railway. In Canada 

that would be a railway like CP [Canadian Pacific] Rail or 

Canadian National Rail. But the mainline class 1 railways are 

an important in fact an integral part of the success formula for 

inland terminals. The other is to have private sector investment 

in the form of companies that want to situate near this kind of 

intermodal facility and development. And in our case, we were 

very fortunate early on to have that kind of a situation develop 

here with CP Rail wanting to move their intermodal facilities 

from downtown Regina to a point west of the city and with the 

arrival of the Canadian Logistics Services million square foot 

warehouse that was being built on behalf of Canada’s largest 

food retailer, the Loblaw Companies. 

 

[14:45] 

 

So when we had that sort of basic formation of capacity as a 

result of those two significant private sector players, we knew 

instantly that there was opportunity for other players of equal 

importance to participate in a project of this nature. And that 

has formed the basis for the development of the Global 

Transportation Hub, and that is what we are planning to build 

on as we move forward. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m excited about the GTH [Global 

Transportation Hub] and what it might mean for not just the 

city of Regina, as I said, but for the entire province. In fact 

given the kind of statistics we’re hearing, this could be the 

single largest economic development project in the province 

over the next decade or so. We’ve already been given a clear 

indication that the job potential, the jobs potential for the 

Global Transportation Hub over the next number of years could 

be as high as 4,000 people. 

 

Now I know that in one instance alone the company is talking 

of hiring anywhere up to 15, 1,600 people over the next couple 

of years. But that’s just one company. That doesn’t reflect the 

employment opportunities that will be created by other 

companies that come to locate in the Global Transportation Hub 

area. That’s a 2,000 acre — plus or minus a few acres — 

project that will be home to many companies, all of whom will 

have significant employment opportunities. So we can see 

several thousands of people working at that hub over the next 

number of years as the project matures and as the land is 

developed out there on behalf of these various major players. 

 

One of the interesting pieces of information that we’ve gleaned, 

one of the early companies that indicated they wanted to be a 

partner in this project said that they would expect truck traffic 

to amount to about 1,400 units a week initially — 1,400 units a 

week — and that’s not just truck and trailers. That’s truck and 

long-combination vehicle trailers. That would put a significant 

stress on our existing infrastructure, and as a consequence of 

that early prediction, we saw the investment at the Lewvan and 

the new interchange that’s being built there. 

 

But we were required to produce a quicker response for 

supporting infrastructure further down the highway. And people 

who drive west on the No. 1 Highway will notice that there’s 

new development at Pinkie Road. There is an accelerated 

timetable for another interchange to happen at Pinkie Road. 

There will be twinning of the road along the Pinkie Road access 

up to Dewdney. There will be some improvements on Dewdney 

Avenue as it heads out of the city past the RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] Depot west to the GTH. And sooner 

than later there’s going to be a new development of highway — 

single and then twinned — to the No. 11 from Dewdney up to a 

new interchange at Highway 11. 

 

Now at one time we thought that would all take about 10 years 

to accomplish. But now we’re being told by the company that 

indicated 1,400 trucks a week as sort of their anticipated truck 

traffic requirements, because they’re ahead of schedule and 

because they think that they’re going to be able to service many 

more stores in Western Canada from this Regina facility, now 

they’re predicting as many as 2,800 trucks a week. And, Mr. 

Speaker, you can appreciate how that would impact our 

planning and how significant that kind of an increase would be 

on the priorities of infrastructure development. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we see this project growing ahead of 

schedule in many instances at a much more aggressive rate with 

much more impact on our existing infrastructure. But the good 

news is that it will have tremendous benefit to the province 

from an economic and employment perspective. And we are 

doing whatever possible we can to manage this growth and to 

make this reality a real important and significant benefit to the 

province sooner than later. 

 

I have some personal interest in the Global Transportation Hub 

as you may know, Mr. Speaker, because the Premier asked me 

to chair the board of directors of that organization. But that 

hasn’t in any way diminished my enthusiasm for the project. In 

fact it’s only heightened my enthusiasm, and I think we have a 

great opportunity here to really establish the role and reputation 

of the province of Saskatchewan as a leader in transportation 

logistics. 

 

I indicated that there were two factors, you know — a class 1 

railway and a private sector player — to make a facility like 

that a success. But the supporting infrastructure required to 

fully complement a project of this nature was recognized early 

on when we undertook our five-year rolling plan and our 

evaluation of the provincial transportation network and 

approached transportation in this province from a clearly 

strategic perspective, an economic perspective. And we 

identified roads that would feed into larger highways that would 

accomplish our export potential with more efficiency and 

quicker timelines and less cost. 

 

And so we’ve laid the foundations for a successful project here 

by looking at the entire province and saying, how can we 

benefit the entire province through this project? What needs to 

be done? What investments need to be undertaken in order to 

achieve our ultimate goal here? And when we talked about 

highways earlier, that’s why some of the highways that are 



5834 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2010 

experiencing record levels of investment are being fulfilled 

right now because they play an important part in sort of feeding 

the opportunities that will accrue to the business people of this 

province through the Global Transportation Hub. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this summer in the constituency of Cypress Hills, 

we saw the most devastating impact of unprecedented rainfall. 

You know, the Southwest is historically known as one of the 

drier parts of the province. We, on a good year, might get 12 to 

14 inches of moisture including snow and sleet and rain and 

everything. And this year we had rainfall in Cypress Hills of 

unprecedented proportions. 

 

And in the immediate area of the Cypress Hills — the park and 

the community of Maple Creek — we had significant rainfall. 

We had every little pothole and slough full of water. The 

ground was completely saturated, and then we had two separate 

large, wet, heavy snowfalls which produced far more water than 

you would ordinarily expect. And as that water and moisture 

kept arriving, it made it more and more difficult for the streams 

and the creeks and whatever dam structures or water control 

structures existed there to handle the increased moisture. 

 

And then in the middle of the night, we had what was about an 

8-inch rain that fell right at the top of the Cypress Hills. If 

you’ve ever visited that area, when you understand how much 

cobblestone and rock there is there and how much runoff 

potential exists, especially when it’s all downhill, and when you 

have that much water over about 150 or 200 square miles, 8 

inches of water in an area that large is going to produce an 

awful volume of water. 

 

And in the middle of the night, authorities warned the people of 

the community of Maple Creek that a flood was imminent. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think anybody in that community 

appreciated how significant, how dramatic, and how 

devastating that flood would be because nobody who’d ever 

lived in the community of Maple Creek had seen a flood of this 

proportion. 

 

There was a flood there back in the mid- to late 1990s that did 

some damage, but it was a piker compared to the impact of this 

flood. 

 

Mr. Speaker, officials who’ve looked at the volume of water 

and the speed with which it came and the problems that were 

associated with it, have identified this flood as a one in maybe a 

thousand-year event. And in fact, they said that the volume of 

water here was sort of a . . . You could identify it as about 4,000 

times greater than anything that had been experienced in the 

area before. 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, nobody can be prepared for conditions of 

that sort. Nobody anticipates that kind of thing happening. It’s 

clearly unprecedented and never likely to happen again. But the 

question becomes, how does a government respond to a disaster 

of that magnitude? How does a government reassure the people 

that they will stand by them and work with them and help them 

in whatever way they possibly can? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the provincial disaster assistance program has 

been in place for quite some time. But it was never intended to 

deal with an impact quite this significant. And it certainly 

wasn’t capable of responding to floods every day or two in 

different communities around the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we had a flood in Maple Creek on June 18, 19. 

And I think the impact was starting to dissipate on the 20th of 

June. We had one just a week or 10 days later in Yorkton. We 

had one shortly thereafter in Saskatoon. We had another one in 

North Battleford. We had one at Raymore and the 

Kawacatoose, Watrous. We had floods and storms of 

tremendous power and damaging potential in communities all 

around the province. 

 

And as of just recently, I heard the minister say that we have 

damage claims that are now numbering in excess of 3,700 — 

3,700 claims from around the province, literally hundreds of 

municipalities asking for assistance from the provincial 

government. 

 

What was the largest pre-2010 damage claim as a result of these 

kinds of events? What was it? I mean Fishing Lake. I’ve heard 

that, and I guess we would all be familiar with Fishing Lake. 

But how many people would’ve been affected by the Fishing 

Lake disaster? A couple hundred claims? More than that? Not 

very many more. But you know, whatever it would’ve been, it 

would have been a very small percentage compared to the 

3,700, 3,800 claims that have been filed for the summer of 2010 

with the PDAP [provincial disaster assistance program] 

officials. And I know the community of Maple Creek had 

between 450 and 500 claims. And outside of the community of 

Maple Creek in the rural area of Maple Creek, and then if you 

add the community of Burstall in, which also got an 8-inch rain 

overnight and flooded a lot of basements, if you add that in, you 

might have about 550 claims just in my constituency alone. 

 

So we spent a lot of time this summer visiting the community 

of Maple Creek. I was in there on a daily basis for a while and 

for several separate occasions following that. I spent about 12 

days in the community of Maple Creek just focusing on flood 

claim issues, and a day or two in Burstall. 

 

But what I was impressed by, Mr. Speaker, was the 

responsiveness of the PDAP officials. Now I know there have 

been complaints as time wore on about some of the claims not 

being adjusted and not being paid out in a timely manner, but I 

can’t fault the way officials responded to these disasters in the 

early stages. They were there instantly. You know, the day after 

the flood the Premier was on the ground in Maple Creek. The 

Minister of Highways and Transportation was on the ground. 

The Minister in charge of the PDAP program was there. The 

federal MP was there. I was there. 

 

[15:00] 

 

We walked door to door and talked to people right away. And 

the orders that came out of that visit that day from the Premier 

and the minister to the officials in the ministry was, we need to 

respond. What can we do immediately to help these people? 

And that’s where it was almost instantly determined that we 

would provide every person who had a damage claim a $3,000 

cheque, and within a week that money was there. 

 

That’s never happened before, Mr. Speaker. And that 

responsiveness, I think, was very well received by the people of 



November 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5835 

Maple Creek. I know the municipal officials, the mayor and the 

administrator there and members of the town council, were 

working day in and day out to help the local citizens there. 

 

But the other thing that they appreciated about our 

government’s response was that they were able to call directly 

to the Premier. They either could talk to the Premier directly or 

his executive assistant or somebody in the Premier’s office with 

a problem and with a suggestion. And the government 

responded as quickly as possible. 

 

I know that, I know that, you know, in subsequent weeks there 

were concerns about the time it took for adjustors to do their 

job. But, Mr. Speaker, here’s something else. If we 

acknowledge the fact that this province has never seen a 

disaster of that magnitude, never seen that kind of damage done 

province-wide, it’s pretty likely that you’re not going to have 

enough adjustors anywhere within the province to handle that 

magnitude and that volume of claims. 

 

And you can go maybe hire new people to supplement the role 

of the adjustors, but if they don’t know the details of the 

program, if they aren’t familiar with this kind of damage, if 

they haven’t done this type of adjusting before, that’s not really 

all that helpful. And we had some situations where people who 

were brought in to help with the adjusting weren’t familiar 

enough with the requirements of the program to do a fully 

adequate job. 

 

And there are some instances of course where the damage you 

would see initially was superficial. It looked pretty obvious, but 

it was superficial compared to the ultimate damage that the 

flood would impact on any given property days and weeks and 

months later. In fact today we’re still getting reports of damage 

that was caused by the flood that wasn’t noticed within the first 

week or two or even month or two of the initial disaster. So I 

learned a lot about floods and the impact of floods, and I 

learned from insurance company specialists why floods are 

considered the worst possible natural disaster that you can deal 

with. 

 

You know, if you have a tornado, Mr. Speaker, a tornado drops 

down and does extensive damage in this area or that area. It 

moves from building to building or farm to farm, but there’s a 

beginning and an end to the damage of a tornado. If you have a 

fire, there’s a beginning and an end. And when the fire is out, 

you can see pretty much the total damage that’s been caused by 

that fire. But when you have flood damage, you have damage 

that is not just ubiquitous, it’s pervasive and it’s continuous. It’s 

the damage that . . . I almost want to use the term, it’s the gift 

that keeps on giving, except it’s not a gift. It is the kind of 

situation where what doesn’t appear damaged today is suddenly 

hosting black mould two weeks later. 

 

You know, in one instance in a campground where the water 

was almost 45 feet deep, the pressure of the water was so great 

that it forced water between the plastic coating on electrical 

cable and the wire itself. Now who’s ever heard of that? Is that 

the kind of thing that we would normally adjust in any kind of 

an evaluation? No. But it was weeks and weeks later when they 

found out that the corrosion that had started on that 

underground buried wire was so total that all of the wire in the 

campground would have to be ripped out and reinstalled at a 

cost of thousands and thousands and thousands of dollars. That 

money, that damage wasn’t even recognized as part of the 

initial claim. 

 

So when you see the impact of flooding, when you see 

basements now four months later starting to crumble because 

the water pressure in the water table is so great that it’s causing 

basements to buckle, when you see joists starting to heave in 

houses because of moisture in the basement. When you see that 

kind of extensive damage happening many months after the 

fact, you can see why a flood is so devastating and the damage 

is so continuous. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what was the response of the Saskatchewan 

Party government to this particular episode, not just in Maple 

Creek, not just in Burstall, but in other communities around the 

province? Well Maple Creek actually served as sort of the 

testing spot for a lot of changes that were introduced by the 

provincial government because it was the earliest and because 

so many of the shortcomings of the PDAP program became 

apparent as the adjustment process was undertaken. 

 

And we’re very proud of the way we dealt with this. It took 

some very thorough vetting and some very careful analysis by 

the ministry and by officials in the ministry. We wanted to 

make sure that we did this right, that we were thoughtful about 

it, that we didn’t have unintended consequences, and it took a 

little time to do it adequately. 

 

But here’s some of the things that we’ve achieved, Mr. Speaker, 

changes that were brought to the PDAP program in the month 

of August after some of those very early assessments of damage 

had been done. We reduced the deductible for private claimants 

from 20 per cent — which was a real irritant — down to 5 per 

cent, which eased the burden for many of our claimants. We 

increased the maximum claim for residents, primary residents, 

from $160,000 to 240,000. We increased the maximum amount 

of assistance to small businesses, to non-profit organizations, to 

boards, and to primary agricultural enterprises from 160,000 to 

$500,000. 

 

One of the things we did that caught a lot of people by surprise 

was we eliminated the Saskatchewan residency requirements 

for small business and agricultural owners. Mr. Speaker, 

previously the program would not, would not support the 

claims of individuals who were not bona fide Saskatchewan 

residents. But because of the experience in Maple Creek where 

we had people who lived in Alberta but owned businesses in 

Maple Creek, who were maybe part-time residents there, or 

who were in the process of relocating in Maple Creek from 

other jurisdictions, we felt that that business enterprise deserved 

to be treated on an equal footing with existing businesses in the 

community. And so that residency element was removed. 

 

We also separated the maximum $30,000 relocation payment 

from property claims. At one time, if you got relocation 

payments as part of the PDAP process, that $30,000 cap was 

subtracted from what you got in total from the program. But 

that was separated out, and you could get your full relocation 

payment without it having an impact on your property claim. 

 

We made regional park authorities eligible for the same kind of 

coverage as municipalities. And we fixed the deductible for 



5836 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2010 

municipalities and regional parks at 15 per cent of their current 

taxable assessment. 

 

We made other changes a little later on in the months of 

September and October. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that there’s 

enough information here that I want to share with the members 

of the House that I’ll need a little more time, but at this point 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — You won’t get more time. You’ll be 

done. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Well maybe I’ll be done sooner than I thought, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But let me just talk about some of the changes that happened to 

the PDAP program in September and October. We capped the 

amount of depreciation on furnaces at 35 per cent. I think that’s 

really critical for people, especially as we approach the winter 

months. We reduced the depreciation rate on drywall and other 

tangible properties such as hot water heaters and concrete. We 

hired additional structural engineering firms to expedite the 

work of the adjustment process. We hired more independent 

claims adjusters. And we increased the advance payment on 

claims, initial claims, from 40 per cent to 60 per cent to allow 

people to get moving quicker once they received the adjuster’s 

report. And we’re moving on a priority basis any claims that are 

associated with furnace and hot water repairs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s much more that has been accomplished 

under the PDAP program. And so if we had more time, I’d like 

to detail some of that. 

 

The only other thing I want to talk about for two minutes is the 

benefit of the STARS [shock trauma air rescue service] 

program that’s being introduced to the province of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this last weekend I was in Alberta, 

and coincidentally I talked to two people who’d had just recent 

experiences with the STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 

Society] helicopter program there. 

 

In the case of one man, he told me that that program saved his 

life. He had a heart attack at home. He was resuscitated, loaded 

into a helicopter, and flown to Calgary. On the flight to 

Calgary, he died on the table. And if it hadn’t been for the 

full-service medical service available to him on that STARS 

helicopter, he would have died. 

 

And when I heard his story and the enthusiasm he had for the 

quality of medical care he received as part of that STARS 

transfer, I was reminded how important that kind of capability 

would be in my own constituency. How important it would be 

for individuals in the large rural area of southwest 

Saskatchewan where a ground service ambulance can’t reach in 

a timely manner, and how many lives might be saved in my 

own constituency with that kind of medical capability that a 

helicopter can provide. 

 

The other story I heard, I was at a funeral on Sunday and the 

funeral was for a friend of mine who died in the STARS 

helicopter. But he was being rushed from Vulcan to Calgary 

and his heart blew up. And it wouldn’t have mattered how good 

the medical capability on that helicopter was, he wasn’t going 

to survive it. But he had a fighting chance knowing that he 

could be removed from Vulcan to Calgary in such a timely 

manner. 

 

And those two examples, Mr. Speaker, say volumes to me 

about the importance of having this type of service in the 

province of Saskatchewan. It isn’t intended to replace any other 

activities. It’s going to complement the existing services. And I 

think that these kind of anecdotal stories only reinforce, in my 

own mind, how important this undertaking is for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And while we’re talking about the benefit to rural 

Saskatchewan, the same kind of benefit can accrue to urban 

Saskatchewan when they need to be transferred from a smaller 

hospital in a more rural community to one of our tertiary 

hospitals in Regina or Saskatoon. And I think the lives saved 

through this undertaking will be clearly beneficial and make 

this investment absolutely worthwhile. I can’t say enough about 

my respect for the STARS organization and the benefits they 

have brought to the many people whose lives have either been 

saved or whose wounds have been healed earlier because of 

access to that service. So this is an investment that I believe is 

not just justifiable but absolutely essential for quality of life and 

security for people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve been granted a lot of latitude by my 

colleagues to enunciate some of these initiatives, and I 

appreciate their indulgence. But I want to say once again that 

this Throne Speech I think represents not just the agenda of the 

government yesterday, not just an enunciation of where we’re 

at today, but where we’re going in a very pragmatic and 

practical way. And I will be supporting the Throne Speech 

motion, and I will not be supporting the amendment. 

 

And at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask leave of the House to 

recess for a short time and that the bells recall the members at 

the call of the Chair. 

 

[15:15] 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Cypress Hills has asked for 

leave to move a motion that the Assembly recess for a short 

period of time and that the bells call the members back to the 

Chamber at the appropriate time. Is the Assembly agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly will recess 

until the call of the Chair and the bells are rung. 

 

[The Assembly recessed for a period of time.] 

 

The Speaker: — The Assembly will resume with the response 

to the Speech from the Throne. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

real honour, as always, to be able to stand in this Assembly and 

respond to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

But before I get into the text of my remarks, I want to 

congratulate the member from Saskatoon Northwest on a 



November 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5837 

well-fought campaign in the recent by-election. I do know this, 

Mr. Speaker. The Wyant family is very well-known for its 

public service, not only in Saskatoon but in Saskatchewan as 

well. 

 

When I was the Minister Responsible for the Crown Investment 

Corporation, I had the privilege of working with the member’s 

brother, Peter, who is a very fine public servant, who offered 

good advice when it came to one of the companies that the 

province had an interest in, and that was Federated Co-op’s 

heavy upgrader. And Peter did yeoman service not only with 

regard to the upgrader but other assets that CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] had. So it’s really 

wonderful to see another Wyant come to Regina. And I’m 

looking forward to his career as a member of the legislature in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to do a couple of things. I want to thank my 

constituency assistant, Judy Gossen, for the work that she does 

in our constituency office. I think it’s fair to say that Judy sees 

me a lot more often now than she used to. And we’ve worked 

together for a number of years. And I want to thank her very 

much for the work that she does day in and day out on behalf of 

not only people that live in Saskatoon Nutana, but also people 

that come from across the province to our office to see whether 

or not we can make progress on some of their issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened very carefully to the Throne Speech, and 

I was struck by the opening poem. And the Throne Speech 

really is a brief outline of what the government intends to 

accomplish in the year ahead. And the opening poem is a poem 

by a poet, Robert Frost, and the poem is called “The Road Not 

Taken”. And over the years, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had an 

opportunity to go out the west doors of the Assembly and over 

to a secluded little area where some of a previous premier’s 

ashes are interned outside of the . . . on the other side of the 

road. And Woodrow Lloyd, who was the premier of 

Saskatchewan in the 1960s has his ashes, some of his ashes are 

interned there. And there is a poem that Woodrow Lloyd often 

referred to in terms of his life as a politician in the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the reason why I raise Woodrow Lloyd, Mr. Speaker, is 

because Woodrow Lloyd was the member of the legislature for 

Biggar, and that’s the area that I’ve come from. Woodrow 

Lloyd was my mom’s high school teacher and really was the 

reason why . . . On my mom’s side of the family, her father and 

mother were Irish Catholics that had come here from Prince 

Edward Island. They settled here in the teens part of the last 

century. 

 

And when they came here as Irish Catholics, they were 

Liberals. And as a result of the way that Woodrow Lloyd, who 

was the high school principal in Biggar, treated my mom and 

her sister, my grandparents became CCFers [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation] in the 1940s. 

 

And I would say that that’s one of the reasons why I’ve had an 

interest in politics, was because of my mother’s influence. 

 

And when Woodrow Lloyd died, and I remember this very 

clearly, on the program that described his life was this poem. 

And when you go out to the west side of the legislature, you 

will see on a plaque is this poem. And this poem is an important 

poem for social democrats in this province. It’s an important 

poem for Woodrow Lloyd. It’s an important poem for my 

family. And in fact I have the original program from his 

funeral. I’ve had it framed. And it’s on the wall in my 

constituency office, and it’s been there since I was elected in 

1986. 

 

And the poem was important for Woodrow Lloyd, a lot of the 

CCFers because they really thought they were taking the road 

less travelled. And when you think about what Woodrow Lloyd 

had to put up with in 1962 with the implementation of medicare 

and what people who supported medicare had to put up with, it 

was indeed a road less travelled. 

 

Now I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, that we can fast forward 

several decades to 2010 and say that we really are on a road less 

travelled in the province of Saskatchewan because we’ve seen 

this movie before, Mr. Speaker. And I want to describe in the 

minutes that I have the movie that we’ve seen before. Because 

we now have in the province of Saskatchewan a conservative 

government. And they might say that they’re not, but they are, 

Mr. Speaker. They are a conservative government. 

 

And when I look at the Throne Speech, surely to goodness 

when we think about public policy we think about the people 

behind that public policy that we are trying to make progress 

for, Mr. Speaker. And the one part of the Throne Speech that I 

find most disconcerting is, on the new road we are doing more 

to help those in need, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t see any 

evidence of that at the moment. 

 

And I listened very carefully to the members opposite saying 

that they were taking the high road in their Speech to the 

Throne. And when I listened carefully to what they were 

saying, I concluded that in many respects many of them were 

taking the low road. Because they weren’t talking about the 

people behind the public policy that we come here to 

implement, they were talking about the past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have some very significant problems in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and I want to describe them. It is 

true that the average wage of people in Saskatchewan has 

increased, and we should be pleased about that. But what we’re 

not looking at is the median wage and how many people are 

below the medium wage. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, daily in the constituency of Saskatoon 

Nutana, which is not a low-income constituency, people come 

into the office and talk about how difficult it is to make ends 

meet. And let me give you some examples. Day after day after 

day, women in particular and immigrants in particular come 

into my constituency office and talk about, Mr. Speaker, how 

difficult it is to make ends meet. And, Mr. Speaker, they talk 

about the increased rents that are occurring. 

 

And let me give you an example. There is a woman that lives in 

my constituency — this is a real person — who spent most of 

her life working for a . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Premier on his feet? 



5838 Saskatchewan Hansard November 3, 2010 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — With apologies to the member for Nutana. 

With leave to make a very brief statement on a very important 

day for Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. Order. Order. Order. 

Leave is not granted. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Member for 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the woman that I am referring 

to worked for many, many years for a institution in the province 

of Saskatchewan . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’d ask the members to allow the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana to continue her speech. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 

woman is in her early 60s. She worked for an institution in the 

province that did not have a high-wage policy, did not have 

benefits, and did not have a pension plan. And when that 

institution closed in the province of Saskatchewan, she moved 

from a small town into the city to be closer to a sister. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, she came to Saskatoon about four years ago. 

She had saved on a minimal wage, a little bit above minimum 

wage, but she saved money and she had some investments in 

the bank. And she thought that she would be able to get herself 

to the old age pension. She’s getting some Canada pension, but 

her money is beginning to run out and she doesn’t know where 

she’s going to go, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A second person that I’m thinking of is an immigrant who came 

here under the immigrant nominee program, is working in the 

service sector — once again, makes a little bit above minimum 

wage. This is a single person, and this person has faced rent 

increases that now gobble up over 60 per cent of the money that 

he takes home each month, Mr. Speaker. These are real people 

with real issues. 

 

And one of the public policy issues that we have in the province 

of Saskatchewan is a lack of affordable housing. And while the 

Throne Speech certainly referred to a home ownership program 

where over the next several years 1,000 people, 1,000 families 

would be able to own a home, this Throne Speech did not 

address the need. And it’s a real need, Mr. Speaker, to have 

affordable housing, not only for families, not only for single 

families and not only for seniors, but a real need to have 

affordable housing for those folks who work in the service 

sector or are not yet at the age of retirement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we think that if the government is serious, serious about 

supporting people who have real needs, there will truly be a real 

investment in affordable housing, not only in Saskatoon but in 

North Battleford, Regina, Estevan, Swift Current, various parts 

of the province where . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well he 

may, but I want to put this on the record for the people that I 

represent, because they have real needs and the government, at 

the moment, is not stepping up to address their needs, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There is certainly prosperity in the province for some people, 

but there is not prosperity in the province for all. 

 

And when you’re talking about taking a road less travelled, let’s 

take a road less travelled where all people can have access to a 

safe and secure bed and home each day of the year, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what New Democrats support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another issue that is paramount is what’s 

happening to people who are HIV [human immunodeficiency 

virus] positive. Mr. Speaker, I had a man in my office about a 

week ago that is a recovering IV [intravenous] drug user. He’s 

52 years of age, and he has absolutely no place to live in the 

city of Saskatoon. 

 

And who did he come with to my office? He came with his 

78-year-old mother on a bus because she was looking for help. 

She lives in a small apartment. And she is absolutely devastated 

that, on her low income, her son has no place to go. 

 

And she recognizes that her son has made some very serious 

choices in his life, Mr. Speaker, that he is a person who has had 

a tremendous drug addiction. And he is on the road to recovery 

but he has absolutely no place. And I spent the day trying to 

find him a place to live. This too is a man, for the member from 

Southeast — and this woman lives in his constituency, the mom 

— this is a man that has no identification, none. And in order to 

get an apartment, you have to have some form of identification. 

You have to have a health card, a birth certificate. You have to 

have something. And with the condition that he has and the 

shape that he’s in, Mr. Speaker, he really should be in a group 

home or someplace that is supported living. But there’s no 

place for him to go, and he’s living with his mom. 

 

And I think if we want to travel a new road then we need to 

have someplace for people who are HIV positive to go to be 

supported, to have a safe place to live, to have food. Because 

we know that the health evidence shows that the people in our 

province who are HIV positive are the least healthy in the 

country and have the worst health outcomes in the country. 

 

And why is that, Mr. Speaker? It is because they are poor and 

they are often homeless and they do a lot of couch surfing, or 

they live outdoors. And I think if we want to take a road less 

travelled in a province that is truly blessed at the moment, a 

province that is truly blessed, then we need to think about those 

people and implement public policy that will support people 

living with HIV, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 5 p.m., this Assembly stands 



November 3, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5839 

adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5821 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5821 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5821 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5821 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5821 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5821 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5822 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5822 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5822 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5822 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5822 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5822 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5822 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5823 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5823 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5823 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5823 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Jim Brady Honoured 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5823 

 Premier of British Columbia Resigns 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5824 

 Rawlco Centre for Mother Baby Care 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5824 

 Leader’s Actions 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5824 

 Health Care Providers’ Week 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5824 

 Potash Corporation Golden Share 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5825 

 Proposed Sale of Potash Corporation 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5825 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Proposed Sale of Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5825 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5825 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5826 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5826 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5827 

 National School of Dental Therapy 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5829 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5829 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

REINSTATEMENT OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5830 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5830 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5836 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


