




















































Hansard: May 04, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 55B  TUESDAY, MAY 4, 2010, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5357 

 May 4, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 p.m., the House will resume 

debate on the proposed motion by the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

PRIVILEGE 

(Continued) 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased once again to rise and speak to the motion before the 

House. Mr. Speaker, over the supper hour I had the opportunity 

to review the stark similarities between the situation we face 

today and the situation faced by this Assembly in 1982. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1982 this House last faced a motion of privilege 

and, Mr. Speaker, at the time we had a Premier by the name of 

Grant Devine, Mr. Speaker. And we had a situation where a 

member of his government was brought forward on a motion of 

privilege, Mr. Speaker, and the characteristics I would have to 

say, after reviewing the situation in some detail, Mr. Speaker, 

are in stark, really stark comparison to today, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re virtually identical in the characteristics and mannerisms 

in which the government of the day and the government of 

today believe that they can in fact, Mr. Speaker, do whatever 

they want. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was somewhat surprised to see the similarities, 

Mr. Speaker, and that they are so, so much alike. Mr. Speaker, 

1982, Colin Thatcher, the then member that was up on an issue 

of privilege, was supported by his leader. He was supported by 

his leader. He was supported by Grant Devine. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that government went on to be perhaps the worst in 

Saskatchewan’s electoral history. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are those who say — and if you read 

some of the comments on those days, Mr. Speaker — that those 

early, early decisions to not reign in and not allow the arrogance 

and not to deal with the situation that that privilege motion 

presented, resulted in many of the problems that the 

government faced as time went on, Mr. Speaker. Because had 

the leader in 1982 taken the reigns and apologized and shown 

leadership, Mr. Speaker, that government would have perhaps 

not gone on to do many of the things they did because of a lack 

of leadership and a lack of direction from the Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am at the moment having transcribed the 

comments from the Minister of Health and the Premier in their 

scrums before the motion was even in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, before the motion was even in this Assembly. I am 

told . . . Pardon me. Just after it was in, Mr. Speaker, before it 

was even debated, before it was even debated, before the 

members of this Assembly had a chance to debate the issue 

whether or not this case of privilege should in fact be referred to 

the Standing Committee on Privileges, the Premier said his 

government would vote it down. All his members would vote 

down the issue of privilege, Mr. Speaker. Prior to this debate, 

prior to the conclusion of this debate, the Premier said that his 

government and every one of its members would vote against 

this privilege. 

Mr. Speaker, a Premier who will not respect even the processes 

of this House, a Premier that does not respect the rights of 

members, does not respect this Chamber, does not respect its 

processes, Mr. Speaker, is not a leader. A Premier who will 

before the legal rights of the people of Saskatchewan are 

examined, a Premier that will determine, predetermine prior to 

process, Mr. Speaker, right or wrong, that he knows better than 

this Assembly. He knows better than the Speaker. He knows 

better than each of the members in this Assembly. He knows 

better than the member from Moose Jaw North. He knows 

better than the member from Carrot River Valley. He knows 

better than the member from Lloydminster. He knows better 

than the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood or any of the 

members in the back. 

 

Before we have a right to use our parliamentary rights, our 

privileges that are afforded only to the members of this 

Assembly, before we have a chance to debate an issue which 

the Speaker has determined is a prima facie case, Mr. Speaker, 

the Premier determines that his members, to a person, are going 

to vote — before the debate on a motion before this House 

where this House has been misled or has been believed to be 

misled by a minister of the Crown, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they think it’s funny, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have to 

say that this may well be the darkest day that I have seen in my 

elected life. Because, Mr. Speaker, when a Premier will say, 

before the debate is allowed to occur, what the outcome will be 

on an issue of privilege where they can bring false information 

before the House . . . And they can laugh about it. They can 

laugh. They can laugh about misleading the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s a shame. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you have any respect for this institution, 

any respect for its processes, Mr. Speaker, the Premier at least 

would let the process go on and then he’d use his majority to 

abuse the minority. All right. That’s fine. But at least he would 

allow the process to go on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about, I want to talk 

about, Mr. Speaker, and this is from . . . I am quoting from The 

Law, Privileges, Proceedings and Usage of Parliament, Mr. 

Speaker, the 19th Edition, Erskine and May. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it talks about a “Conspiracy to Deceive Either 

House or Committees of Either House”: 

 

It has already been seen that the giving of false evidence, 

prevarication or . . . [suspension] of the truth by witnesses 

while under examination before either House or before 

[the] committees of either House is punished as a 

contempt;  

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say, “Misconduct of Members . . .” 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

The Commons may treat the making of a deliberately 

misleading statement as a contempt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now, Mr. Speaker, we’re dealing with an issue 

where the facts have been established at least to a level, Mr. 

Speaker, that this issue should be referred to the Committee of 



5358 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

Privileges for review. Mr. Speaker, it is a relatively simple 

matter. We have before us the statement made by the Minister 

of Health when he says the very regulation that he’s speaking 

about on The Health Information Protection Act, that the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner has been consulted four 

times on that very regulation, and it is specific. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we then have a letter written from that very same 

independent officer of the legislature saying, no he had not been 

consulted. And, Mr. Speaker, before we even have the 

opportunity as an Assembly — our rights as members of the 

Legislative Assembly on the issue of privilege, probably the 

most important issue a Legislative Assembly ever determines, 

Mr. Speaker, on the most important issue that a Legislative 

Assembly and the members of that Assembly ever determine, 

Mr. Speaker — the Premier goes to the media. The Premier 

goes to the media and says, all of his members will vote against 

the motion of privilege. 

 

But even before he did that, Mr. Speaker, he stood in this House 

and he defended the minister today rather than showing 

leadership, rather than showing the leadership that should be 

seen by the Premier. 

 

He could have made the minister apologize. He could have 

corrected the situation, and he didn’t. Mr. Speaker, that, that is a 

choice that he made; not a choice that I would have liked to see 

him make. I would have liked to believe that the Premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan would have greater integrity, greater 

character, and be willing to do the right thing because, Mr. 

Speaker, we all received the same information from the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner. 

 

We can all read. We can all determine for ourselves that what 

was said in this House and what the Information and Privacy 

Commissioner said were very different — very, very different, 

Mr. Speaker. And nobody, nobody could mistake that. In fact 

this House has been told an incorrect fact, not once, but several 

times, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we saw this same situation in 1982. We saw 

the Grant Devine government and one Colin Thatcher showing 

a similar level of arrogance, disrespect, contempt, disregard, 

and disrespect for this Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, even more 

importantly, that disrespect and contempt goes beyond the 

doors of this Assembly to all the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And when a government has no 

respect for the people of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, then, Mr. Speaker, it is very, very difficult to consider 

to see them as a government in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when members of this Assembly cannot rely on 

the answers from a minister of the Crown, Mr. Speaker, and 

that minister of the Crown is in one of the most powerful 

portfolios of a government, Mr. Speaker, that’s a shame. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I had stated earlier, we are having the 

transcripts of the interviews with the Minister of Health and the 

Premier put together and I’ll have them in a short period of time 

in the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak to the individual members of 

the government. Mr. Speaker, for the Premier to say, before the 

motion is even spoken to, before the debate has been concluded 

and for that matter barely begun, Mr. Speaker, that each and 

every one of you will vote against a motion of privilege, 

perhaps the most serious vote you will ever have in your years 

as a member of the legislature and that you will all follow like 

puppets, Mr. Speaker, and do as you’re told, Mr. Speaker, why, 

Mr. Speaker, should the people of Saskatchewan believe that 

you’re governing in their best interest? 

 

Mr. Speaker, because you have . . . We as members of the 

Assembly have a right to exercise judgment, a responsibility to 

exercise judgment and to act in the interest in the people of 

Saskatchewan. And yes, Mr. Speaker, to exercise good 

judgment. Judgment that is both respectful of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, that is respectful of the members of 

this Assembly, and that is respectful of your role as a member 

of the Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, failure to exercise that 

good judgment, Mr. Speaker, means we’re not doing our jobs, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, after a debate, after consideration, after 

having all the facts in front of you, if every member of the 

government voted in a similar manner then, Mr. Speaker, that is 

their right. Even if they’re wrong, it is their right under our 

parliamentary system, Mr. Speaker, because the majority gets 

their way after the minority has their say. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the Premier pre-empted the parliamentary 

system. He pre-empted the right of you to have your own say. 

When he goes out to the media before the debate and says, each 

and every one of you are going to vote against the motion 

before you even hear, Mr. Speaker, the debate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of, there’s a lot of similarity to 

this in the 1982 situation, and we know what that government 

went on to do. They displayed a level of arrogance and 

incompetence, Mr. Speaker. And many say, many say when you 

talk of those days and reflect upon what happened, that very 

early in the Grant Devine government’s first term of office they 

faced a similar situation on the issue of privilege. And they 

displayed an arrogance where the then Premier Grant Devine 

defended Colin Thatcher in the same manner that we see the 

Premier today defending Minister McMorris, defending the 

Minister of Health. 
 

[19:15] 
 

Mr. Speaker, those similarities leave concern. Mr. Speaker, 

those similarities should make members of this Assembly 

concerned. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to say that the Premier 

today went one step further when he showed a level of absolute 

arrogance and went out and said to the media he doesn’t care. 

He doesn’t care about the debate in this Assembly, that every 

one of you are going to vote it down, every one of the members 

of the government are going to vote against it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if they had, if they had allowed the debate to 

go on without making those types of comments, and at the end 

of the night voted as I said a minute ago, the rights of the 

majority are such that they can vote down a minority, even it’s 

wrong. Even it’s wrong. Because, Mr. Speaker, there are many 

members on the government side that I know, know what was 

said was wrong, that the actions of the Minister of Health don’t 

sit well with them. And that if they’re in close ridings, Mr. 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5359 

Speaker, and they’re looking at their own electoral futures, Mr. 

Speaker, they wear something somebody else did. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, more importantly on principle, more 

importantly on principle, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

cannot feel good. The members opposite cannot feel good that 

they are going to vote against the motion of privilege before 

they even heard the debate. And, Mr. Speaker, for the Premier 

to go out in the public and say that every one of his members is 

going to vote against the motion of privilege when the Speaker 

has found a prima facie case, Mr. Speaker, before we even have 

the opportunity to debate it, Mr. Speaker, that’s shameful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know there are members on the government side 

know that’s wrong. I know there are members on the 

government side that respect the process. I know that there are 

members on the government side that respect the role of an 

elected member of the Legislative Assembly, and I know that 

there are members on the government side that respect our 

parliamentary democracy, that respect this Chamber. They 

respect our rules, and they respect our processes, Mr. Speaker. I 

know there are members that do, and we know who they are. 

 

And we urge those members not to vote like puppets the way 

the Premier said you are all going to vote before the debate even 

occurred, Mr. Speaker. In an arrogance that is seldom seen, in 

an arrogance seldom seen on an issue of privilege, Mr. Speaker, 

before the issue is debated in the House, Mr. Speaker, we have 

the Premier saying to the members of this Assembly that 

they’re all going to vote against a motion of privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that in itself is a challenge to the very rules which 

we live by. It’s a challenge to the very rules of this Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker, when the Premier, the head of a government, does 

not respect the rules of this Chamber. Did not consult with his 

own caucus. Not acting in the interest of the people of 

Saskatchewan. Does not respect this Chamber. Does not respect 

our parliamentary traditions. Does not respect our law, Mr. 

Speaker. He does not respect the law in this land and our 

country. Mr. Speaker, our parliamentary rights, our 

parliamentary law, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when a Premier, prior to the debate goes out and 

predetermines the outcome of a vote, Mr. Speaker, with no 

consultation, telling each of you which way you’re going to 

vote, Mr. Speaker, telling each member of the government 

which way they’re going to vote, that’s unbelievable, Mr. 

Speaker. And it’s shameful, it’s absolutely shameful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1982 we saw a similar pattern. And what 

happened? We went on to see a government that could not 

manage its affairs. It was out of control. There was uncontrolled 

arrogance, Mr. Speaker, a government that acted without any 

sense of rules, Mr. Speaker. No restriction on what they would 

do, Mr. Speaker, didn’t follow the rules of the Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, didn’t even in the end pass a 

budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and today we have a very similar situation. In 

1982 we had Grant Devine defending Colin Thatcher, even 

though he knew Colin Thatcher was wrong. And Colin 

Thatcher went on to create great difficulty for the people of this 

province, Mr. Speaker. And that government went on to be 

perhaps the worst in our Canadian parliamentary history. Well 

it’s definitely the worst in Saskatchewan history. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the similarities today are unbelievable. 

 

We have a Premier today standing up and defending a minister 

when an independent officer is saying what he said was not 

true. We have the Premier standing up and defending him, Mr. 

Speaker. And that independent officer knows he puts his job on 

the line taking on a cabinet minister of a government, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, he felt strong enough that he’s prepared 

to lose his job taking on the Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, 

but the members on this side are going to be watching very 

carefully that Mr. Dickson’s not, not in any way mistreated as a 

result of doing his job.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker, today is a day that will go down in the 

history of this province, Mr. Speaker because before we had the 

right to have a debate, before we had the right to have a debate, 

the Premier said, what you think as individuals doesn’t matter; 

that the issue of a prima facie case of privilege doesn’t matter; 

that you as individual members don’t have a right to have an 

opinion. You don’t have a right to have a say. 

 

And I know the member from Cypress Hills, that will bother 

him. I know it will bother the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. I know it’s going to bother the member 

from Carrot River Valley. I know it’ll bother the member from 

Yorkton. I know it’s even going to bother the member from 

Moose Jaw North. I know it’s going bother the member from 

Melfort, I know it will. I know that it will bother many 

members on the government side. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there are others it won’t bother. But the 

members of the government, Mr. Speaker, are not, are not, Mr. 

Speaker, being allowed the freedom, being allowed the freedom 

to vote the way they want. If the Premier says before they even 

hear the debate, before they even get to hear the debate that he 

will in fact, they will all in fact vote against, vote against the 

motion before the House, a motion that through due process of 

this Assembly has been determined to be a prima facie case of 

privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to spend some time talking about the 

attack on democracy and what it means to this Assembly, what 

it means to the future of the members of this Assembly. And 

I’m going to talk about it, Mr. Speaker, from the point of view 

of an attack on our democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when a case is being made for an issue of 

privilege, and we haven’t had a case of privilege being debated 

in this House . . . We had a case just about eight months ago in 

October —pardon me, Mr. Speaker, not even eight months, six 

months ago — but the minister stood up and apologized. He did 

the right thing. He did the honourable thing. He stood up and 

apologized because he knew, he knew that, Mr. Speaker, it was 

the right thing to do. He knew he had misled the House, and he 

knew that he would be found in contempt of the House. And, 

Mr. Speaker, he did the right thing. 

 

Today we are debating a prima facie case of privilege, Mr. 

Speaker, something we have not done since 1982, something 

the last time that we went to this extent was Colin Thatcher and, 

Mr. Speaker, in the government of Grant Devine. And, Mr. 



5360 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

Speaker, that’s not a comparison I’d want to be made about me. 

I would not want that comparison to be made about me, 

comparing me to Colin Thatcher, comparing me to the Devine 

government. I certainly would not want that on my 

parliamentary record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to spend time because I think it’s 

important of the people in the province of Saskatchewan to 

understand what we’re dealing with. It has been 28 years since 

members of this Assembly entered into such a solemn debate. 

And it is a solemn debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think it’s important on this occasion to look back to the 1982 

case because it’s very similar to the case before the Assembly 

today. And in order for members of this Assembly to 

understand the gravity of this case and to understand the need to 

refer this case to the Committee on Privileges, members must 

understand past cases, particularly past cases that this Assembly 

has dealt with, and understand the history of this Assembly and 

understand the reasons why this is so important to this 

Assembly to maintain its credibility, and its credibility not just 

amongst its members, Mr. Speaker, but amongst the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan and the people of Canada as well, 

Mr. Speaker. Because if we think that we can act and not follow 

the rules and have no respect for our Assembly and for the rules 

of this Assembly and our parliamentary process, and nobody is 

going to follow it and nobody is going to understand, we are 

fooling ourselves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In October, in October the case, Mr. Speaker, was written up in 

The Parliamentarian. And the parliamentarians across this 

country and across the Commonwealth read about it. They read 

about the situation of the member from Wood River, the 

Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing and the 

issue that this Assembly dealt with. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, in just a few short months we have 

another identical situation before the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. It 

is a pattern of behaviour and a pattern, Mr. Speaker, that the 

people of Canada and the people of Saskatchewan have a right 

to know about and should know about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, on July 8th, 1982, Mr. Hammersmith, the 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Prince 

Albert-Duck Lake rose in this Assembly and asked the 

following question during question period: 

 

Question to the Minister of Mineral Resources. In the June 

21, 1982 edition of the Toronto Globe and Mail the 

Minister of Mineral Resources, in responding to an 

allegation that he personally fired an employee, or 

employees, of the Department of Mineral Resources said, 

and I quote: 

 

That’s not true. I have not dismissed anyone personally. 

 

My question to the minister is as to the accuracy of the 

quotation, and whether it is true that the minister has not 

personally fired or dismissed any employee or employees 

from the Department of Mineral Resources. 

 

That’s what Mr. Hammersmith, the MLA for Prince 

Albert-Duck Lake, asked Colin Thatcher, the minister of 

Mineral Resources. And I’ll continue to quote briefly from 

Hansard because I think it’s very important for members of this 

Assembly to see the parallels between the 1982 case and the 

case which is before us this evening. In response, to Jerry 

Hammersmith’s question, Colin Thatcher stood and said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have to confess to becoming so bored with 

this question period, I wasn’t even listening. Could I ask 

the member to repeat his question? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that showed a level of arrogance . . . And I 

see the members of the government laughing, Mr. Speaker. 

They can think it’s funny. The Highways minister can think it’s 

funny but, Mr. Speaker, that is just saying that he thinks what 

Colin Thatcher did was appropriate. So the Minister of 

Highways in the government today thinks what Colin Thatcher 

did was appropriate and funny, Mr. Speaker, and funny. 

 

The Hansard account continues, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 

 

MR. HAMMERSMITH: —: My question to the bored 

minister is, and I repeat: has the minister personally fired 

or dismissed any employee or employees from the 

Department of Mineral Resources? 

 

HON. MR. THATCHER: — No. 

 

MR. HAMMERSMITH: — I just want to get this clear 

for the record, Mr. Speaker. Is the minister stating 

unequivocally that he has not personally, in writing, 

verbally, from the radio in his tractor, or by any means 

whatsoever, personally fired any employee or employees 

from the Department of Mineral Resources? Unequivocal. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, here’s what Colin Thatcher said in response 

to that very specific question, and I quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps the member has some difficulty with 

the English language. I believe I answered his initial 

question which was the identical question to his 

supplementary. I used a basic English word, known as no. 

I will repeat it. Perhaps if he requires the same answer in 

French, I could ask my colleague to respond to it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was an extremely arrogant, extremely 

arrogant answer and an extremely arrogant response. Mr. 

Speaker, that is very similar to the situation we are facing today. 

Mr. Speaker, we have a minister who repeatedly answered a 

question that he knew, he knew was not right, that the answer 

was not right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, even after the Information and Privacy 

Commissioner, at potential personal risk for his own, his own 

future, wrote to every single member of this Assembly, every 

single member of this Assembly saying unequivocally, he had 

never, never been consulted on that regulation, Mr. Speaker, on 

the HIPA [The Health Information Protection Act] regulation, 

that the minister stood in this House and said he had been 

consulted on four times. 

 

[19:30] 

 

The Information and Privacy Commissioner made it very clear 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5361 

he had never been consulted. Mr. Speaker, that is what 

happened in this Chamber on July 8th, 1982. Three times, Jerry 

Hammersmith, the NDP [New Democratic Party] member from 

Prince Albert-Duck Lake, asked Mr. Thatcher, Grant Devine’s 

minister of Mineral Resources, a very direct and clear question. 

 

Once Mr. Thatcher didn’t hear the question because he was 

bored, but the other two times he answered with an empathetic 

denial. The following day, on July 9th, 1982, Jerry 

Hammersmith stood in this Chamber to raise a point of 

privilege. Mr. Speaker, I think it will be helpful to the members 

of this Assembly to hear just a brief portion of Mr. 

Hammersmith’s remarks that day. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, the comparisons to the case in 1982 and 

the case before this Assembly today is remarkably the same. 

The attitudes of the government are remarkably the same, Mr. 

Speaker, and the attitudes of the two ministers are remarkably 

the same. 

 

The one thing that is different, Mr. Speaker, one thing that is 

different — although both Premiers defended their ministers — 

is in this case today the Premier went out into the rotunda and 

told the media, before the debate even occurred, that each and 

every one of his members would vote against the motion. Mr. 

Speaker, that shows a level of disrespect for this Chamber, for 

our rules, for his own members, for this Assembly, and most 

importantly for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so the Premier today went one step further than 

Grant Devine in 1982. Grant Devine in 1982 didn’t go out to 

the rotunda and tell everybody that his members would vote 

against a motion of privilege, the most important motion that 

members of an Assembly will ever deal with, before the debate 

even occurred. Mr. Speaker, even Grant Devine and the 

Conservative government of 1982 didn’t have that level of 

arrogance, Mr. Speaker. And the Premier, the Premier of today 

does. Mr. Speaker, that shows very little, very little leadership, 

no respect for this Assembly, very poor judgment, Mr. Speaker, 

extremely poor judgment. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised that his members are not 

outraged. I’d be outraged if my leader told me before a debate 

even occurred what my position had to be, and if he went and 

told the media what my position was before I even had a chance 

to hear it. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Premier today 

did that to his members, Mr. Speaker. The Premier today 

disrespected this Assembly and disrespected his members by 

going to the media and telling the media what his members 

would vote, that his members would vote against a motion of 

privilege before the debate occurred and before he talked to his 

members and before, Mr. Speaker, and before all the evidence 

was debated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on July the 9th, 1982, Jerry Hammersmith stood 

in this Chamber to raise a point of privilege. As I said, I think it 

would be very helpful to the members of the Assembly to hear a 

brief portion of Mr. Hammersmith’s remarks. Again, the 1982 

case was the last time this House was faced with a prima facie 

case of privilege and it is important . . . It’s the last time that 

there was a debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to point out that in this government’s short history, there 

have been two cases of prima facie, Mr. Speaker, and in one the 

minister did the right thing and he apologized. But, Mr. 

Speaker, this afternoon there were many opportunities for the 

minister to do just that and he didn’t do it, or yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, or in many, many days as this issue’s been before the 

House. 

 

Again, the 1982 case was the last time the House was faced 

with a prima facie case of privilege, and it is important for 

members to understand the similarities between the case and the 

case that is before us this evening. So here is a brief quote from 

Jerry Hammersmith’s remarks on July 9th, 1982, and I quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I fully realize the seriousness of the charge 

that I bring before this House this morning. That is made 

clear for all parliamentarians in Erskine May, 19th 

Edition, page 142, under the heading “Misconduct of 

Members or Officers of Either House.” That section in 

Erskine May [which I read earlier, Mr. Speaker] is under 

the heading I have stated, subheading “Deliberately 

Misleading the House.” 

 

The House may treat the making of a deliberately 

misleading statement as a contempt. 

 

In 1963 the House resolved that in making a personal 

statement which contained words which he later 

admitted not to be true, a former Member had been 

guilty of a grave contempt. 

 

That’s from Profumo’s case, 1962-63. Members who are 

familiar with the history of that case will recall that it was 

not the particular personal involvements that Mr. Profumo 

had been involved in that resulted in the necessity of him 

resigning. It was rather that he had misled the House with 

regard to his involvements. 

 

So I understand the seriousness of the charge, Mr. 

Speaker, but I feel that I must make it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing that members opposite take an issue 

as important as contempt of the Assembly, a motion of 

privilege, and laugh about it, Mr. Speaker, laugh about it. Mr. 

Speaker, I wish the members opposite will at least show respect 

to the House this evening, Mr. Speaker, in the seriousness of the 

issue before us. 

 

Mr. Hammersmith went on to quote Mr. James McGrath, the 

Progressive Conservative Member of Parliament for St. John’s 

East, who said in the House of Commons, May 20th, 1982, the 

following quote: 

 

If I cannot be satisfied that I can rely on receiving honest 

and factual answers to the questions that I raise in this 

House, then I cannot function as a member of this House 

and I cannot effectively serve my county, my province, or 

my constituency. It is as simple as that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to repeat that, Mr. Speaker, because this is 

the exact situation this Assembly faces today — the very, very 

same situation. And as I said earlier, the similarities to the case 

in 1982 and Colin Thatcher and Grant Devine, and the Minister 

of Health and the current Premier is actually astounding. It is so 



5362 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

similar, Mr. Speaker, that it’s just about unnerving. 

 

But I want to repeat that Mr. McGrath, Progressive 

Conservative Member of Parliament for St. John’s East, who 

said in the House of Commons on May 20, 1982, the following 

quote: 

 

If I cannot be satisfied that I can rely on receiving honest 

and factual answers to the questions that I raise in this 

House, then I cannot function as a member of this House 

and I cannot effectively serve my country, my province, or 

my constituency. It is as simple as that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the exact same case I made earlier this day, 

that I made to members of this Assembly. But before you even 

heard the debate, your leader, the current Premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan, went out into the rotunda and told 

the media and the people of Saskatchewan that each and every 

one of you would vote against this motion. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. When the 

member is speaking, I would appreciate if he would address his 

comments to the Chair and through the Chair. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, through you to all the members, this quote is exactly, 

exactly the same point I made this afternoon, that if we cannot 

rely on the information provided to us by ministers of the 

Crown, Mr. Speaker, then we cannot do our jobs. 

 

But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, if they don’t respect this 

institution, they don’t respect our rules, if you don’t respect this 

Chamber, if you don’t respect our parliamentary democracy, at 

least respect the people of Saskatchewan. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, people make decisions. They make choices. They act 

upon the information provided to them by ministers of the 

Crown. 

 

And families make decisions that affect their children, their 

grandchildren, their businesses, their farms, and their futures 

based on information provided to them by ministers of the 

Crown. Mr. Speaker, and if you can’t rely on that information, 

Mr. Speaker, how can the people of this province know what 

options they have before them, know what choices they have to 

make for their families, know how they can advance the 

well-being of their children and grandchildren? 

 

So it goes far beyond us being able to do our jobs in this 

Assembly. It goes to the very essence of our province. This 

province was built through co-operation, understanding, 

working together, relying on one another. And if you can’t rely 

on the information provided by ministers of the Crown and this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, in question period, Mr. Speaker, then 

the people of Saskatchewan have been let down. 

 

Even if you care nothing for our parliamentary rules, the 

Chamber in which we stand, your responsibilities of a member 

of the legislature, Mr. Speaker, if the members don’t care about 

that, at least care about the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan because each and every one of us is elected, is 

elected to represent the people of the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we have a responsibility, a responsibility to act in the 

interest of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. And in 

acting, Mr. Speaker, in acting . . . And our answers to the 

people of the province is part of our acting, Mr. Speaker, and 

part of our actions on their behalf. They cannot rely on that, Mr. 

Speaker. And they cannot rely on their government. They 

cannot believe in their government and, Mr. Speaker, that’s a 

shame. That is a real shame. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to have a Premier that takes it one step 

further than Grant Devine did in 1982, that went out into the 

rotunda and told the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

through the news media that all of his members would vote 

against this motion, they would vote it down — before the 

debate — is in itself a contempt for this Assembly and a 

contempt for the members of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and 

should not have been done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when a Premier goes and tells the media that 

they’re going to vote down a motion of privilege before the 

debate, that shows a level of contempt for this Assembly, for its 

rules, and for the people of the province of Saskatchewan like 

we’ve never seen before. And, Mr. Speaker, that isn’t 

leadership, Mr. Speaker, that is not leadership. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the people of the province of Saskatchewan didn’t 

elect the Premier as a dictator. They elected him to lead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a leader, a leader is not going to show the type and 

level of contempt for this Assembly to go out into the rotunda 

and before the debate on a serious matter of privilege say that 

they will vote it down without even allowing the debate to 

occur. Because the debate doesn’t matter the minute the Premier 

says it’s over. He’s voting against it. The debate does not 

matter. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to just move on on this particular 

case because I think it’s very important and very relevant. I’d 

like to remind those listening that the reason I am speaking 

about the case from 1982 is because it was the last time the 

Speaker found a prima facie case of privilege, or breach of 

privilege, pardon me. And that was the last time members of 

this Assembly were faced with such a debate. 

 

It is important for us to consider past precedent when 

examining the facts of the case that is before us this evening. So 

the NDP member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake made his case 

that Colin Thatcher, Grant Devine’s minister of Mineral 

Resources had misled the House, Mr. Speaker — Grant Devine 

and Colin Thatcher. Colin Thatcher had misled the House and 

the Premier had gone along with it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[19:45] 

 

Similar to what we saw today. Minister of Health misleads the 

House, the arrogant minister, and we have the Premier 

defending him. But then he takes it one step further and goes 

out into the rotunda and says the debate doesn’t matter here. 

Your opinions don’t matter. Our opinions don’t matter. The 

Speaker’s opinion doesn’t matter. The people of 

Saskatchewan’s opinion doesn’t matter. He’s going to do what 

he wants. And his members are going to follow and do exactly 

as he tells them to and vote against this motion even before 

debate has had an opportunity to be held. 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5363 

Mr. Speaker, so the NDP Member from Duck Lake made his 

case that Colin Thatcher, Grant Devine’s minister of Mineral 

Resources, had misled the House. And what happened then, Mr. 

Speaker? Eric Berntson, Eric Berntson, Grant Devine’s deputy, 

stood up and said the following quote: 

 

Just a couple of words on the point raised by the hon. 

member. I, of course, can’t speak for the Minister of 

Mineral Resources and since he is not here he is unable to 

speak for himself. I would ask, Mr. Speaker, that before 

you make the determination as to whether this is in fact a 

prima facie case of privilege you wait for the Minister of 

Mineral Resources to have the opportunity to present his 

case . . . 

 

The next sitting day, Mr. Speaker, was July 12, 1982. On that 

day, Colin Thatcher rose in this Assembly to reply to the point 

of privilege. And since I believe it is important for members to 

know the similarities between the Minister of Health’s actions 

today and those of Colin Thatcher, I will quote briefly from 

Colin Thatcher’s response to the point of order. Thatcher said, 

and I quote: “There is no question Mr. Speaker, I state 

categorically again, I have not personally fired any employees.” 

 

Thatcher went on to say, and I quote:  

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to go a little bit further. I suggest that 

the manner in which this was dealt with on Friday was 

reprehensible. And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

personally express my contempt and scorn for the former 

minister, the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, for the 

manner in which he has approached the matter without 

notice — particularly during my absence in this House — 

to get a cheap headline on the weekend. Mr. Speaker, I 

suggest that tactics like this, tactics which I think are 

reprehensible and disgusting, are indicative of why that 

pathetic little crew occupies the turf that they do in this 

Assembly today. 

 

That’s how Colin Thatcher talked about the opposition of the 

day, Mr. Speaker, with an arrogance and contempt that we have 

not seen in a very long time — an arrogance and contempt, Mr. 

Speaker, that we have not seen for 28 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but today I saw an arrogance and contempt that I 

think is even greater because, Mr. Speaker, when a Premier will 

circumvent the fundamental privileges of members of this 

House by going out into the rotunda and will say that his 

members will vote down a motion of privilege before the debate 

even occurs, Mr. Speaker, that is contempt of the members of 

this Assembly, of this House, and of our privileges at a level 

that exceeds those of 1982. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is what Colin Thatcher, Grant Devine’s 

minister of Mineral Resources had to say in response to the very 

serious points of privilege raised by NDP MLA Jerry 

Hammersmith. Instead of recognizing that he had misled the 

House, Thatcher simply spouted partisan rhetoric and expressed 

scorn and contempt for the opposition member who was trying 

to uphold the standards of parliamentary privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today when I rose on the motion of privilege, Mr. 

Speaker, and rose to speak on the motion of privilege and the 

Premier went into the rotunda and said it didn’t matter what our 

case was, it didn’t matter what the Minister of Health did, that 

all his members were going to vote against a motion of 

privilege even before the debate, I now have seen a case of 

arrogance that exceeded that of Colin Thatcher. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s shameful. And, Mr. Speaker, it does not serve this 

Assembly well. It does not serve the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan well, and it does little to build confidence, in the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, in our government, our 

institutions, or in its elected members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again I want to emphasize that it is important for 

members of this Assembly to understand the parallels between 

the current actions of the Minister of Health and the Premier 

and the actions of Colin Thatcher and Grant Devine in 1982. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, it’s history repeating itself. Mr. Speaker, 

in response to Colin Thatcher’s statement, Allan Blakeney, the 

leader of the opposition, said this, and I’ll quote just briefly, Mr. 

Speaker. And I quote: 

 

We in this House must be able to rely upon statements by 

ministers, not by taking them out and analysing them to 

see whether some different construction might be put upon 

them, but rather we (and the public, by the way) must be 

able to rely upon statements as being fair and giving to the 

listener the facts. 

 

Mr. Speaker. Now those are different words that I use this 

afternoon, Mr. Speaker, but what I said meant exactly the same 

thing. Mr. Speaker, if members of this Assembly cannot rely 

upon the information provided to us by ministers of the Crown, 

Mr. Speaker, that is a very, very serious situation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, people make decisions 

about their lives and about their families and about their 

children and grandchildren based on the information provided 

to them by ministers of the Crown. They make investments in 

their companies. They make choices in what they’re going to 

plant, Mr. Speaker. Producers and farmers make choices based 

on information provided. Health care workers make decisions 

based on what information is provided. Chiropractors, teachers, 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan have to be able to 

rely on the information provided to them by their elected 

representatives, by the ministers of the Crown. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and in this province the Minister of Health holds 

the most important portfolio in the minds of people in this 

province. Health is the number one concern of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, medicare, medicare — 

this is the birthplace of medicare. Mr. Speaker, people care 

dearly, dearly for their health system in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, they have to be able to rely 

on their Minister of Health and the information the Minister of 

Health provides them, Mr. Speaker, as being factual because 

they make decisions based on that information. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in response to Colin Thatcher’s statement as 

I said earlier, the then leader of the opposition, Allan Blakeney, 

went on to say that they had to rely on that information. “The 

public and bankers and businessmen must be able to rely upon 

statements made by ministers all of the time.” 

 

So when I was talking earlier today about farmers and business 



5364 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

people and parents making decisions on behalf of their children, 

in 1982 a man who I will give credit for having a great deal 

more wisdom than myself — in fact more wisdom than many, 

many if not all of the current members of the Assembly — a 

man that I think held the respect of the people of Saskatchewan 

and a man who earned it . . . It’s kind of amazing in some ways 

that he and I in two different decades never having served 

together, 28 years apart, have the exact same feelings about the 

responsibilities of a government and about the need for the 

people of Saskatchewan to be able to rely upon the ministers, 

the word of the ministers of the Crown in answers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, so that tells me a number of things, Mr. 

Speaker, that the words of a minister to the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan through this House are very 

important to people, Mr. Speaker. In 1982 a colleague who I am 

going to say I respect a great deal went on to be the premier of 

Saskatchewan or had been the premier of Saskatchewan, pardon 

me, for many years, a person I hold in great respect, came to the 

same conclusions. And, Mr. Speaker, that tells you that this 

issue and the concern of people is the same today as it was in 

1982. “The question period is a very serious part of the way we 

govern ourselves.” 

 

In response to all that was said — he had heard just a snippet of 

what I have shared in this debate — the Speaker ruled on July 

13th, 1982. As part of his ruling, the Speaker stated the 

following, and I quote: 

 

I have reviewed the remarks of all members on this point 

of privilege. There seems to be two main issues involved 

in this case: (1) was it misleading for the Minister of 

Mineral Resources to say that he did not personally fire 

any employee, and (2) was there a deliberate intent to 

mislead the House? 

 

The minister in his remarks explained the circumstances 

regarding the dismissal and claimed that he did not 

personally fire the employee, thus implying there was no 

misleading of the House. Although there were other 

circumstances involved, the fact remains that it was the 

letter signed by the minister which effectively 

accomplished the dismissal, I did not find anything in the 

comments of any member to dispute this conclusion. 

 

In this light I find that the original answers of the minister 

in question period on July 8 were misleading. 

 

The second question is the more important one in 

determining whether a breach of privilege has been 

committed, and that is: was there a deliberate intent to 

mislead the House? The Minister of Mineral Resources 

did not deal with this question in his explanation 

yesterday. I want the House to understand very clearly that 

it is not the role of the Chair to decide whether or not there 

was a deliberate intent to mislead; that is for the House to 

decide. It is my role to decide whether privilege is 

sufficiently involved to warrant the House examining this 

question now, before any other business is taken up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re in that exact same position today in that 

debate. 

 

Based on the information I have in front of me, I rule that 

a prima facie case of privilege has been established, which 

justifies giving this matter precedence over the orders of 

the day. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, prior to today was the last time a Speaker 

found a prima facie case of privilege in this Chamber. That’s 

why I think it is incredibly important for members to look back 

at the case and to understand the parallels between the actions 

of Colin Thatcher and the actions of the current Minister of 

Health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have before us a case today when the minister 

has said clearly that he had consulted with the Information and 

Privacy Commissioner on four occasions on that very specific 

regulation. This very regulation, Mr. Speaker. We then had the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner, in a letter to all 

members of the Assembly . . . And that occurred, Mr. Speaker, 

on April the 12th, when the Minister of Health told us in no 

uncertain terms that he had consulted four times in that very 

regulation, on that very regulation. He used the word, “very 

regulation”. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, we have a letter from the Information 

and Privacy Commissioner saying that he had never seen the 

regulation, never seen the regulation until he had requested it on 

April the 13th, the day after he’d heard it, he’d heard it in the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, I once again think it’s 

very, very important to read the letter. Mr. Speaker, I’m going 

to go to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I hear the member from Regina Dewdney 

talking about reading the letter once again which is true would 

be, I don’t know how many times already. And I’ve just picked 

up the newest rules, House of Commons Procedure and 

Practice and there’s some certain guidelines in regards to 

repetition and relevance and the fact that the Speaker does have 

the authority to move to another member. So I would ask the 

member to address the question before the Assembly of the 

motion presented and to move to other arguments, not the same 

argument over and over and over again. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The case resulted in 

Colin Thatcher offering an apology to the House. He 

apologized. But then, according to a report in the Canadian 

Parliamentary Review, Colin Thatcher went out to their media 

and said he only apologized because he said he was forced to 

and he questioned Speaker Swan’s ruling on the matter. 

 

[20:00] 

 

So Colin Thatcher apologized one moment and left this 

Chamber and made a mockery of the Speaker the next. So on 

July 14th, Jerry Hammersmith stood during oral questions and 

asked Premier Grant Devine about Colin Thatcher’s statements 

outside of the House. At that time Grant Devine requested leave 

for his minister to make a statement and Colin Thatcher stated, 

and I quote from the Canadian Parliamentary Review: 

 

Mr. Speaker, last evening in the corridor I made an off the 

cuff remark that was stupid, inappropriate and inexcusable 

. . . Mr. Speaker, it is my sincere wish that you accept my 

apologies with my additional assurances that such will 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5365 

never be repeated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are dealing today with an issue that the 

similarities are unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the one difference that is of great significance in this 

particular case, it wasn’t the Minister of Health that went out 

and made the statement that should not have been made, in the 

case before us today was made by the Premier of the province 

of Saskatchewan. And when the Premier goes out into the 

rotunda, when a motion of privilege is before the House and 

before the debate has occurred, after the Speaker has found a 

prima facie case of privilege, Mr. Speaker, after you have found 

a prima facie case of privilege, Mr. Speaker, the Premier goes 

out into the rotunda and says all his members are going to vote 

against the motion of privilege, even before the debate is 

allowed to occur — now, Mr. Speaker, that is the difference 

between the case of 1982 and the case of today. 

 

In 1982 it was Colin Thatcher who went out into the rotunda 

and made the remark that never should have been made. And in 

the year 2010, it was the Premier of the Government of 

Saskatchewan that went out and made a remark to the media 

that never should have been made, that shows total contempt 

and disrespect for this Assembly, its members, and the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think members should think about that because, Mr. Speaker, 

if the pattern holds true, tomorrow the Premier should stand in 

this House and apologize to this Assembly and to its members 

and to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. Because in 

1982 Colin Thatcher, by his own admission, did the stupid 

thing; but today it wasn’t the Minister of Health, it was the 

Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk further about the attack on 

democracy and how through attacking the democracy in the 

province of Saskatchewan, how by not respecting the rules and 

privileges of members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that the 

government lets the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

down. We have seen time and time again how the government 

does not respect the democratic institution or independent 

officers of this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we had a prima facie case found because an 

independent officer had the courage to stand up for his 

convictions, to do what he saw was right, Mr. Speaker, to do 

what he thought was right and to do his job as the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan hired him to do. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s no easy task when you have a 

government who won’t hire the Chief Electoral Officer selected 

by an independent panel because they don’t like him. They 

couldn’t provide any real explanation after a panel — which 

included their own member, the Minister of Justice, an 

independent person that they picked, the Speaker of this 

Assembly — the Speaker recommends the appointment of the 

Acting Chief Electoral Officer to the position of Chief Electoral 

Officer in the province of Saskatchewan, and the Premier 

decides he won’t do it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So any independent officer that stands up to this government 

does so, does so at a risk to their own future, Mr. Speaker. So, 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there is a pattern and there is 

concern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I used the example of the appointment, their 

refusal to appoint the recommended candidate for the Chief 

Electoral Officer’s position, Mr. Speaker. The people of the 

province of Saskatchewan should be concerned. They should be 

very concerned when a government, after a several month 

process — a several month process, Mr. Speaker — they don’t 

appoint the recommended candidate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we’re talking about a case of privilege, 

which is part of our democratic process. It’s a part of holding a 

government accountable for their actions, Mr. Speaker. It is 

about defending our parliamentary democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And independent officers are part of our parliamentary 

democracy, Mr. Speaker, because they are hired as the 

watchdogs, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t mean that in a derogatory 

term, Mr. Speaker. They are very, very credible individuals 

hired to ensure that this Assembly operates credibly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the assault on democracy continued today in the 

rotunda made it very clear as to why . . . Why would anybody 

using good judgment go out in the rotunda prior to debate and 

say, we’re just going to vote it down. I’ll tell you, nobody using 

good judgment would do that, Mr. Speaker. What we saw was 

evidence of what would be very poor judgment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when a government decides how they’re going to 

vote on an issue of privilege about the very fundamental rights 

of our democratic process in this Assembly, before even 

hearing the debate, well that in itself is a problem. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, that means it doesn’t matter if it’s right or wrong. 

They don’t believe in right or wrong. They don’t believe in the 

rule of law, Mr. Speaker; because that’s what the rule of law is 

about — right and wrong. Mr. Speaker, it means they believe 

they’re going to do what they want anyway. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what’s even worse than that — to agree 

you’re going to do it and keep it to yourself is one thing — but 

to go and announce to the people of the province, to the media, 

you’re going to do it, that’s even worse. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

have a legitimate problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to spend some time talking now about 

other cases that have an impact, a potential impact on the 

decision about this case before us today. And, Mr. Speaker, it is 

very important to understand the other relevant cases on 

privilege across the country, Mr. Speaker, and some of the 

determinations that have or some of the outcomes as a result of 

those cases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is extremely rare for a speaker to find a prima 

facie case of privilege, as you know, in which a member misled 

the House. It’s rare. Any of us can go through the Canadian 

Parliamentary Review and find many examples of questions of 

privilege that have been raised in the legislatures across Canada 

and in our federal parliament. But in those cases, Mr. Speaker, 

it has not often found a prima facie case of privilege. That is 

why, Mr. Speaker, the case that is before us today is incredibly 

serious. It is incredibly serious, Mr. Speaker. These proceedings 



5366 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

are not to be taken lightly. 

 

A prima facie case of privilege involving members misleading 

the House are so rare that we should, in fact, deal with this with 

the respect, consideration, and detail that is warranted. It is 

important for members of this Assembly to understand the 

gravity of the situation that is before us today. And hearing a 

few details from other cases where prima facie cases of 

privilege were found related to misleading members of the 

House, I think, is important. 

 

One such example from the Canadian Parliamentary Review is 

from Prince Edward Island in 2001. And I quote from the 

Canadian Parliamentary Review: 

 

On November 23, 2001, [Mr. Speaker], the Minister of 

Development and Technology, Michael Currie, raised a 

question of privilege for the Speaker to consider [Mr. 

Speaker]. At issue were remarks made by the Leader of 

the Opposition, Ron MacKinley, during Oral Question 

Period in which he alleged that the Minister engaged in an 

illegal activity, specifically listening to wiretapped 

conversations of private individuals. The Leader of the 

Opposition withdrew his use of the word “wire tap” and 

replaced it with “taped” but declined to apologize. Later in 

the sitting day, [Mr. Speaker] Premier Pat Binns, rose and 

requested that the Leader of the Opposition apologize for 

his remarks. Again, the Leader of the Opposition declined 

to do so. 

 

In her ruling, Speaker Mildred Dover found that a prima 

facie case of privilege had been made. The statements by 

the Leader of the Opposition were serious and misleading. 

Further, such allegations have the potential of significantly 

damaging the reputation of any Member. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat that. In the rule it says: 

 

Further, such allegations have the potential of significantly 

damaging the reputation of any member. The Leader of 

the Opposition offered a verbal apology to the Minister of 

Development and Technology. Government House 

Leader, Elmer MacFadyen, advised that a letter of apology 

to the Minister accompanied by a letter of apology to the 

House, and tabled in the House, would be acceptable to 

the Government. He then moved, seconded by Beth 

MacKenzie [the member for] (Park Corner-Oyster Bed) a 

motion to that effect. The Leader of the Opposition tabled 

two copies of his letter of apology on December 5, 2001. It 

proved to be unacceptable to the House. Following a brief 

recess to allow Government Members to consult, a motion 

to suspend the Leader of the Opposition for the remainder 

of the sitting day was passed. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we see that in Prince Edward Island when a 

member misleads the House it is taken seriously. It is acted 

upon, and it is dealt with. And the integrity of our parliamentary 

system, the rules of our Assembly, and our democracy are 

defended and protected by the members of the Prince Edward 

Island Legislative Assembly. 

 

Another example is from February 1st, 2002, in the federal 

parliaments of Canada, our federal parliament, Mr. Speaker, our 

federal House. Here is the summary of that situation from the 

Speaker of the House of Commons website: 

 

On January 31, 2002 Brian Pallister, (Portage-Lisgar, 

Canadian Alliance) rose on a question of privilege and 

accused Art Eggleton (then Minister of National Defence) 

to be in contempt of the House. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I believe I’ve spoke to this case earlier 

today, Mr. Speaker, but I have much greater detail today than I 

did then. I simply spoke of the case in a very general term. But, 

Mr. Speaker, I now have detail of what occurred in that case. 

And I think it’s important for members to understand, rather 

than just talk about that that case occurred, what actually did 

occur: 

 

Mr. Pallister stated that the Minister of National Defence 

should be held in contempt of the House because on two 

occasions the Minister made contradictory statements in 

the House regarding precisely when he had been informed 

about the involvement of Canadian troops in taking 

prisoners in Afghanistan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that point I made this afternoon, that far I 

hadn’t information this afternoon. But my research over the 

supper hour, Mr. Speaker, divulged a great deal more 

information. I think it’s important for the House to know: 

 

Mr. Pallister added that after Question Period, outside the 

Chamber, the Minister had admitted to the media that he 

had indeed misled the House, but had not apologized in 

the House. After interventions by other Members, 

including the then Minister of National Defence, the 

Speaker said that he would take the matter under 

advisement and come back to the House in due course. 

 

On February 1, 2002, the Speaker delivered his ruling. He 

stated that while he was prepared to accept the Minister’s 

assertion that he had no intention to mislead the House, the 

contradictory statements made by the Minister in the 

House merited further consideration by an appropriate 

committee in order to clarify the matter. 

 

Accordingly, at the conclusion of his ruling, the Speaker 

invited Mr. Pallister to move his motion to refer the matter 

to the Standing Committee on Procedure and House 

Affairs for investigation. The motion was agreed to by the 

House and accordingly . . . was taken up by the 

Committee. 

 

So Mr. Speaker, in the Parliament of Canada, in the Parliament 

of Canada the government did not use its majority to stop an 

investigation to get to the bottom of the facts. The Parliament of 

Canada allowed the investigation to go on, Mr. Speaker, and I 

think that’s absolutely, absolutely important for members to 

understand. Unlike here when the Premier goes out in the 

rotunda and says before the debate even occurs that his 

members will vote it down in a display of arrogance not seen in 

this country, Mr. Speaker, the Parliament of Canada — the 

government, the government, Mr. Speaker — agreed to allow it 

to be investigated. 

 

[20:15] 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5367 

So we see, Mr. Speaker, the members of parliament take it 

seriously when there is evidence that a member has misled the 

House. Mr. Speaker, we have the examples across Canada 

which are very few — very, very few — when a prima facie 

case is brought before the Legislative Assembly or the House of 

Commons in a jurisdiction. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re so rare 

and they’re so few, but in those cases, Mr. Speaker, that have 

been there — where a prima facie case is there — the 

legislature of Prince Edward Island and the House of 

Commons, Mr. Speaker, both allowed the investigation to go 

on. 

 

And we heard a few minutes ago that the members of the 

Legislative Assembly of Prince Edward Island take it seriously 

when there is evidence a member has misled the House. As rare 

as it is for a Speaker to find a prima facie case, Mr. Speaker — 

and it is rare, Mr. Speaker — but in Prince Edward Island and 

the House of Commons, both times the government allowed the 

investigation to go on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But not here, not here. The Premier says — even before we 

have the right to debate — with no respect at all for this 

Assembly that no, he will not let it be referred to the Committee 

on Privileges for investigation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just pointed out two cases where a member 

misleading the House was taken seriously in other jurisdictions 

in this country. It was not treated flippantly in the way the 

Premier treated this case today. Members in Prince Edward 

Island took it seriously when a member was accused of 

misleading this House. And members of our federal parliament 

also took it seriously when a member was accused of 

misleading the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must quote from James McGrath, the 

Progressive Conservative Member of Parliament for St. John’s 

East, who said, and I quote. Mr. Speaker, I’ve used this quote 

once, but I think it’s very important to once again, because it’s 

so profound and fundamental to the very issue before us. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, if I cannot be satisfied — and this is the 

quote, this is the quote from the member from St. John’s East: 

 

If I cannot be satisfied that I can rely on receiving honest 

and factual answers to the questions that I raise in this 

House, then I cannot function as a member of this House 

and I cannot effectively serve my country, my province, or 

my constituency. It is as simple as that. 

 

That is from the Hansard of the Parliament of Canada, May 20, 

1982. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no wonder members in Prince Edward Island and 

the House of Commons take it seriously when a member is 

accused of misleading this House. The question today is 

whether the Sask Party members will take it seriously as well, 

will not listen to their leader, will act, Mr. Speaker, will think 

for themselves, and will in fact allow the issue to be referred to 

the Committee on Privileges. 

 

We already know the Premier has chosen not to do so. He has 

exercised a complete lack of judgment and leadership by 

precluding the outcome of this debate and by announcing that 

he will stand by his Minister of Health and whip all of his 

MLAs to do the same. Mr. Speaker, this is a very unfortunate 

day for democracy in Saskatchewan, democracy in Canada and, 

Mr. Speaker, in respect for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to spend a little bit of time now . . . I have 

the audio transcripts, the actual audio transcripts, Mr. Speaker, 

that I just received moments ago. Pardon me, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to just quickly before I go to the actual scrum, 

Mr. Speaker, just want to refer back to the actual questions in 

the House, Mr. Speaker. And the member from Douglas Park 

said when the . . . during question period on May the 4th, 2010, 

Mr. Speaker, today, so this is very relevant, I haven’t quoted 

this at all, Mr. Speaker, in my debate. He said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, the vast majority of people in the province 

have indicated they disagree with the Premier’s decision to 

release people’s private health information, and that’s true 

of the Privacy Commissioner as well, who has raised 

significant concerns. But against all of these wishes and 

against the advice of experts, the Premier pushes ahead 

with releasing this private information. Why is the Premier 

so intent on breaching the privacy of Saskatchewan 

people? 

 

That was the question asked today in question period, Mr. 

Speaker. And I now have the transcript of the response of the 

Minister of Health, because it is very relevant to this debate. 

The Hon. Mr. McMorris said: 

 

Mr. Speaker, this has been discussed many times. It’s a 

regulation change to the Health Information Protection 

Act. The regulation change allows for health regions to 

enter into negotiations with foundations to exchange only 

name and address. 

 

It has met with concern from the Privacy Commissioner 

and that’s absolutely correct, Mr. Speaker, as has other 

changes to HIPA [The Health Information Protection Act]. 

In fact a number of years ago, when the former 

government changed a regulation regarding disclosing 

patients’ names in cases of gang involvement or drug use, 

Mr. Speaker, the privacy information officer at that time 

disagreed with the government, Mr. Speaker, and the 

government went ahead with that change anyway because 

they thought it was the best thing to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was legislation and that was through public 

hearings and there was a public debate about the issue and 

hearings held across the province. But, Mr. Speaker, the next 

question by the Leader of the Opposition is this, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Mr. Speaker, it might be an idea that the Premier would 

look at, of allowing the individuals and the public to opt in 

as opposed to putting reverse onus on the public of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s a testament to the lack of judgment of 

this Premier when you realize that this Premier sat while 

his minister on various occasion claimed that he had 

consulted with the Privacy Commissioner. In fact the 

minister said, the Minister of Health said he had consulted 

four times. And the Premier sat while this was going on. 



5368 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

Now my question to the Premier is this: is it acceptable 

that the Minister of Heath provides false information to the 

people of the province, and to this Assembly, and to the 

press? Is that acceptable behaviour from a minister of his 

government? 

 

Mr. Speaker, and the Minister of Health rose to respond: 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, my statement is 

very clear in Hansard. I said that we [have], meaning the 

Ministry of Health which I am in charge of, have 

consulted on a number of occasions, three occasions with 

the Privacy Commissioner. And I stand by that statement 

because the Ministry of Health did, we’ve had 

conversations with the Privacy Commissioner. Even 

though the formal text wasn’t handed over regarding the 

regulation, Mr. Speaker, we had conversation with him. 

 

But I tell you, it is prime coming from those members 

opposite talking about misleading the public, after a 

pamphlet that they sent out all over Saskatoon saying the 

children’s hospital is cancelled. Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member was then asked to apologize to the 

House, and stood and apologized to the House. 

 

The next question by the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, is this: 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. As we know 

now, his Minister of Health claimed that he had consulted 

the Information and Privacy Commissioner on this very 

regulation, not on some other regulation, but this very 

regulation. But he hadn’t; he didn’t consult. And the fact is 

there’s a result: the House, the media, and the people of 

Saskatchewan were knowingly left with false information. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: what kind of leadership 

does this demonstrate from his government and from the 

Premier of this province to allow that kind of false 

information to be brought to this Assembly? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier stood to respond. Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier, the minister had . . . The Premier responded: 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the minister has answered the 

question. The minister indicated that the ministry was in 

consultation with the officer of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker stood, and an interjection, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 

Wall then continued his answer: “Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 

notwithstanding the challenges to the Chair from the members 

opposite, I would just say this . . .” Again the Speaker rose, then 

Mr. Wall continued: 

 

. . . I just want to say that the minister has indicated that 

the ministry did consult. He used the word “we” in 

Hansard. It’s exactly what happened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Consider and compare what members opposite have done 

on the . . . issue of the children’s hospital . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, the remainder of his comments have nothing to do 

with the question asked. Mr. Speaker, so he, the Premier 

continued to defend his minister during question period today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the next question asked by the Leader of the 

Opposition was this, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell the Premier what’s jeopardizing the 

children’s hospital: it’s running of a deficit in this province 

for the first time in many years. Mr. Speaker, everyone in 

this province is asking where has all the money gone, and 

if the Premier wants a children’s hospital built, why 

doesn’t he simply give the money so the hospital can be 

built? Why doesn’t he just do that? Just give . . . the 

money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this. The 

people of the province don’t want their health information 

given out. That’s a fact. The Information and Privacy 

Commissioner thinks that this flawed idea of the Premier 

will violate the Charter of Rights and Freedoms of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. Even at that, his 

minister has brought false information to this Assembly. 

When will the Premier come to his senses, demonstrate 

some leadership, withdraw this crazy idea, and deal with 

his minister here in this Assembly? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier responded in this way: 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the member is prone to hyperbole. The 

same initiatives, the same initiatives in other provinces 

have not brought forward a Charter challenge. The 

minister’s been [very] . . . clear. The minister’s said, we’re 

going to implement this policy in an effort to help 

foundations raise still more money in the province of 

Saskatchewan. We’re going to implement this measure, 

Mr. Speaker. We’ll carefully review it with foundations, 

[and] with health regions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was the response of the Premier of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, he continued, he continued to 

defend his minister. And then he went out, Mr. Speaker, to a 

scrum and I have the audio of his scrum, Mr. Speaker. The 

transcript, pardon me, of the audio of the scrum. The reporter 

asked, and I’m going to start with on, this is asking of the 

Premier, on Mr. McMorris: 

 

What is your side’s intention in terms of the vote of this? 

Given you heard the Speaker’s ruling, I assume. 

 

Brad Wall: 

 

Yes, I did hear the ruling. I heard there’s a prima facie 

case made, in the Speaker’s opinion, for there to be now to 

be a debate in the Assembly. When the Speaker rules 

there’s a prima facie case made in the case of a point of 

privilege, it’s not a prima facie case necessarily in favour 

of the original motion. It simply says this should be 

debated by the House. This can move forward and be 

debated by the House and absolutely fair enough. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, first the Premier says that we can debate this 

and it’s fair enough. Then the reporter asked: “Do you 

acknowledge the rarity in that happening?” Mr. Speaker, the 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5369 

reporters understand the rarity of a prima facie case of privilege 

coming before an Assembly and this is the first time in 28 

years. The Premier responded: 

 

Absolutely. I haven’t been here all that long, but it’s a rare 

occurrence indeed. The Opposition House Leader is 

currently speaking to the motion. It’s unclear at this point. 

They may be trying to move right until 10 minutes before 

the rule is . . . Ten minutes before the end of this day, it 

must come to a vote. If that occurs, we obviously, we will 

be here until 10 minutes before the regular hours and we 

will be voting against the motion. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the words of the Premier in the rotunda before 

we even have a chance to debate this issue is, we will be voting 

against the motion, the motion to refer an issue of privilege to 

the Committee on Privileges which is set up for the sole 

purpose of reviewing issues of privilege, Mr. Speaker. And the 

Premier will say that they will be voting against the motion 

before the motion is even debated. He goes on to say, “The 

government members will be voting against the motion, or if 

the vote happens any time before the 10 minutes prior, we will 

be voting against the motion.” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is the Premier saying it, unlike in the 

province of Prince Edward Island, unlike in the Parliament of 

Canada where the government voted against its own member to 

allow an investigation to go on. Mr. Speaker, here the Premier 

says, just like the premier did, Mr. Speaker, just like the premier 

did in 1982: 

 

The reason is that there is a matter of intent here with the 

minister. The minister actually took the step yesterday of 

indicating this. It was in the ministry’s consultation that 

occurred on the principle, on the very same principle — 

maybe not on each and every word in conjunction in the 

regulation — but on the principle of allowing foundations, 

with the approval of regions, to access information, names, 

and addresses for the purpose of fundraising. 

 

[20:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, that isn’t at all what the Information and Privacy 

Commissioner says. Mr. Speaker, the transcript goes on to say: 

 

We know that the Privacy Commissioner was opposed to 

that. We understood that he was opposed to it when the 

previous administration was thinking about it but didn’t do 

it. It was thinking about it. We know that’s the case now. 

That’s what the minister was referring to. 

 

So he was referring to consultations done years before. Mr. 

Speaker, I go on and I quote from the transcript: 

 

On this issue of the Privacy Commissioner’s position on 

this and weighing in on this, I’ve looked at it and there’s 

just no intent for the Minister of Health to mislead the 

House in his answer. And he took steps to clarify 

yesterday. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what the Premier’s saying in his transcript, in 

his reply to the media, is that he looked at it and it doesn’t 

matter what this Assembly, what our processes, what our rules 

are, what our democracy permits and in fact demands of each of 

us; that he alone will make a decision whether or not there was 

a case of privilege. And, Mr. Speaker, he’ll make that without 

having been here many of the last weeks, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, he’ll make that case without all the facts in front of 

him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reporter went on to ask this question: “If that 

was true, why didn’t he tell us three weeks ago that my ministry 

did consultations under the previous government, but not once 

since I’ve been Health minister?” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the next question from the transcript is this, from 

the reporter: 

 

If that was true [asking of the Premier] why didn’t he tell 

us [referring to the Minister of Health] three weeks ago 

that my ministry did consultations under the previous 

government, but not once since I’ve been Minister of 

Health. 

 

The Premier replied, “Well I don’t know. I think he said he 

misspoke yesterday, and certainly tried to clarify that yesterday. 

I’ve only read Hansard.” 

 

The reporter, next question. He said, and this is the reporter 

speaking: 

 

He said, “And I felt like part of the ministry even when the 

NDP was in charge of the ministry. So when I said we, I 

meant ministry officials.” But he never took pains to tell 

any of us who have covered this every day, when I said we 

did consultations, I mean, they did consultations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can imagine how much, Mr. Speaker, you can 

imagine how much consultations have changed, saying the 

Labour ministry sent you to government. When I hear, we did 

consultations, to me that means since we formed government. 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier went on to say, and this is the 

Premier, and I quote:  

 

I don’t know. I don’t know what Don would say in direct 

answer to that. Here’s what I think: I think Don would say, 

because the principle here has not changed, the desire of 

the government to move forward with something the 

previous government was only thinking about and didn’t 

do. The principle hasn’t changed. 

 

Many people in the ministry are the same people. Many of 

the people in the office of the Privacy Commissioner are 

also the same people. I think that’s what the minister is 

saying there. I think that’s what the minister is saying. I’ve 

talked to him about this. 

 

I’ve looked at the information, and I fundamentally don’t 

believe there is an intent here by the minister to do what’s 

alleged by the opposition. And we’ll be voting against the 

motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously the Premier isn’t aware that the 

opposition makes a case whether or not that there should be a 

prima facie case of privilege. But it’s the Speaker determines 

whether or not there is a prima facie case of privilege. Mr. 



5370 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

Speaker, surprising the Premier doesn’t understand that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I go on. And the reporter now asks another 

question of the Premier in the scrum. Reporter says: 

 

Normally one might respect and accept it, but he did make 

reference in the House to this specific consultation, this 

specific proposal in terms of a regulation change. That is 

the point in contention. 

 

The Premier’s reply: 

 

I think what he would say is that specific proposal, the 

notion of the opt in versus the opt out, that’s what’s at 

debate here. And it’s a reasonable debate to have. In fact, 

as you know, we’ll be reviewing this in a year’s time to 

see what the net result is. 

 

That was the reply by the Premier, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the reporter goes on to ask another question, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Why not just say, look we didn’t consult with me as 

minister under the new direction. I am the minister of the 

department now. I didn’t consult under my guidance; 

however there were consultations in the past under the 

former NDP administration. That’s what makes sense. It’s 

hard to accept. 

 

That’s what makes it hard to accept, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 

the reporter said. The Premier replied, “I don’t think that’s true. 

I don’t think it’s true.” The reporter said, “It’s absolutely true.” 

Well the Premier went on to say, and I quote: 

 

Well, it isn’t. I think it’s reasonable that a minister, in the 

course of discussing a proposal that comes from the 

ministry or health care foundation, could quite rightly ask 

has there been consultation on this with the Privacy 

Commissioner. And the briefing would be, yes there has 

been. On this specific principle of opt in versus opt out, 

yes. What’s the position of the commissioner? He’s not in 

favour of it. We know that. 

 

That was the Premier’s reply to the reporter. The reporter then 

asked why would he think it’s not his duty to not consult then? 

The reporter asked, “Why would the minister then think it’s not 

his duty to not consult, then?” The Premier said, “Because the 

consultation has happened.” 

 

The reporter went on to say, or to ask, “But do consultations 

happen all the time?”The reporter . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the 

opposition members not to drown out his own member. If the 

opposition doesn’t want their member to speak, I can recognize 

somebody else. I will ask the opposition side to come to order. 

Right away. I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the reporter went on to say, “But 

do consultations happen all the time?” 

 

The Premier responded, and I quote:  

 

But on this specific point, the consultation had happened 

three times. It may not have been the exact words, but on 

this issue, but on my understanding of reading the Privacy 

Commissioner’s letter, is that the issue here at debate, opt 

in versus opt out, was a matter of deliberation by the 

Commissioner. And the Commissioner didn’t support it 

and we knew that. I would think the minister has taken 

steps to say, look if I had misspoke, I want to clarify the 

matter. He’s done that, and that’s why we’ll be voting 

against the motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reporter said this: “He hasn’t done that in the 

House. He hasn’t done that with the media and I report.” The 

reporter said very clearly and deliberately when the Premier 

said that he had apologized, said he misspoke. 

 

The reporter said, he hasn’t done that in the House and he 

hasn’t done that with the media. The reporter then said, “He 

didn’t say he misspoke, he just said we should have known that 

he was part of the ministry, so consultations that took place a 

few years ago.” 

 

The Premier then said, and I quote, “I don’t know what it said 

specifically in Hansard. I think he said he wanted to clarify. I’m 

not sure of the words, I don’t have Hansard.” 

 

The reporters then asked, does he owe the people of 

Saskatchewan an apology if the Speaker finds a prima facie 

case for debate whether or not he misled? The Premier then 

replied this: “I think he’s already decided. After the vote, 

notwithstanding the result, he wants to state that in the 

Legislative Assembly.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, so the Minister of Health has said after his 

members — based on what the Premier has said in his own 

quotations — stand in this House and say that he didn’t mislead 

the House, that he wants to stand and apologize for doing just 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that makes a greater mockery of our parliamentary 

system, of our rules, and of this Assembly, than doing nothing, 

Mr. Speaker, because he’s saying after the Premier has said, 

you’ll all vote against the fact he has misled the House, then 

he’ll stand and apologize for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand. Quite frankly I’m a bit 

flabbergasted. I don’t know what to think because we have the 

Premier who says that his members are going to vote en masse 

against the motion on the issue of he misled the House. And 

then the Premier says, after you defeat the motion, he’s going to 

stand up and apologize. I don’t understand, Mr. Speaker, I’m at 

a loss. I’m at a loss that a Premier would make such a mockery, 

such a mockery of this Assembly, such a mockery of our 

parliamentary democracy and such a mockery of this institution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you shouldn’t be elected here unless you believe 

in this institution; unless you believe, believe in our 

parliamentary democracy; unless you believe in the rights of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan; unless you believe in 

this Chamber, its rules, its traditions, and its responsibilities. 

 

But to say that you’re going to vote against the motion on a 

prima facie case of privilege and then you’re going to apologize 

after you’ve just voted it down for doing the very thing you just 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5371 

voted against, that makes a mockery, it makes a mockery of this 

Assembly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t . . . I’m at a bit of a loss of words, 

Mr. Speaker, because this Assembly and its rules and its 

traditions, the importance of our parliamentary system to people 

of our province and to us as members of the Assembly, I don’t 

know how to explain that. I don’t know how to explain that, Mr. 

Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how you can explain 

something like that. 

 

I don’t understand the logic. I don’t understand the judgment of 

the Premier. I don’t understand the lack of leadership that that 

would demonstrate. I don’t know or understand the lack of 

judgment that demonstrates. I don’t know what that does to 

make the people of Saskatchewan trust their government or 

trust this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I think all 

members of this Assembly should be concerned. I really do. I 

really do wonder, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the reporter went 

on to ask this question of the Premier: 

 

What do you think this does to people’s trust in members 

of your cabinet if the Speaker and the Privacy 

Commissioner say, well this guy told you that he’s not 

consulted, but in fact he did, and the Speaker says, yep, 

that’s a good enough case to debate instead of dismissing 

it out of hand. 

 

The Premier replied: 

 

I will vigorously defend the minister in terms of his intent 

here and his conduct as a Minister of Health in this 

government. I think the people of the province today, if 

you asked them, are far more worried about the 

misinformation spread by the NDP about our intentions 

with the children’s hospital. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Premier goes on to try to deflect blame and 

not deal with the very serious issue before us. 

 

The reporter said this to him: “Are you serious?” That’s the 

question the reported asked of the Premier. “Are you serious?” 

 

And the Premier replied, “I’m dead serious.” 

 

[20:45] 

 

The reporter said, “You think it’s a bigger deal . . .” 

 

And the Premier cut him off, saying: 

 

Absolutely. Well you don’t have to take it from me. The 

health care foundation raises the money for the children’s 

hospital and the same people are calling to ask for their 

donations back because the householder paid for by the 

taxpayers’ dollars sent out by the New Democrat Party is 

misrepresenting the decision of the government on the 

hospital. 

 

The reporter went on to say this: 

 

So what would be the impact of actually cutting the 

funding, removing the funding from this year’s budget in 

terms of their fundraising capacity? Because I think 

honestly, sir, that would be far more tragic in terms of 

their ability to raise funds than some NDP householder. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s what the reporter said to the Premier. The 

Premier went on to say, and I quote: 

 

But it hasn’t. We were very clear that this decision early 

on, that as soon as the money was needed for construction, 

it will be there. We have been very clear about that and 

that’s why the health region has been very comfortable. 

That’s why the health region has been comfortable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the reporter said: 

 

And you think the NDP mailer is a bigger deal? A minister 

lying. I didn’t want to use that term but then the “minister 

empirically lying” . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker. That is a quote. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask the 

opposition members to come to order. Before I recognize the 

member, I would be careful about saying indirectly what he 

can’t say directly. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

just reiterate, Mr. Speaker, that was a direct quote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier went on to reply, and I quote, “Well 

you just did use that term. That’s not the case.” 

 

And the reporter said, “You think that’s a bigger deal than a 

minister empirically lying?” Mr. Speaker. And that is a direct 

quote. 

 

The Premier, the Premier replied in this manner: 

 

That’s not the case, and I categorically reject what you’re 

asserting. I do think it’s a bigger deal if taxpayers’ money 

is used to propagate what is in fact a lie that actually hurts 

the foundation’s ability to raise money for the children’s 

hospital. You bet I think that’s more serious. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and that was a direct quote from the Premier. Mr. 

Speaker, and I quote, the reporter then said, “Have you ever 

seen a federal Tory mailer?” And Brad . . . the Premier, pardon 

me, said “No, I do not.” Mr. Speaker, this is a direct quote from 

the Premier: “No, I do not. I don’t know if I have or haven’t.” 

 

The reporter then asked this question: “Really? Because I get 

one every single month from Ottawa and they are full of what 

you describe as hyperbole.” 

 

The Premier then asked, “What’s your point?” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reporter then said, and I quote, “My point is 

that those political mailers are full of hyperboles, all of them.” 

 

The Premier then said: 

 



5372 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

If hyperbole has somebody phoning a foundation saying, 

I want to withdraw my donation or ask you about 

withdrawing my donation to the children’s hospital, I 

think that’s serious. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reporter then said, and I quote: 

 

They cancelled funding. It says right here that they 

cancelled funding as opposed to withdrawing. I understand 

that, cancelling. 

 

Brad Wall . . . or pardon me. Excuse me, Mr. Speaker, I 

apologize for using a direct name. The Premier, and I quote, 

“Don’t ask me to ask the foundation. I mean, they’re the ones 

getting the calls.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I apologize for using a name; the names are used 

in the actual transcript. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reporter then says: 

 

What would people make of this that this issue only comes 

up a day after your own minister has been accused of 

misleading the House, that all of a sudden this is the 

biggest issue that’s become a Sask Party talking point? 

 

The Premier’s response was this, and I quote: 

 

This issue was raised today, in the morning, maybe even 

yesterday by the foundation. They have been pretty clear 

in Saskatoon that they’ve been hearing back from donors 

who are very concerned about the impact of fundraising on 

this particular mailout and it came out today. It’s when 

they’ve been on the radio. 

 

The reporter says, and I quote, “It seems like an attempt to 

change the channel for a government that’s taking heat on 

privacy rules.” 

 

The Premier responded, and I quote: 

 

To tell you the truth I don’t . . . anybody in our 

organization including me thought that there would be a 

prima facie case to move to debate based on the intent of 

the minister. There is a debate now that’s going on. There 

will be a vote. I think the minister will want to say a few 

things before the matter is concluded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have many, many more pages of this particular 

transcript, Mr. Speaker. The reporter then said, “Given that, I 

want to go back to this. Your minister’s being accused right 

now of lying.” And it’s a direct quote from the reporter. 

 

The Premier then said, “By the NDP.” 

 

And the reporter responded, the reporter responded — and 

obviously the speaker doesn’t understand the rules of this 

Assembly very well, because the prima facie case is not found 

by the NDP; it’s found by the Speaker — but the reporter 

responded, “And fair enough, but if it’s proved to be so for 

whatever reason, that would seem to be a very, a way bigger 

deal to me as Premier.” 

 

The Premier said, “But it hasn’t been proved to be so and it’s 

not true.” 

 

The reporter said, “It is proved to be so.” The reporter said, 

“Well it is proved to be so.” 

 

The Premier then responded, and I quote: 

 

Well it’s not true. I’ll tell you what. The NDP can use 

taxpayer-funded ads to say a member of this Assembly — 

it happens to be me in this case — has bankrupted two 

businesses. Right? 

 

The reporter said, “I don’t know that that’s accurate, though, 

and I think there’s more political discourse.” 

 

Brad Wall: “Oh, that’s just political discourse.” 

 

Then the reporter says, “Well it is. It’s a flyer as opposed to 

something that’s said in the House.” 

 

The Premier said: 

 

Well I guess you and I are going to disagree here. In this 

case, there’s no intent. There’s a clear intent in that case to 

misrepresent the truth — a clear intent, and it’s funded by 

the taxpayers’ dollars and the same is true of the children’s 

hospital. Folks, there’s just no intent here by the minister, 

and that’s how we’ll vote against the minister. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s inconsistent with his other comments. 

He said he’s going to vote against his minister, and that’s a 

direct quote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reporter then said, and this is the final 

comment, “I just don’t see how there is no intent here.” At that 

point, the Premier walks away. The Premier simply walks 

away. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have also the scrum from the Minister of 

Health’s . . . the transcript from the Minister of Health’s scrum 

this afternoon. The reporter asked, and this is the question: 

 

I think part of the issue too is that you said, we consulted 

on this very regulation. It wasn’t just a matter of you are 

definitely the head of the ministry then or now, but this 

very regulation. Do you understand why there is some 

concern that . . . 

 

And at that point the minister cuts him off: 

 

Yeah, and again I’m going on the general term of what the 

regulation, the general intent of the regulation . . . You 

know, I know the ministry had talked to the Privacy 

Commissioner. Certainly, you know, a month or so — I 

guess, Jacquie, you would know — before we introduced 

it. So the Privacy Commissioner knew the intent of the 

regulation regarding fundraising in health regions. I think, 

you know, Jacquie had mentioned, you know, they had 

some conversations with the iterations in 2007, and he was 

asking for a substantial change. It was changes that he had 

recommended. That was a substantial change. And 

certainly, Jacquie can speak to it much better than me, but 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5373 

when I again was speaking about this very regulation, this 

very regulation, allowing name and address to be, um, to 

be shared, it’s the same intent of the previous regulations. 

There were some iterations, but it’s the same intent. 

 

As I said, it’s not a regulation that is completely different 

from what was consulted on before. I’m saying the overall 

intent of the regulation . . . and people will misread, not 

misread, interpret, that I was misleading. I am sorry about 

that. That was never my intent. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in his scrum outside of this 

Chamber, the Minister of Health has admitted he did, he did 

what is in question in the motion of privilege, Mr. Speaker, in 

his own scrum, in his own scrum, in his own scrum, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, how do you vote against a motion of 

privilege when in his own scrum, in his own scrum the minister 

admits it? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . Mr. Speaker, I am at this time 

reading from the transcript, word-for-word transcript of the 

Minister of Health’s scrum this afternoon. Mr. Speaker, in the 

final three sentences of his scrum he says: 

 

As I said, it’s not a regulation that is completely different 

from what was consulted on before. I’m not saying the 

overall intent of the regulation . . . And people will 

misread, not misread, interpret, that I was misleading. I am 

sorry about that. That was never my intent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reporter then asked: 

 

And given you can see, even if you didn’t intend to 

mislead people, you can see how people may have been 

misled. And I believe you were talking about your 

government consulting as opposed to the prior government 

consulting, by which I mean ministry officials under both 

those governments. Will you do anything differently in the 

future when you’re speaking? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health went on to say this: 

 

I guess I’ll try and be much clearer. You know, I’ve been 

here for 10 years. This hasn’t happened for 20-some years 

in this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reporter then said, “Almost 30 years.” 

 

The Minister of Health said: 

 

Okay, almost 30 years. I don’t want to be misleading. I 

heard a lot of things said in the House and I could question 

a lot of that. I spent eight years in opposition and heard 

cabinet ministers say stuff that they couldn’t back up and 

whatever. You know, I’m not very pleased with the way 

this has gone. I mean I feel sick about it. But, you know, it 

was never my intent. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have in the minister’s scrum today a clear 

admission. Mr. Speaker. We had earlier the Premier say that his 

government, even before the debate, would vote down the 

motion of privilege. Mr. Speaker, I hope the members opposite 

take into consideration what their own Health minister has said. 

[21:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to continue to quote from the transcript of 

the scrum. The reporter then said: 

 

I’m having a hard time understanding even where your 

head’s at on this. On the one hand, you’re sick about it and 

it hasn’t happened in almost 30 years and you do take it 

seriously. On the other hand, you’ve heard all kinds of 

politicians say all kinds of crazy stuff that they can’t back 

up. And you got caught and they didn’t. 

 

And the Minister of Health then said, “No, that’s not what I’m 

saying.” 

 

The reporter than said, Mr. Speaker, and I am quoting directly 

from the transcript: 

 

Well I’ve just heard you say all those words. I’ve heard 

you say all those words with the exception of the last 

words I said: you got caught and they didn’t. But you’ve 

just said that, you know, compared to what you’ve heard 

over the last 10 years, all kinds of stuff that people 

couldn’t back up, I assume from that again, I have to 

interpret based on what you’re saying, that that sounds like 

you’ve heard lots of stuff over the years that people 

couldn’t back up. But you’re the guy that’s been found for 

a prima facie case of misleading the House. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, members of the Assembly, the reporter asked 

this very direct question: 

 

So which is it? I get that this is a big deal. So which is it, I 

guess? That this is a big deal or you just got caught on 

something that people do all the time? 

 

The Minister of Health went on to say: 

 

No, Stefani, that’s not at all what I said. I said that I’m not 

happy with what has happened. I don’t feel good about it 

at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say here at this time, I respect the 

Minister of Health for saying that, a great deal. 

 

I’ve heard lots of things that have been said in this House 

different times. I bring my credibility to this place. I try to 

conduct my affairs. That was never my intent to mislead 

the public whatsoever, and I’m sick that this has happened. 

It was never my intent. The words that I spoke were never 

my intent to mislead. As I said when I referred to we, 

we’re talking the Ministry of Health. That’s what I meant. 

When I talk about a generalization of regulation or 

fundraising, that’s what I talk about. I never meant to 

mislead and I’m sorry that’s what the impression that I 

have left. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go on to quote as we finish this scrum. 

The reporter then said, “What would be . . .” The reporter then 

asked, “What would be wrong with a just an unequivocal 

apology?” And the Minister of Health said this: 

 

I have no problem standing in the House after the motion 



5374 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

saying I apologize if the people felt that I misled the 

House. 

 

The reporter then said: 

 

But, sir, we didn’t get the dates until we got them from the 

Privacy Commissioner. I guess that’s what you knew that 

we never knew. 

 

The Minister of Health then said: 

 

Yes, but again I didn’t see the importance of it because it 

was a consultation on a regulation that I don’t see 

changing a whole lot. It’s the intent of regulation. I wasn’t 

misleading saying . . . I could have said, our government 

did. I didn’t say that. I said, we have through the ministry. 

The ministry has consulted with the Privacy 

Commissioner. We know the intent of this regulation, and 

we know the Privacy Commissioner’s stand on it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that concluded the Minister of Health’s scrum. 

Mr. Speaker, we have an admission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to read from the Canadian Parliamentary 

Review, volume 33, no. 1 of 2010. This is a direct quotation, 

Mr. Speaker, from the Parliamentary Review: 

 

On Tuesday November 3, the Opposition House Leader, 

Kevin Yates, raised a question of Privilege. Mr. Yates 

alleged that the Minister of Public Safety . . . and Policing, 

Yogi Huyghebaert, was attempting to mislead the House. 

 

And this is a direct quote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Minister indicated that he had no knowledge of a 

dangerous sex offender being at large. When provided 

with further information of the specific case, the Minister 

corrected the record. Speaker Don Toth, outlined the 

evidence and concluded that the Opposition House Leader 

had not provided sufficient evidence to find a prima facie 

case of contempt. 

 

Two days later, [two days later] the Opposition House 

Leader, raised another question of Privilege. He claimed 

the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

made remarks in the Assembly that were perceived as a 

threat and discouraged him from performing his duties and 

exercising his freedom of speech. The Minister apologized 

and withdrew the inappropriate remarks. The Speaker 

found that the threatening comments were contemptuous. 

However, given that the Minister had apologized, the 

Speaker ruled that the apology ended the matter. He did 

remind Members that if there had been no apology given, 

he would have had no other choice but to find a prima 

facie case of privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have before us is a very, very serious 

issue. Mr. Speaker, we have a case of privilege that has been 

brought before the House. We then have an admission of that 

case in a scrum, Mr. Speaker, outside the House. Mr. Speaker, 

these cases reflect upon Saskatchewan and the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not since 1982 in this province have we had to 

debate an issue of prima facie case privilege. Mr. Speaker, at 

that time Colin Thatcher, a minister in the Grant Devine 

government, misled the House, Mr. Speaker. And in that case, 

the minister apologized to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, to the members of this Assembly, and to his 

colleagues in the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we have a similar situation, where we have 

the Minister of Health, we’re debating a prima facie case of 

misleading the House. The Premier defended the actions as 

Grant Devine did in 1982. And like 1982, Mr. Speaker, it 

happened. It happened now not just by the information provided 

by the Information and Privacy Commissioner, but by 

admission of the minister in his own scrum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health had indicated in his scrum 

that he would want to apologize after the vote. As I had 

indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, for a government to vote against 

a case of prima facie privilege before the House, to just simply 

use its power knowing, knowing that it has occurred, knowing 

that it has occurred is the most absolute abuse of power — is an 

absolute abuse of power. Mr. Speaker, for a government to vote 

against a case of privilege when the case is absolute, for the 

government to use its power to abuse the rules of this 

Assembly, the parliamentary law which we must all abide by, is 

the absolute most extreme, the absolute most extreme abuse of 

power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope we don’t see that this evening. I hope for 

the sake of our democracy, for the sake of our parliamentary 

laws, for the sake of our province, for the sake of its people, and 

for the sake of the future of this institution, that the government 

doesn’t vote against a motion they know is wrong, that they do 

not vote against a motion they know is wrong, as difficult as it 

may be for the government. 

 

As difficult as it may be, Mr. Speaker, as difficult as it may be 

— to vote against the motion is to say, Mr. Speaker, it’s okay to 

lie. We know he lied but it’s okay to lie because we’re the 

majority, we’re the government. And, Mr. Speaker, that would 

show a level of arrogance and a contempt for the people of the 

province, for this institution, for our parliamentary democracy, 

for our rules, that I hope never occurs. 

 

As I started my comments earlier today, that the rules of this 

institution are more important than any of us, the outcomes of 

this debate today are fundamental to the future of this 

institution, fundamental to the future of our province because if 

a government knowingly votes, knowingly votes against the 

truth and abuses its power absolutely, then it’s no longer fit to 

govern. It is no longer fit to govern. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, later this evening we are going to have to 

make a very significant choice, a choice that reflects upon the 

integrity of each and every member, a choice that reflects upon 

the integrity of a government and of an opposition, a choice that 

reflects upon the integrity of this institution. It’s also a choice 

that reflects upon the integrity of our families, our friends, those 

we represent but most importantly, Mr. Speaker, it reflects upon 

the future of our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we as members of this Assembly need to be 

willing to step beyond our own petty differences to ensure that 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5375 

this institution, that this institution continues to have integrity, 

that this institution continues to be responsible to the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan and continues, Mr. Speaker, to be 

a place of integrity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today, the day as I said earlier in my opening 

remarks, is a day every member of this Assembly wishes was 

not here. It’s a black mark on our history. It is a black mark on 

our future. So, Mr. Speaker, we have to rise above today and 

think of tomorrow, and think of how we vote on this issue 

allows us to move forward or to move backward, to look at 

what it means to our constituents, the people of Saskatchewan, 

our friends and families, and to this very institution. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s not a laughing matter. Some members may think 

it’s not a solemn occasion, but then they just don’t understand. 

Mr. Speaker, we are tasked by the election to our positions in 

society with a responsibility that’s greater than any one of us, 

and it’s something that we must take seriously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister understood that this afternoon in the 

scrum and for that he deserves credit. I hope all members of this 

Assembly understand that as well, the choice that we will all 

make in about 45 minutes or so where we’ll reflect upon the 

ability of this Assembly to move forward with integrity and 

respect or to be considered, Mr. Speaker, as a place of anarchy 

and a demonstration of absolute power by a government 

knowingly, a government knowingly voting against the truth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, finding a case of prima facie privilege in our 

Canadian history is very rare. Even in the history of our 

parliamentary democracy across the British Commonwealth it is 

rare. Elected members very rarely disrespect the Assembly and 

the privileges that come with it to the degree that the Minister 

of Health and the Premier of this province did today. 

 

[21:15] 

 

Of course we have seen how Colin Thatcher dealt with the issue 

in 1982 and how the then Premier Grant Devine dealt with it. 

They disrespected this House. They disrespected the Assembly, 

and they disrespected the people of Saskatchewan when they 

misled the House in 1982. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s not make a very serious situation even more 

serious. The situation we have before us is a very, very serious 

situation, one of which that through scrums today it appears 

clearly that the Minister of Health has come to terms with. One 

today which we as members of the Assembly later this evening 

will have to also come to terms with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1982 Colin Thatcher and Grant Devine never 

came to terms with it. They had not finished dealing with the 

original issue, and immediately the then minister, Colin 

Thatcher, went out and made a mockery of the decision of the 

Assembly. Mr. Speaker, in 1982 Colin Thatcher made a 

mockery of this Assembly, but the Premier did the right thing 

the next day and made him apologize to the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the difference today is that the Premier went out in 

a scrum before this very debate occurred today and said that his 

government would vote against the motion of privilege. Then 

minutes later, after the Premier’s scrum, the Minister of Health 

accepted his responsibility. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that later this evening all members of 

this Assembly need to think very carefully before they vote. 

This is an issue that should not be taken lightly. It should not be 

used to assert majority power when in doing so you would 

know you’re wrong. The members of the government could 

know they were wrong if they made . . . use their majority to 

say something was right when they know it’s wrong. Mr. 

Speaker, that is the worst abuse of power that any government 

can ever do. 

 

It’s about the integrity of the House. It’s about the integrity of 

this Chamber. It’s about the integrity of our government. It’s 

about the integrity of our legislature and the integrity of our 

democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on December 10th, 2001, Paul Forseth, the 

member from New Westminster-Coquitlam-Burnaby and a 

member of the Canadian Alliance, rose on a question of 

privilege. He alleged that the minister of Citizenship and 

Immigration had deliberately attempted to tarnish his reputation 

by accusing him of spreading lies. Damaging a member’s good 

name could constitute a member of . . . constitute a motion of 

privilege. 

 

But I would argue that this member did . . . what this member 

did, the Minister of Health, is an even more serious allegation. 

The Minister of Health misled the House, misled the media, and 

misled the people of Saskatchewan. In the case in the federal 

parliament, Mr. Speaker, Speaker Milliken in the Canadian 

House of Commons ruled that these remarks were made outside 

the Chamber and therefore did not constitute a question of 

privilege. 

 

The fact that the Minister of Health made his remarks within 

this Assembly makes them even more serious. Members are 

protected within this Assembly. Privilege is the collective of 

our rights, privileges . . . Mr. Speaker, privilege is the collection 

of our rights and privileges and our immunities, Mr. Speaker, 

from prosecution by others for what we say in this House. A 

goal going hand in hand with that, Mr. Speaker, is the 

accountability of members of this Assembly to this House. 

 

The fact that the Minister of Health made his remarks within 

this Assembly is even more serious. All the members are 

protected in this Assembly and given privileges that are not 

afforded outside of this Assembly. By making statements that 

have been refuted by the Privacy Commissioner, the Minister of 

Health is making a mockery of our privileges that are afforded 

to us as members of this Assembly. 

 

On September 27th, 2001, the member from Edmonton North, a 

member of the Progressive Conservative caucus, rose on a 

question of privilege stating that she had been denied access to 

her computer files. She believed that there had been an 

infringement on her rights as a member. Now that our own 

Speaker has found that a prima facie case of privilege has been 

made, the Minister of Health has by consequence infringed 

upon the rights as members of this Assembly to receive truthful 

and honest answers. 

 

The Speaker ruled on October 15th, 2001, and he stated that he 

found a cause for concern. The Speaker referred the House to a 

decision made by Speaker Fraser on February the 9th, 1988, in 



5376 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

a similar case. He found that while this error might have been 

an honest mistake, the fact remained that the action taken could 

have been damaging to the minister’s ability to properly 

represent her constituents. 

 

If misleading statements are made in this House, Mr. Speaker, it 

affects all of our ability to properly represent our constituents. 

We should all expect that inside this Assembly we can expect 

honest, truth, and integrity from members. We expect that the 

answers we hear from cabinet ministers are true. We expect that 

we can take these answers back to our constituents in good 

faith. But now the actions of the Minister of Health have thrown 

all of this into question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to now talk of another example of a point 

of privilege being raised by the Speaker. On March 14th, 2001, 

Vic Toews, the member from Provencher representing the 

Canadian Alliance, rose on a question of privilege concerning 

the disclosure of information prior to a Bill. Mr. Speaker, again, 

again a serious concern. 

 

I will repeat, Mr. Speaker, the House should take precedence 

for all members. Members should give the House precedence to 

the most accurate information that they have at all times. 

Unfortunately on April the 12th the Health minister completely 

disregarded this notion and provided inaccurate information to 

the House. 

 

In this instance, the denial of information necessary to members 

in order for them to do their work had been the key 

consideration of the Chair. The matter was referred to the 

standing committee on procedures and House affairs, Mr. 

Speaker, for further study. The committee decided that there 

would be no sanctions against the minister but that steps should 

be taken to ensure that similar breaches of privilege not occur in 

the future. 

 

Now our Speaker has found that on April 12th the Minister of 

Health did commit a breach of privilege. This minister has 

shown no regard for this House and for the hard work of the 

House of Commons to ensure that this would not happen again 

in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious situation. Mr. Speaker, if you 

review the various cases of privilege that have been found in 

both the House of Commons and in the legislatures of the 

provinces of Canada, Mr. Speaker, they all point to a very 

common theme. If a member of an Assembly or the House of 

Commons makes a statement that directly contradicts 

statements made by a public servant or officer of the Assembly, 

that’s not appropriate. This is much like the situation we find 

ourselves in today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speaker delivered his ruling in the case in 

February 18th, 2000, did not find a prima facie case of privilege 

in this case. However we can take an important lesson from his 

ruling. He did rule that statements in the House are protected in 

an absolute sense by privilege. Although in that particular case 

there wasn’t evidence found, he did rule that statements in the 

House are protected in an absolute sense by privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all expect this absolute sense of privilege is to 

ensure both truth and honesty in the House. Mr. Speaker, we 

have before us now a serious situation in which we can no 

longer know and can no longer rely upon the answers provided 

by a minister of the Crown, Mr. Speaker, and that is a very, 

very serious situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to, now want to just reflect upon what is 

being said, Mr. Speaker, about this issue in the media because, 

Mr. Speaker, the actions of this Assembly as reflected in the 

media talk about where the people of Saskatchewan and how 

they view this situation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I am responding to Canada Views, Mr. 

Speaker. It says: 

 

Responding to a Motion of Privilege raised by the NDP 

Opposition yesterday regarding misleading comments 

made by Health Minister Don McMorris made on April 

12, 2010, the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly ruled 

today that there is a prima facie case of privilege to be 

found. The Speakers ruling means that credible evidence 

has been found that McMorris deliberately misled the 

Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan when he 

claimed he had consulted with the Information and 

Privacy Commissioner regarding regulatory changes 

which would allow health foundations to access personal 

health information of patients in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a news report. It goes on to say that: 

 

The Privacy Commission refuted the Minister’s claims 

when he said he was consulted on this regulation and we 

are pleased that the Speaker has found his ruling in this 

regard, [it goes on to say] NDP Leader Dwain Lingenfelter 

said. Ministers are required to answer truthfully and 

provide full disclosure when responding to questions put 

to them by Opposition members in the Assembly. The 

Minister clearly failed in this case. 

 

He goes on to say that: 

 

Lingenfelter said he was surprised to see Brad Wall’s 

full-throated support of his Minister and noted that Wall 

himself repeated the misinformation McMorris had 

provided to the public regarding the consultations. He said 

Wall should remove McMorris from cabinet as he has 

broken his trust with [the] . . . people. 

 

This speaks directly to Brad Wall’s credibility and 

judgment, Lingenfelter said. By not only supporting his 

Minister even after the Speaker had found evidence he 

misled the Assembly but by repeating the false claims of 

consultation, the people of Saskatchewan should have 

little reason to trust either one of them when it comes to 

answers given in the Legislature or anywhere else. The 

Minister should be removed from Cabinet immediately. 

 

[21:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just one of many news reports that are out 

there on this issue. Mr. Speaker, I have another one from 

620CKRM radio report. 

 

What’s the most overused phrase in the world of politics? 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5377 

Public consultation would certainly be in the top 10, and 

it’s proving to be a bit of an embarrassing nuisance for 

Brad Wall and company. The Speaker of the legislature, 

Don Toth, takes his job very seriously. Regular debates 

were suspended in the House yesterday when the Speaker 

ruled that an examination should be made of statements by 

Health Minister Don McMorris to see if they . . . 

deliberately misleading. That’s the most serious charge 

that can be made against a member of the Assembly. In 

less polite circles it means lying, but that word is 

considered unparliamentary. 

 

Of greater concern, it strikes me, is the tendency by this 

government to pay drive-by lip service to the whole notion 

of consultation. Last Friday they signed a deal with 

Alberta and BC called the New West Partnership. It has 

huge implications for many sectors in this province, but 

I’m willing to bet that not all members of Brad Wall’s 

cabinet have even read it. Even if they wanted to, chances 

are it was not even made available to them until hours 

before the signing. When asked if the legislature would get 

a chance to study the agreement line by line and clause by 

clause, the Premier said the equivalent of “I guess so” with 

no formal sense of commitment or understanding. 

 

On the rare occasion when they have allowed substantial 

public consultation, the results have been interesting. We 

won’t see a nuclear power plant in Saskatchewan in this 

lifetime, thanks to the efforts of Dan Perrins. The former 

civil servant chaired consultations across the province and 

the message that came back was clear: don’t do it. It 

wasn’t the answer the government wanted to hear, so now 

it appears they just won’t bother to consult. Deal with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is one of the many, many pieces of 

information that is being put on radio stations across the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have some comments, Mr. Speaker, from the public, emails 

and notes that are coming in on this issue. This in from blogs, 

Mr. Speaker, it says, in one case here, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Saskatchewan Party hacks seem to love to distort the truth 

and hope to blur it for everybody else. What is clear is the 

Health minister lied and should resign. 

 

At 10:13 p.m. ET [eastern time]: 

 

Is this true? McMorris went from a driving instructor in 

Indian Head to the Minister of Health. Say it ain’t so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another individual went on to say: 

 

I watched the proceedings on the tube and it was quite clear 

the Minister of Health did not consult with the Privacy 

Commissioner and that he told the House consultations 

occurred four times. Mr. Lingenfelter pressed him on that 

very point and there was no room for equivocation. The 

Speaker’s ruling to investigate further was determined 

independently by Mr. Toth . . . an SP MLA. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have numerous other quotes, Mr. Speaker, which 

I think are important because they reflect upon what the people 

of Saskatchewan are thinking about this very debate: 

 

Easier to believe what the CBC says than anything 

connected to Rawlco radio which is one of the biggest 

donors to the Saskatchewan Party. Interesting to note that 

they have failed to even cover the story despite it dealing 

with the fundamental structure of democracy. 

 

Talking about this debate. Similar comment: 

 

Similar to the Premier said about “consulting” on the 

New West Partnership/TILMA . . . Does anybody see a 

disturbing trend here? 

 

Mr. Speaker, another citizen goes on to say: 

 

Wow . . . they’re just realizing now that the Minister of 

Health has deceived the government? I have a feeling a 

lot more healthcare issues will be resolved once and for 

all upon this man’s resignation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another one goes on to say: 

 

McMorris said he consulted the Saskatchewan privacy 

commissioner about the matter? Sounds like a lie. He 

says he did it, really just using previous NDP documents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are more and more and more comments 

coming in. Now, Mr. Speaker, as these comments come in from 

people across the province, this is reflecting upon what’s being 

said by the people of the province of Saskatchewan. And it 

reflects upon what a very, very serious issue it is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take a minute or two to comment on two 

or three of the media columns, Mr. Speaker, and why they’re 

relevant to this debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite should take note that this is the 

debate going on in the media today with the exception, as I 

understand it from comments, not on Rawlco radio; they’re not 

covering this issue. Mr. Speaker, that may in itself be news. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s also that they are one of the larger donors to the 

Saskatchewan Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but it’s clear from media coverage to this that the 

media in the province of Saskatchewan are very concerned 

about this issue, as they should be. Mr. Speaker, we in this 

Assembly are here to represent the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and what we should do should reflect upon the 

province of Saskatchewan with both integrity, responsibility, 

and respect for the Chamber in which we have the opportunity 

to serve. As each of us serves on behalf of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we need to take our 

role very seriously. 

 

It’s obvious to me by the media coverage of this issue that the 

media take it very seriously, Mr. Speaker. The people of 

Saskatchewan are taking it very seriously, Mr. Speaker. Now, 

Mr. Speaker, the true test will be, the true test will be in just a 

few short minutes, Mr. Speaker, if the members of this 

Assembly truly take it seriously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need, as members of this Legislative 



5378 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

Assembly, to be reflective of the concerns of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. And in a few minutes we’re going to 

have the opportunity to make a choice. A choice to uphold the 

integrity of this Assembly, its rules, and our democracy, or a 

choice to vote the way the government, the way the Premier 

tells the government members to vote. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the facts need to be taken into consideration. 

The Speaker has found a prima facie case that should be 

referred. The minister in a scrum later admitted it and doesn’t 

feel good about it and, Mr. Speaker, for that he deserves some 

credit. And, Mr. Speaker, what he should have done and what 

the Premier should have done is stood in this House before this 

debate ever occurred and apologized to this Assembly and 

apologized to the people of Saskatchewan. And then the 

Minister of Health should have done the honourable thing and 

resigned. And if he didn’t, Mr. Speaker, then the Premier 

should have done the honourable thing and shown leadership 

and removed him as the Minister of Health. 

 

As has been reported in the media around the province, this is a 

very serious issue. Mr. Speaker, I have Global TV in British 

Columbia. Mr. Speaker, these issues are no longer contained 

within the province of Saskatchewan. This issue is being 

discussed on Global TV in British Columbia. And what does it 

say? It goes on to say: 

 

The NDP is alleging that Health Minister Don McMorris 

misled the public when he said the province’s privacy 

watchdog was consulted about a controversial new plan to 

provide fundraising hospital foundations with the names of 

former patients. 

 

But McMorris said that when he spoke of formal 

consultations, he was referring to the ones that took place 

between the health ministry and Information and Privacy 

Commissioner Gary Dickson between 2004 and 2007 

under the previous NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, McMorris then said in this article, according to 

this article and I’m quoting directly, Mr. Speaker: 

 

. . . there was no need to seek Dickson’s formal opinion 

again this year when the Saskatchewan Party government 

decided to proceed with the change to health privacy rules, 

because his opposition to the idea had already been made 

clear. 

 

“We knew the . . . [opposition] of the privacy 

commissioner all . . . along. That has been consistent, so 

that we knew that he would not be in favour of this 

regulation because he hasn’t been in the past,” McMorris 

said. 

 

But NDP Leader Dwain Lingenfelter blasted McMorris for 

stating in the assembly last month that Dickson “was 

consulted formally four different times on this very 

regulation” when three formal consultations actually took 

place a few years ago under a different government. 

 

“Why did he refer to the four consultations as if he and his 

ministry had done it when he knew full well he had not 

consulted with the commissioner even once?” Lingenfelter 

asked during question period. 

 

“I think this is serious . . . and a difficult thing for a 

minister to have to explain because he wasn’t being 

truthful and forthcoming with the public on the issue,” 

Lingenfelter said to reporters outside the assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say: 

 

In a new report Monday, Dickson urged MLAs to require 

“express consent” from patients before information is 

shared. Dickson said that of six provinces that have 

stand-alone health information laws like Saskatchewan, 

three require that consent be given before information is 

handed over to assist with fundraising drives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this very issue is the talk of not just local, but 

national news. Mr. Speaker. Tonight as we conclude this issue 

in the next few minutes, Mr. Speaker, the government has an 

opportunity to restore some trust, some trust with the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan, some trust with the members of 

this Assembly, and a trust, Mr. Speaker, with the people of 

Canada, because this issue is now being debated and talked 

about across Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that the Premier and his government have broken the 

trust with Saskatchewan people in many ways in the last several 

months, that they have taken a province from surplus to deficit, 

Mr. Speaker, raising concerns of the people of the province. 

They have brought in a budget that has questioned the very 

things that we’re dealing with tonight about the state of our 

finances. 

 

They have broken countless promises from their election 

platform, driven up the cost of living, and, Mr. Speaker, as they 

have broken the trust in those ways, Mr. Speaker, the issue we 

deal with tonight is more important than them all. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, it deals with the fundamental trust of the people of 

Saskatchewan and being able to believe what they tell this 

Assembly and what they tell the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I indicated in many, many of the speeches 

and debates on the issue of privilege across the country, Mr. 

Speaker, when the issue has been raised, there are many, many 

concerns that people have, that if the information provided by a 

minister of the Crown cannot be relied upon, Mr. Speaker, it 

affects business decisions. It affects individual decisions. Mr. 

Speaker, it affects people’s views of the services the 

government provides. It affects decisions on people’s health 

care, Mr. Speaker. It can affect many, many things. Mr. 

Speaker, you have to be able to rely, and we have to be able to 

rely as members of this Assembly on the information provided 

to us in this Chamber to do our jobs. And, Mr. Speaker, if we 

can’t rely on that information, then we cannot do our jobs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, tonight the Premier can demonstrate some 

good judgment. He can demonstrate some leadership and he can 

stand in this House and support the motion before this 

Assembly. Mr. Speaker, to do otherwise after the comments 

made by the Minister of Health in his own scrum, Mr. Speaker, 

I don’t know what the Premier . . . I don’t know how the 

Premier could do anything but and remain with any integrity. 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5379 

This Premier is now faced with a serious moral dilemma, and 

this is going to be and should be a defining moment in his 

premiership. It will define for the people of Saskatchewan what 

his moral compass is. It will define for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan what the values of our Premier is. 

 

[21:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, tonight is an opportunity for the Premier to turn 

the page, to show some leadership, to demonstrate sound 

judgment, to do what he knows in his own heart is right — as I 

know the members in the government all know and understand 

and realize — and vote in favour of this motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, repeatedly in this session we have seen a lack of 

judgment on the part of the Premier. Today is an opportunity 

for the Premier to turn the page, to use his moral compass and 

re-establish some confidence, Mr. Speaker, and to show that he 

can learn from mistakes and that he can show appropriate, 

sound judgment when the issue is before him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and based on the actions from earlier today, it 

would appear that the Premier, because he said that he would 

instruct his members to vote against this motion even before it 

was debated . . . And, Mr. Speaker, the facts have changed since 

then. Since then, the Minister of Health, in a scrum, did the 

honourable thing. Mr. Speaker, it would be incredibly 

unfortunate if the Premier did not lead his government to vote 

for the motion and then move for the members of this Assembly 

to resolution of this issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the Premier does not do that, if the government 

votes against this, if the members of the government vote 

against it, then the Premier’s moral compass — and I dare say 

that of his own members — is highly questionable. After the 

comment, after the admissions and comments and the taking of 

responsibility we saw later this day in scrums from the Minister 

of Health, Mr. Speaker, how could we, as an opposition of the 

people of Saskatchewan, trust anything that the minister would 

say in this House? 

 

If they would vote against, if they would vote against what they 

knew to be untrue, Mr. Speaker, if the members of the 

Legislative Assembly cannot rely on receiving honest and 

factual answers to questions that we raise in this Chamber, then 

it is impossible for us to function as members of the Legislative 

Assembly and impossible for us to do our jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think all members of this Assembly should 

understand that. Mr. Speaker, later this evening the Premier will 

have an opportunity to show that he understands that and that 

his caucus and cabinet understand that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier this day, as we all know, the Premier 

vigorously defended his minister. And then he went out in the 

rotunda, Mr. Speaker, and said that before the debate even had 

occurred that his entire caucus would vote against the motion. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a defining moment since that 

point. And, Mr. Speaker, as I read the scrums, Mr. Speaker, it 

became clear that we had in fact had a defining moment. The 

information had changed. So we look upon the government to 

act properly and do the right thing — show some leadership, 

show some good judgment, step beyond this issue and move 

forward. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m calling on the Premier to do the right 

thing. I’m calling on his cabinet ministers and the members of 

his caucus to do the right thing. Mr. Speaker, to vote against a 

motion they know to be accurate, Mr. Speaker, a motion they 

know to be true, to simply use their power to say, no — even 

knowing it’s wrong, we’re going to defend an action — is the 

absolute greatest abuse of power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the government chooses to do that, it will put a 

black mark on our political history in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and this Assembly. It will make 

this event more significant even than that of Grant Devine and 

Colin Thatcher in 1982. Mr. Speaker, it would make this issue 

an even greater, a greater injustice and mockery of our 

parliamentary rules, laws, traditions and, Mr. Speaker, make a 

mockery of the members of this Assembly, our rules, and the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now, Mr. Speaker, call upon the members of the 

government to do the right thing, the honourable thing, Mr. 

Speaker, to do the honourable thing, to consider prior to voting 

what the honourable thing is in this situation, Mr. Speaker. I 

know it’s not an easy thing. I’m not saying it’s easy. I’m not 

saying it’s something you’d like to do. I’m not saying it’s 

comfortable, but it’s the right thing to do. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I’m asking all of the members of this Assembly to vote for this 

motion so we can put this issue behind us and move forward. 

Mr. Speaker, it shows both leadership, it shows integrity. It 

shows judgment, Mr. Speaker, and it begins a path back to trust 

and working in this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in other jurisdictions when the Speaker finds a 

prima facie case of privilege, members have taken it seriously. 

And I’ve used many examples tonight where even the 

government members voted against one of their members, Mr. 

Speaker, and I would expect no less of the members of this 

Assembly. Mr. Speaker, let’s not shirk our responsibilities. 

Let’s ensure that the basic rights of members are respected and 

honoured, because at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, this is all 

about trust. 

 

And Saskatchewan people are starting, Mr. Speaker, to 

recognize that this government has broken that trust in so many 

ways. Tonight’s vote is an opportunity for the government to 

start to restore some of that trust. Will they use their majority to 

say it’s okay to mislead the House? Or will they do the right 

thing and refer this matter to the Standing Committee on 

Privileges? 

 

Mr. Speaker, people are watching this debate. Mr. Speaker, 

people are commenting online. People are waiting to see how 

the Premier and the government members will respond. Mr. 

Speaker, I call on them to do the right thing, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Speaker, for the first time in 28 years, for the first time in 28 

years we’re dealing with one of the most difficult decisions a 

government would ever make. Twenty-eight years ago now, the 

government of Premier Grant Devine, the cabinet minister by 

the name of Colin Thatcher faced a similar dilemma. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we face, today we face the same decision. 



5380 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, we face that same decision today as members of 

the Assembly. Mr. Speaker, this issue is one in which we must 

step above, we must step above our biases, we must step above 

our party roles, we must look at this issue for what it is — an 

issue of integrity, responsibility, and respect for the very 

Chamber in which we sit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the last several hours I’ve had the opportunity 

to speak about probably the most important issue I will ever 

speak about in my career as a Member of the Legislative 

Assembly. Mr. Speaker, I will never in my career, I hope ever 

speak to another motion of privilege. Mr. Speaker, today is a 

serious day for this legislature. It’s a serious day for the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, it is 

although a very serious day, it is also an opportunity for us as 

members of the Assembly to step beyond our petty differences, 

to step above those things that stand in the way of moving 

forward and doing the right thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is not only in this Chamber that the issue of 

privilege is being debated. Mr. Speaker, it’s being debated in 

households across this province. It’s being debated in 

households across this country, Mr. Speaker. It’s being talked 

about because this is such a rare occasion, Mr. Speaker, that this 

is being talked about. Mr. Speaker, in 28 years this is the first 

time that we have debated this issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in just a few minutes we are going to have the 

opportunity to either step forward or step backward. It’s an 

opportunity to make a difference on maybe the most important 

debate the members of this House have had an opportunity to 

participate in, Mr. Speaker, an issue of privilege. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of this Legislative Assembly need to 

take their responsibilities as seriously as members have in other 

Houses across the country. Mr. Speaker, these issues have not 

been dismissed lightly anywhere, nor should they. They are 

extremely important issues, Mr. Speaker. They are issues that 

all members of this Assembly need to take very, very seriously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, very recently Speaker Milliken in Ottawa made a 

very historic ruling on matters of privilege related to the 

production of documents, Mr. Speaker — a courageous 

decision, Mr. Speaker. In the course of giving his ruling, 

Speaker Milliken laid out very well the role of the Speaker in 

the parliamentary system such as ours when they are dealing 

with matters of privilege such as this one. And he said, I quote: 

 

As Speaker, one of my principal duties is to safeguard the 

rights and privileges of Members of the House. In doing 

so, the Chair is always mindful of the established 

precedents, usages, traditions and practices of the House 

and of the role of the Chair in their ongoing evolution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of course that’s your principal duty here as well, 

to safeguard the rights and privileges of the members of this 

House. Now, Mr. Speaker, those rights and privileges are not an 

ends in themselves. They serve important purposes, Mr. 

Speaker, for members of this Assembly, for the integrity of this 

Chamber, and for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those rights and privileges are essential to our 

democratic system of representative government. And under 

our system, Mr. Speaker, the people elect us as their 

representatives to this Assembly. We are here to act on their 

behalf, to oversee the actions of the government, and, in our 

role as opposition members, to call the government to account. 

We are here to perform that duty on behalf of those who elect 

us, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan. And we must be 

secure in those rights and privileges we have as elected 

members, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[22:00] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to vote against this motion tonight would say 

that our rights and privileges don’t mean anything, Mr. Speaker 

— and that became even more clear after the Minister of 

Health’s comments in his scrums, Mr. Speaker — that to not 

respect this, Mr. Speaker, would be an affront to those rights, 

Mr. Speaker, and privileges that we have as elected members. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we as members have, as an example, a special 

freedom of speech not accorded to others in other places. We 

have this freedom, Mr. Speaker, so that we can ask questions 

we wish without fear of legal harassment that would impede us 

in the execution of our functions. Similarly, Mr. Speaker, we 

must be able to expect that every answer we receive from a 

minister of the Crown is a truthful answer, Mr. Speaker. 

Otherwise, Mr. Speaker, we could not do our job. We could not 

question ministers on behalf of those we represent because we 

could not rely upon the answers that we receive. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have these privileges and these rights, Mr. 

Speaker, to exercise as members of the Legislative Assembly, 

so that the people may properly be, so that the people may be 

properly represented here in their Assembly by us. Mr. Speaker, 

if we didn’t have them or if they weren’t respected by the 

members opposite, our democratic system of representative 

parliamentary government couldn’t and wouldn’t work, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that’s why Speaker Milliken — as I know you do too, Mr. 

Speaker — takes so seriously his role as the guardian of our 

rights and privileges as members of the Legislative Assembly. 

This is truly a principal function of the role of Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in future outlining his role in matters of 

privilege, Speaker Milliken also cited a practice which is very 

relevant to the motion we are debating tonight. He quoted, Mr. 

Speaker, from the House of Commons Procedure and Practice, 

2nd Edition, O’Brien and Bosc, at page 141. Mr. Speaker, it 

says: “Great importance is attached to matters involving 

privilege.” A member wishing to rise on a question: 

 

A Member wishing to raise a question of privilege in the 

House must first convince the Speaker that his or her 

concern is prima facie (on the first impression or at . . . 

[a] glance) a question of privilege. The function of the 

Speaker is limited to deciding whether the matter is of 

such a character as to entitle the Member who has raised 

the question to move a motion which will have priority 

over Orders of the Day; that is, in the Speaker’s opinion, 

there is a prima facie question of privilege. If there is, the 

House must take the matter into immediate consideration. 

Ultimately, it is the House which decides whether a 

breach of privilege or a contempt has been committed. 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5381 

And that, Mr. Speaker, up until the last sentence, is what we 

have done so far. I have raised the matter, Mr. Speaker, and you 

have found there is a prima facie question of privilege. And we 

are, Mr. Speaker, taking the matter into immediate 

consideration. We are doing so with the motion I have moved 

on this matter, Mr. Speaker, and here I’d like to move to the 

motion itself and explain why each part of it is so relevant to the 

important question of privilege we are discussing tonight. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first of all, we are asking the Committee on 

Privileges to examine the statements made to this Assembly by 

the Minister of Health. This is a very important step, Mr. 

Speaker, and I wish here to invoke a precedent in the House of 

Commons in Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, of February and March of 

2002, because it deals very directly with the question of how 

referral to a committee relates to the question of a minister’s 

intention to mislead the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on that occasion the issue was one of ministerial 

statements that could not be reconciled with one another. The 

minister in question, the Minister of National Defence had 

made different statements on two different occasions about 

when he had been informed about the involvement of Canadian 

troops in Afghanistan and the taking of prisoners, Mr. Speaker. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in February 2002, the Speaker ruled that, 

even though he was prepared to accept the minister’s assertion 

that he had no intention of misleading the House, the Speaker 

nevertheless ruled the matter merited further consideration by 

the relevant parliamentary committee in order to clarify the 

matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while not prejudging the work of the committee, 

we think the same kind of clarification is needed on this matter. 

 

Second, Mr. Speaker, we are asking the committee to report 

back to this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, allow me to quote again 

from Speaker Milliken’s remarks when he said, quoting 

O’Brien and Bosc, “Ultimately, it is the House which decides 

whether a breach of privilege or a contempt has been 

committed.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we agree with that principle very strongly. But if 

the House is to decide, Mr. Speaker, it must do so in a 

deliberate way. The decision of the House must be an informed 

decision, Mr. Speaker. It should not be a hasty decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the case involving ministerial statements 

regarding Afghan detainees, the federal committee took a few 

weeks to clarify matters. It took that time, Mr. Speaker, because 

they too take matters of privilege very serious, Mr. Speaker. 

When they reported back to the House, the federal MPs 

[Member of Parliament] on the committee wanted to ensure that 

their report was full and clear and could provide the best 

guidance possible to their fellow MPs. 

 

And they did that, Mr. Speaker, because they respected the 

principle I cited a moment ago, that ultimately it is the House 

which decides whether a breach of privilege or a contempt has 

been committed. It should be a decision of the whole House, 

Mr. Speaker, and it should be an informed decision made with 

due deliberation after the relevant committee has given the 

opportunity to carefully review the matter and provide the 

proper report to members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we understand the Premier may 

take a different view. Reportedly, Mr. Speaker, he has decided 

to short-circuit the process and has told his MLAs to vote 

against this motion, and so prevent the relevant committee from 

doing its work and so prevent this whole Assembly from 

making an informed and deliberate decision about whether a 

breach of privilege or contempt has occurred. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in finding a prima facie question of privilege, you 

noted that it was quite unusual for an officer such as the Privacy 

Commissioner to respond as he did with his letter on May the 

3rd. Everyone recognizes, Mr. Speaker, that it may be even 

rarer for someone in your position to find prima facie evidence 

that a minister had made a misleading statement in the House. 

 

Everyone recognizes the seriousness of the question that should 

be facing the whole House, Mr. Speaker — of whether or not a 

true breach of privilege or a contempt has been committed, Mr. 

Speaker, is of the utmost seriousness — because it should be 

the whole House that decides this matter, Mr. Speaker, after 

receiving a full report from the relevant committee that 

investigates the issue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s become, you know, more and more 

clear, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Health understands the 

seriousness of what has happened, as his scrum this afternoon 

would indicate. Everyone recognizes this, Mr. Speaker, except 

the Premier apparently because he’s prepared to rush his 

judgment. He’s prepared to tell his MLAs how to vote, and to 

tell his MLAs how to vote without even letting the committee 

do its work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this happens it is regrettable. When a Premier 

instructs his members to treat so lightly a very serious matter 

that touches on the rights and privileges of those members 

themselves, Mr. Speaker, where would the moral compass of 

the Premier be? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask the members opposite how seriously 

the Premier takes the rights and privileges as members of the 

Assembly when he is asking them to co-operate in a rush 

judgment in a matter like this one. When the Premier will go 

out in the rotunda before the media and say his members are all 

going to vote against it, and just minutes later the minister 

himself will admit — he will admit, Mr. Speaker — and he will 

feel bad about what has occurred. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, we are asking them, until the 

committee reports to this Assembly, that the minister be 

removed from his position as a minister. Mr. Speaker, we have 

serious reasons for doing so. Mr. Speaker, first the Speaker has 

ruled for the first time in many years that there’s a prima facie 

case of privilege. This means he has found evidence that the 

minister may have misled the Assembly. 

 

And now it is the principal requirement of ministers that they be 

able to stand in their place and answer for the ministries. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s absolutely crucial that ministers’ answers be 

credible to members of the Assembly who are questioning the 

government on behalf of the people. Any less than that, Mr. 

Speaker, any less than members of this Assembly getting 

credible answers from ministers of the Crown, Mr. Speaker, 

prevents us from doing our jobs, Mr. Speaker — the very job 



5382 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2010 

that the people of the province of Saskatchewan elected us to 

do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this minister has been found prima facie to have 

possibly given an unreliable answer. Members of this Assembly 

would be derelict in their duties as members if they continued to 

question this minister on behalf of the people as though his 

answers were credible. They would also be prejudging the 

outcome of the committee’s deliberations if they were to do so. 

They would be signalling to the committee that they consider 

the minister’s answers to be reliable, Mr. Speaker, when this is 

the very point of deliberation the committee must decide and 

report back to this House on. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, these are the principal reasons we are asking 

that the minister be removed from his position while the 

committee does its work. Mr. Speaker, we could not rely on the 

answers of the minister. And to have him remain in his position, 

Mr. Speaker, while the committee was doing its work, would in 

fact undermine the ability of the committee to do the very work 

that they should be doing. That work, Mr. Speaker, will allow 

the whole House to make an informed decision about whether a 

breach of privilege has occurred or a contempt has occurred, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the proper way to handle a matter such as 

this. When the fundamental rights and privileges of all members 

are at stake, Mr. Speaker — rights and privileges that we 

exercise on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan as their 

democratically elected representatives, Mr. Speaker — anything 

less than that is a failure to do our jobs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is why I hope the Premier will reverse 

his decision to rush the judgment, Mr. Speaker, and will allow 

his members to vote freely on the merits of this motion so that 

the rights and privileges of all members can be as well 

safeguarded as they deserve to be, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this is the most important decision the members of this 

Assembly will make in their time in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And for those very reasons, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

go back and for a few minutes discuss, Mr. Speaker, what the 

Minister of Health said in his scrum. Because, Mr. Speaker, in 

his scrums . . . Mr. Speaker, in my mountain of paper here I’m 

looking for, Mr. Speaker, to one more time talk about the 

statements made by Mr. McMorris. 

 

[22:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just reiterate what I think is an 

absolutely important, an absolutely important piece of 

information to the vote we are about to take in the next few 

minutes, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what I want to quote is 

from the scrum of the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, his 

scrum from today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, today in his scrum the Minister of 

Health makes it very clear, makes it very clear. The minister 

says this: “I guess I’ll try and be much clearer. You know I’ve 

been here for 10 years; this hasn’t happened for 20-some years 

in the House.” The reporter says, “Almost 30.” “Okay, almost 

30.” And he goes on to say, and this is the Minister of Health, 

he says: 

 

Okay, almost 30. I don’t want to be misleading. I heard a 

lot of things said in this House, and I can question a lot of 

that. I spent eight years in opposition and I heard cabinet 

ministers say stuff that they couldn’t back up and 

whatever. You know, I’m not very pleased with the way 

this has gone. I mean I feel sick about it but, you know, it 

was never my intent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health goes on. Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Health goes on to say that he didn’t intend to 

mislead the House. He goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

No, Stefani, that’s not all what I said. I said they’re not 

very happy with what has happened. I don’t feel good 

about it at all. I’ve heard lots of things that have been said 

in this House different times. I bring my credibility to this 

place, I try to conduct my affairs. That was never my 

intent to mislead the public whatsoever and I’m sick that 

this has happened. It was never my intent. Those words 

that I spoke were never my intent to mislead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, then, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Health then goes on to say, to say this: that after the vote in this 

Assembly, he would apologize. So, Mr. Speaker, I want to 

make one final comment about the absolute . . . [inaudible] . . . 

integrity. 

 

There is no integrity in apologizing after you’ve had your own 

members vote against what you know to be wrong. In fact that 

is the most hypocritical situation that any of us could ever do. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the apology would not be in good taste 

because if you just had your members vote that in fact you 

hadn’t done it, and then you come in and apologize for doing it, 

Mr. Speaker, that makes a sham of this very process and makes 

a sham of this very Assembly. It makes a sham of our rules, of 

our institution and, Mr. Speaker, we don’t want this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a very few, short minutes we have the 

opportunity for the Premier to show some leadership, something 

he has not done. Mr. Speaker, the Premier can be different than 

Grant Devine, different than Colin Thatcher and he can show 

some leadership. He can stand, he can stand in this House and 

not follow the leadership of Grant Devine and Colin Thatcher 

and move ahead and do what he knows what is the right thing, 

which is to vote in favour of this motion of referral to the 

Committee on Privileges, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier has an opportunity to once again 

move away from his history, Mr. Speaker, not follow Grant 

Devine, not follow Colin Thatcher, but to show some 

judgement, to show better judgement than he’s shown in recent 

months, Mr. Speaker, to show the people of Saskatchewan that 

he can do something, that he can lead. He can do the 

honourable thing to show a moral compass and to vote in 

favour, Mr. Speaker, of the motion before us. But, Mr. Speaker, 

but, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’ll ask the members to 

come to order. According to rule 12(5) of the members’ rules 



May 4, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5383 

and proceedings, being now 10 minutes before the hour of 

adjournment, I will place the question on the motion before the 

Assembly. The motion presented by the member from Regina 

Dewdney: 

 

Be it resolved that the Standing Committee on Privileges 

be . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Be it resolved that the Standing Committee on Privileges 

be instructed to examine the issue of the statements made 

to this Assembly by the Minister of Health on April 12th, 

2010 and report back to the Assembly, and that, until such 

time that the committee reports, the Minister of Health 

shall be removed from his position as a minister. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nays have it. Standing vote. Call 

in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 22:21 until 22:25.] 

 

The Speaker: — I’ll ask the members to take their chairs and 

we’ll call the vote. Those in favour of the motion please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 20] 

 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Harper Trew Higgins 

Junor Atkinson Nilson 

Forbes Vermette Broten 

Furber Morin Yates 

Iwanchuk Taylor Quennell 

Wotherspoon Chartier  

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 

 

[Nays — 32] 

 

Wall Morgan Bjornerud 

Gantefoer Draude Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles Cheveldayoff 

Duncan Huyghebaert Heppner 

Harpauer D’Autremont Harrison 

Norris Reiter Hutchinson 

Brkich Elhard Schriemer 

Stewart Allchurch Weekes 

Wilson Michelson Ottenbreit 

Ross Chisholm Bradshaw 

Kirsch McMillan  

 

Principal Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 

20; those opposed, 32. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion is defeated. We’ll go to 

government orders. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave 

to make a statement. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has asked for leave for 

a statement. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. Being near the hour of 

adjournment, the Assembly will stand adjourned until tomorrow 

afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

PRIVILEGE 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5357 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 5383 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


