




















































Hansard: March 22, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 34A  MONDAY, MARCH 22, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4343 

 March 22, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce three special people who are seated in your gallery 

today. Larissa Shasko, the elected leader of the Green Party in 

April of 2009, Larissa’s here with us. She’s a political science 

student, lives in Moose Jaw with her husband. And I want all 

members to join with me in welcoming her here today. Thank 

you, Larissa, for being with us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery as well, right next to 

Larissa, is Ryan Bater, current Leader of the Liberal Party, 

raised in North Battleford, earned his degree in business 

economics, was very instrumental in North Battleford’s 

regional economic development authority. And, Ryan, I’m 

proud of the work you did there because I’ve had a small vested 

interest in that, being the minister when it was introduced. I 

know all members will want to join in welcoming Ryan here to 

the Assembly today. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, through you and to you and the other 

members in the Assembly, a good friend, Leader of the 

Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan since 2006, 

Rick Swenson. Rick of course was a member of the Assembly 

for a number of years, a worthy opponent. Rick, welcome back 

to the Assembly today, and I know all other members will join 

me in that welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 

join with the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming these 

leaders to the Legislative Assembly today. Mr. Speaker, 

obviously democracy is only as strong as those who contest it 

— the parties that are represented, the individuals that are 

represented. And obviously, Mr. Speaker, the province is better 

off when that contest is vibrant, and we owe that in large 

measure to the various political parties that have been 

contesting elections here very recently, Mr. Speaker. And I join 

with the Opposition Leader in welcoming them to their 

Legislative Assembly and ask all members to do the same. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the House 

several folks who’ve come from across the province — Prince 

Albert, Saskatoon, and here in the city of Regina and other 

places — to have some questions about rent and those kind of 

issues. They’re actually up in the east gallery, west gallery, on 

the main floor, and an awful lot in the Speaker’s gallery. This 

truly is a major issue for many people, many people in 

Saskatchewan, and so I’m glad they’ve come today to their 

legislature to hear the answers that they want to hear from the 

government. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce a 

group of students and concerned citizens from First Nations 

University of Canada. If these individuals in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, could please rise. Thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker. many of these individuals are members of the 

students’ association and all were in front of the legislature 

earlier today, coming to the legislature to voice their concerns 

about the future of First Nations University of Canada. 

 

I’ll also state, Mr. Speaker, later on in the day I will be tabling a 

letter from the students’ association to the Minister of 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

I ask all members to join me in welcoming these students and 

others to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through to the 

Assembly, I’d like to recognize some members of the building 

trades. We have with us Calvin Goebel, Randy Nichols, Chuck 

Rudder, Terry Parker, I think is there, and Gunnar Passmore. 

I’d like all members to welcome these trade unionists to their 

Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, I am pleased to 

introduce friends and constituents seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I’d like to start off with Elder Lorna Standingready. I’ll ask 

Elder Standingready to stand. Certainly Elder is a teacher to 

many of us as well, and certainly I count myself as a student. 

Elder Standingready originates from Peepeekisis and White 

Bear First Nations, has built her life working in Regina. I would 

also like to recognize her daughter, Miss Donna Standingready, 

a community leader here in Regina, and close friend, Miss 

Kaitlyn Swan who is a grade 9 at O’Neill High School and is 

looking towards journalism school, Mr. Speaker, following that. 

Miss Sawyer Swan who is a young entrepreneur who is looking 

towards graphic arts for her future and who’s been an award 

winner with Junior Achievement, a great program in our 

province. I’d also like to recognize Ms. Brenda Dubois who’s 

the Chair of the Regina Urban Aboriginal Strategy and also a 

constituent. 

 

These are just some of the individuals that are leaders within 

Regina Rosemont, Mr. Speaker, within Regina, and within our 

province. I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 



4344 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

welcoming them here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure indeed to 

introduce a friend and a former colleague, Keith Goulet. Keith 

was the member for Cumberland for a number of years and 

served that area of the province very, very well. I understand 

he’s taken a leave from politics and is now a student doing his 

Ph.D., I believe his Ph.D. at the university. Keith, welcome to 

the Assembly. I know all members will want to join in the 

welcome in having you here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, with 

leave for an extended introduction please. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked leave for an extended 

introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The member may proceed. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 

introduce to you and through you and to all members of the 

Assembly a gentleman seated in your gallery by the name of 

Jaime García. And perhaps Mr. García could stand so he could 

be recognized. 

 

Mr. García came to Canada at the age of 11 after his father was 

persecuted, shot, and left as a paraplegic for standing up for 

peoples’ rights. So Jaime is well versed with the issue of fair 

and equitable treatment as a society in general. He is 32 years of 

age. He is a graduate of O’Neill High School, so I’m sure he’ll 

want to get acquainted with some of the other students that are 

currently sitting up in the gallery. He attended the University of 

Regina and then after that the University of Calgary. He is 

currently a digital media designer who is married to Kendra 

Strong-García who herself is a very important activist in the 

community. 

 

She is currently the director of the YWCA [Young Women’s 

Christian Association] children’s shelter and has done amazing 

activism and work with respect to FASD [fetal alcohol 

spectrum disorder] as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. García is very active in the soccer community in Regina as 

a player, a coach, and a former board member. He currently 

coaches with the Austria Capital football club, and I understand 

he’s still kicks the soccer ball around from time to time too 

when he’s asked to play as a guest player. He’s a strong 

advocate of labour issues for the past six years and has been 

seen on many fronts of those issues around not just the city of 

Regina, but across Saskatchewan and across the country. 

 

He’s a long-time NDP [New Democratic Party] member; he’s 

held a membership since he was 18 years of age. And he’s 

currently seeking the NDP nomination for Regina Coronation 

Park. As you can see, Mr. Speaker, not only because of his 

family history and the persecution that his father suffered in the 

country that he lived in before he came to Canada, he is a strong 

member of the community of Regina Walsh Acres. He’s father 

of three wonderful children — Avery, 15; Myan who’s nine; 

and a wonderfully precocious Eden who is three years old. 

 

He has a strong appetite for democracies, Mr. Speaker, and I 

would ask all my colleagues to welcome him to the Assembly 

today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I realize 

we’re making a lot of introductions here today, but I would be 

remiss if I didn’t introduce my friend, Mushom. I’m speaking 

of course of Chief Cameron Watson from Chacachas First 

Nation in the Southeast. It’s good to see you here, Mushom, and 

welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I present a petition 

concerning the First Nations University. This petition is . . . the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

We, the undersigned, fully support First Nations 

University of Canada and are petitioning the Government 

of Saskatchewan to restore full funding immediately to 

the institution. We also petition the Government of 

Saskatchewan to fight on behalf of Saskatchewan and 

insist that all federal funding also be restored to First 

Nations University of Canada. 

 

This petition is signed by residents of Regina and Buena Vista. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens of 

Saskatchewan who are concerned over the condition of our 

highways, in particular Highway 310. This petition states that 

Highway 310 has now deteriorated to a point where it’s a safety 

hazard for the residents who have to drive on this highway each 

and every day. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway No. 310 that the people of 

Saskatchewan need. 

 

And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the good 

folks from Ituna and Fort Qu’Appelle, Saskatchewan. I so 

submit. 

 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4345 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 

to introduce a petition that was put together by the 

Saskatchewan Student Coalition. This petition is in support of 

the implementation of a Saskatchewan scholarship fund that 

was promised by the Sask Party in the 2007 election. And the 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement the promised Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today’s petitioners are from Prince Albert, Hudson 

Bay, Delisle, Saskatoon, Battleford, and my cousin’s 

hometown, Carrot River. I’m pleased to present this petition on 

all of the above’s behalf. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And we all know that poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. And we 

also know that here in Saskatchewan that income gap between 

rich and poor is beginning to grow even more, and that one in 

five children in the province of Saskatchewan lives in poverty. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we also know that when governments reduce 

spending they often attack social programs, and with the budget 

upcoming I think this is importantly relevant. And the prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of constituents in Moose 

Jaw. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition, thousands of the 21,000 now that we have — over 

21,000 — with citizens who are really concerned about the 

possible elimination of government funding for chiropractic 

services. And the petition reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan honour the 

agreement negotiated between the Ministry of Health and 

the Chiropractors’ Association of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the signatures again, Mr. Speaker, are from hundreds of 

communities which I will now read into the record: Regina, 

Pilot Butte, Lumsden, Rouleau, Weyburn, Midale, Estevan, 

Vibank, Raymore, Balgonie, Regina Beach, Fort Qu’Appelle, 

White City, Silton, Wynyard, Craven, Belle Plaine, Hanley, 

Emerald Park, Lipton, Cupar, Asquith, Saskatoon, Rosetown, 

Burstall, Warman, Martensville, Battlefords, Eston, La Ronge, 

Vanscoy, Nipawin, Gull Lake, Swift Current, Hodgeville, 

Webb, Halbrite, Torquay, Carlyle, Tribune, Ogema, Osage, 

Radville, Yellow Grass, Fillmore, Pangman, Nokomis, Moose 

Jaw, Milestone, Admiral, Kenosee Lake, Stoughton, Forget, 

Trossachs, Ponteix, Maple Creek, Central Butte, Hazlet, 

Gravelbourg, Assiniboia, Willow Bunch, Saltcoats, Esterhazy, 

Davidson, Imperial, Craik, Elbow, Dundurn, Watrous, 

Shellbrook, Canwood, Loon Lake, Meadow Lake, Delisle, 

Clearwater River, Biggar, Maidstone, Edam, Unity, North 

Battleford, Cochin, Wilkie, Maymont, Condie, Mayfair, 

Tramping Lake, Medstead, Milden, Langham, Prud’homme, 

Assiniboia, Laporte, Arelee, Aberdeen, Bellevue, Outlook, 

Laird, Hague, Dalmeny, Viscount, Coleville, Kenaston, 

Wakaw, Osler, Waldheim, Kyle, Hepburn, Fox Valley, Birch 

Hills, Prince Albert, Melville, Elstow, Rocanville, Zehner, 

Truax, Odessa, Mankota, Bateman, Yorkton, Edenwold, Cohen 

Bay, Pennant Colony, Wilcox, Waskesiu, Candle Lake, Leask, 

Tompkins, Tugaske, Mortlach, Tisdale, Eyebrow, Mossbank, 

Hendon, Hafford, Radisson, Goodwater, Macoun, Oungre, 

Chaplin, Val Marie, Pambrun, Neidpath, Beechy, Cabri, 

Churchbridge, Runnymede, Pelly, Hyas, Veregin, Kennedy, 

Duval, Fairlight, Leoville, Benson, Avonlea, Fosston, 

Choiceland, Rosthern, Elrose, Wiseton, Big River, Tway, St. 

Louis, Strasbourg, Lake Lenore, Ardath, Bengough, Weekes, 

White Fox, Mont Nebo, Sandy Bay, Morse, Viceroy, Killaly, 

Langenburg, Calder, Hudson Bay, Ituna, Springside, Star City, 

Mistatim, Ridgedale, Lintlaw, Fenwood, Zenon Park, Quill 

Lake, Zealandia, Gronlid, Kinistino, Naicam, Fairy Glen, 

Corman Park, Spiritwood, Big Rose Colony, Sheho, Danbury, 

Togo, Theodore, Duff, Whitewood, Margo, Balcarres, Elfros, 

Ebenezer, Bredenbury, Sedley, Kisbey, Gray, Lebret, Sceptre, 

Simmie, Grenfell, Montmartre, Air Ronge, Creighton, Glenside, 

St. Brieux, Bracken, Young, Blaine Lake, Vonda, and 

Loreburn. 

 

As you can see, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners have signed from 

all over the province — thousands and thousands and thousands 

and more to come. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

rise today to present a petition titled, protecting renters from 

unreasonable increases. And I’ve got quite a pile today from the 

folks from Regina. And I’d like to tell a little bit about it. 

Saskatchewan renters are facing combinations of rising rents 

and low vacancy rates in many communities. And in fact we’ve 

seen rent increases of $100 each in communities like Estevan 

and Yorkton. And we know many provinces have rent controls, 

including BC [British Columbia], Ontario, Quebec, and Prince 

Edward Island. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer now. And the prayer goes, we, in the 

prayer that reads as follows: 

 



4346 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

. . . respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan take the following action: cause the 

government to cause enacting some form of rent control 

with a view to protect Saskatchewan renters from 

unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. With a 

waiting list of almost one full year for our seniors, that’s 

appalling. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that has been circulated by the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition — a petition in support of affordable 

undergraduate tuition and a request that the Sask Party’s actions 

match their rhetoric. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average of 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of the students of Saskatchewan. And the 

issue that they bring forward is that they’re paying the highest 

amount of interest on fixed rate student loans in Canada at 

prime plus two and a half per cent. This petition is being 

circulated by the Saskatchewan Student Coalition. I’ll read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately reduce the interest on 

fixed rate student loans to the prime rate of borrowing so 

that students can accumulate less debt and focus their 

finances on building their lives here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by a good number of folks 

from the city of Prince Albert. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of residents of 

rural Saskatchewan who feel that they’re being left behind by 

the Sask Party government with respect to issues of water. This 

community has been dealing with the situation for over two 

years and the government . . . through a government agency 

ordering the town to upgrade their water system. The exorbitant 

amount that the Duck Lake residents now . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Just to remind members 

that as we’ve . . . Long-standing tradition is to a short and brief 

explanation of the petition and the prayer. I’d ask the member 

to move to the prayer, please. Member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, these residents are paying over 

$165 a month, minimum $165 a month for water bills, and it 

has a direct effect on the First Nations people and the 

community, as well as those on disability . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’ve asked the member to move 

to the prayer. If the member doesn’t move to the prayer, we’ll 

move to the next petition. I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, and the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Duck Lake and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a 

petition in support of withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, in the 

province here the members of the building trade unions have a 

proud history of craft union certification. And, Mr. Speaker, as 

well, that the skilled . . . the building trades contracts support a 

system of apprenticeship, of training, which results in a highly 

skilled workforce that we have. And the petition reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4347 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009, which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by people of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased today to 

rise and present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing for The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. The petitioners were 

prompted to circulate this petition because of rent increases of 

40 per cent at some Battlefords area apartments. The prayer 

reads as follows, Mr. Speaker, that the: 

 

. . . petitioners humbly pray that the honourable 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to call upon the 

Government of Saskatchewan to develop an affordable 

housing program that will result in a greater number of 

quality and affordable rental units to be made available to 

a greater number of people throughout The Battlefords 

and that will implement a process of rent review or rent 

control to better protect tenants in a non-competitive 

housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petitioners all come from the city of North 

Battleford and the village of Meota. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan 

concerned about this government’s disregard and disrespect for 

civil, human, and legal rights. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples, and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Wakaw, Regina, 

and Saskatoon. And I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents of 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

specifically to the $1 billion deficit created by the Sask Party, 

and they recognize that this is a problem getting worse, Mr. 

Speaker, not better. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These concerned residents and petitions are signed by 

individuals, residents of Weyburn and Estevan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Before I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale, I just wanted to remind our guests while 

you’re welcome, it’s a privilege to be in the Assembly. You’re 

asked not to participate in any form during any of the debate. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — I rise today again to present a petition in 

support of the expansion of the graduate retention program. 

This petition is basically about fairness in how we treat 

post-secondary students and about the need to maintain our best 

and our brightest here in Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And, as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed by the good citizens of Saskatoon and 

Clavet. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial 

Discrimination 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Racism is 

destructive. It’s dehumanizing and deadly. Racism claims the 

lives of children, wipes out entire generations, and victimizes 

people based on their religion or the colour of their skin. Mr. 

Speaker, the International Day for the Elimination of Racial 

Discrimination was March the 21st. 

 

This is a day that reminds us of the destructive nature of racism. 

This day was proclaimed in commemoration of the tragic events 

in Sharpeville, South Africa. On March the 21st, 1960, the 

police opened fire and killed 69 people at a peaceful 

demonstration against apartheid laws passed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the wonderful opportunity to attend Regina’s 

local Spring Free From Racism event. It was held at the Italian 



4348 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

Club and there was amazing performances by the different 

cultural groups right here in our very own city. Mr. Speaker, 

there was a mini-mosaic of clothes, food, music, dance. It was a 

wonderful sight, and it was a day of celebration of inclusion. 

 

It is essential that we all work together to make our homes, 

communities, and our province intolerant to racist attitudes. We 

must learn from the tragedies of the past because together we 

create a beautiful, brighter tomorrow. Thank you very much, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Affordable Drinking Water 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, nations around the world observe 

today as World Water Day. This day reminds us that water is an 

essential substratum of human life. Without water, there is no 

life. Without access to affordable water, our quality of life is at 

risk. 

 

While many in our province are fortunate to have regular access 

to affordable water, a growing number of rural residents are 

forced to pay an exorbitant price for water because of this Sask 

Party government. 

 

Residents of Duck Lake, a town of just over 600 people north of 

Saskatoon, are unable to afford their soaring water bills, 

increasing from $32 a month to upwards of $165 a month. Yet 

this government refuses to put up the cash to lower the rates, 

taking rural Saskatchewan for granted yet once again. 

 

Now the residents of the hamlet of Furdale, just outside of 

Saskatoon, are being told that they will be cut off from water 

unless they agree to pay thousands of dollars to hook up to a 

private supplier who cannot guarantee access, price, or water 

quality. Mr. Speaker, on World Water Day let us recognize that 

there are even more rural residents that are being denied 

affordable water by this Sask Party government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, New Democrats reaffirm our conviction that 

people have a right to affordable drinking water, and we’ll 

continue to stand up for rural residents left without affordable 

access to water by a Sask Party government. Thank you. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Saskatchewan Protective Services Awards 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend the 

member from Carrot River and myself had the distinct honour 

of attending the seventh annual Saskatchewan Protective 

Services Award held in Prince Albert, Saskatchewan. At this 

event, Mr. Speaker, 24 recipients were honoured with a 

Protective Services Medal presented by Lieutenant Governor 

Gordon Barnhart. 

 

This year’s ceremony was special to me because I had the 

pleasure of working with a few of the award recipients in the 

Corrections department. Believe me when I say, these 

individuals could not be more deserving of this distinction. 

 

Since its inception in 2003, the Protective Services Medal has 

recognized exemplary long service for Saskatchewan 

individuals working in a direct capacity to protect people and 

our property. The Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal 

focuses attention on the efforts and work of police, fire, and 

emergency professions, along with others working in the field 

of safety and security. 

 

All the individuals honoured have set high standards and strived 

for excellence in their duties so all of the people of our province 

can live safe and secure lives. Mr. Speaker, these individuals 

lay their lives on the line daily in order to ensure our safety. It 

was truly my pleasure to watch them receive the recognition 

they so richly deserved. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Z99 Radiothon Supports Neonatal Unit 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. CC, Lorie, and Buzz of 

Rawlco Radio’s Z99, last Thursday and Friday in 36 short 

hours, turned a lot of hurt to hope and happiness in the 23rd 

annual radiothon to support the Regina General neonatal unit at 

Regina hospital — $360,946 was raised. 

 

This 23rd annual radiothon built on a history. The history 

started when CC was exactly 23 years less mature. Incredibly 

he had a crazy concept, the concept being that if he broadcast 

for 36 straight hours people might respond. So he did so out of 

a car dealership on Broad Street, and he raised close to $15,000 

in that first year, which is a far cry from 360,000 this year. 

 

It’s amazing that he continued. Mr. Speaker, hats off to the 

listeners who donated so generously and to the volunteers who 

ran the phones and to the other support staff, and of course to 

CC, Lorie, and Buzz of Rawlco Radio. 

 

But the biggest kudos of all of course is for CC — a truly 

master fundraiser that we are very grateful for having. Mothers 

and babies, families are seeing hurt become hope and 

happiness. Thanks CC and everyone at Rawlco Radio. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Conserving and Protecting Water 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today’s the 18th 

annual World Water Day. In 1992 the United Nations General 

Assembly designated March 22nd of each year as World Day of 

Water. Today nations across the world join together to celebrate 

the importance of water in our everyday lives. 

 

Water is something that many of us in this province take for 

granted. It’s one of our most precious and vital resources. Our 

government has taken real action to conserve and protect our 

water, and despite what the members opposite say, we are doing 

more than they ever did. The NDP had a low-flow toilet rebate 

program, a budget $200,000. We implemented our own toilet 

rebate program with a budget of $11.2 million. It has so far 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4349 

replaced 13,000 toilets and conserved over 150 million litres of 

water. 

 

The NDP never put a program into place to monitor the water 

quality at Lake Diefenbaker. Our government has initiated 

long-term testing there for the first time ever. Under the NDP, 

the SaskWater contract with Duck Lake skyrocketed, and they 

only gave the town 250,000. Our government has helped Duck 

Lake access $1 million to help with their water problems. 

 

The NDP spent 9.9 million on water infrastructure in their last 

two years of government. In our first two years, we have spent 

76 million on water infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite need to get their story 

straight. Our government is doing more to protect and ensure 

access to clean water than they ever did. Mr. Speaker, the 

people of this province know that action speaks much louder 

than empty rhetoric. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Huskies Win National Title 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the University of Saskatchewan 

Huskies made history yesterday when they claimed their first 

ever Canadian university basketball title. Although the Huskies 

were ranked fifth going into the finals, they fought their way to 

the end and beat the UBC [University of British Columbia] 

Thunderbirds 98 to 81. This game marked the end of an 

amazing season for the Huskies. They have won 17 of their past 

18 games since January. 

 

Only two weeks ago, the Huskies also captured the first ever 

Canada West title — their first ever. 

 

Showron Glover was named Saskatchewan’s player of the 

game, racking up 28 points and 10 assists. Troy Gottselig of 

Findlater, playing in his final university game, received the Jack 

Donohue Trophy as championship MVP [most valuable player]. 

He scored 22 points and grabbed eight rebounds. Michael 

Linklater from Saskatoon scored 20 points and joined Gottselig 

and Glover in receiving the distinction of tournament all-star. 

Coach Jockhims said that the win yesterday was the pinnacle of 

his coaching career and one of the pinnacles in our athletes’ 

lives. His team maintained a level of intensity, dedication, and 

athleticism that was truly amazing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

coaches and athletes of the University of Saskatchewan’s men’s 

Huskies basketball team for winning their first CIS [Canadian 

Interuniversity Sport] basketball title. Go Huskies. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Content of Blog 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP convention is coming up this weekend, and an individual 

by the name of Kent Peterson is running for vice-president of 

the NDP. Kent Peterson is also a blogger with a blog called 

Humble Opinion. Mr. Peterson is now inviting others to be 

guest bloggers on his site. This blog says, and I quote, “Almost 

anybody can be a guest blogger . . . There are only a few 

guidelines . . . it cannot be slanderous unless you are talking 

about Brad Wall or Ralph Goodale.” 

 

Let me repeat that, Mr. Speaker: “. . . unless you are talking 

about Brad Wall or Ralph Goodale.” Mr. Speaker, we now have 

an NDP blogger openly inviting slanderous comments about the 

Premier and Ralph Goodale. More old-style, negative politics 

from the old-style, negative NDP. Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the 

Leader of the NDP supports one of his party candidates for 

vice-president openly inviting people to slander their political 

opponents. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

First Nations University of Canada 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I understand the Minister of 

Advanced Education was in Saskatoon today speaking and 

discussing Aboriginal education in Saskatchewan, which is 

positive, but to the extent that it doesn’t take away from the fact 

that there’s a huge problem at First Nations University here in 

the city of Regina that’s suffering and at the will of this 

government and the lack of response to the needs of First 

Nations University. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: talk is cheap and we feel that 

the government really needs to put its money where its mouth 

is. The fact of the matter is, the funding that has been 

withdrawn is causing a huge problem for First Nations 

University. I want to ask the Premier this question: when will 

he restore the money that he withdrew from First Nations 

University, and when will this government insist that the federal 

government move to have that federal government restore the 

funding as well? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say to 

the member opposite who’s just asked the question, there has 

been a litany of problems at First Nations University for years, 

problems that were committed, frankly, at the expense of the 

students, at the expense of First Nations education in this 

province. When those members sat in government they ignored 

those problems, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we were elected to government, as the problems became 

more apparent we signalled to First Nations University — along 

with about 2 million additional dollars — that we were prepared 

to work with them, but really, Mr. Speaker, that the patience of 

the students and the taxpayers was getting just a little bit short 

with respect to this institution. Mr. Speaker, since that time, 

with no apparent improvement in terms of the concerns that the 

Government of Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan 

have with the institution’s . . . And the professors and their 

association. With no apparent improvement in the situation, 

money’s withdrawn. It will be restored in the context of a 

partnership with the University of Regina, Mr. Speaker. 



4350 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

The Speaker: — The Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have here a letter from the 

Minister of Advanced Education. And I quote from that letter 

and it says, “At this time, it is important that the politicians step 

back and [that] the academic leadership in our province step 

forward to map out future directions for . . . [First Nations 

University] students and their programs.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that work has been done. It’s been completed. It’s 

now time that the Premier step up and refund the monies that 

were taken away. The work has been done by the academics, by 

the students, by the faculty. I ask the Premier again, will he 

announce today the reimplementation of the funding for First 

Nations University here in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the money for 

First Nations education in this province is still there. Monies 

from this government has flowed at increased levels, in fact, to 

institutions like the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 

Technology, Mr. Speaker. This government’s commitment to 

Aboriginal education is non-negotiable and is there, Mr. 

Speaker, and available as a part of a new partnership with the 

University of Regina. 

 

Members opposite are advocating simply that the old status quo 

continue on in the province of Saskatchewan. That is not going 

to happen, Mr. Speaker, because the status quo, with systemic 

abuses, Mr. Speaker, the status quo includes firing of senior 

financial officer, Murray Westerlund, days after he submitted a 

report accusing senior staff of thousands of dollars in improper 

leave payments and trips to Hawaii, Montreal, and Las Vegas, 

Mr. Speaker. The status quo involves scholarship money, Mr. 

Speaker, not going for scholarship but used to pay for 

operational shortfalls at the university. That is not acceptable, 

Mr. Speaker. We will make our investments in First Nations 

education. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier knows that 

when he withdrew the $5 million of provincial money from the 

First Nations University, it opened the door for the federal 

government to withdraw their $7.2 million. 

 

This government asked for a review, and the work to be done 

by academics and by the University of Regina. That work is 

completed. I ask the Premier again: has he met with the Prime 

Minister to insist that the 7.2 million of federal dollars be 

restored to First Nations University, and is the $5 million from 

the Government of Saskatchewan going to be restored in this 

budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, not only is it the position of 

the NDP that the money be restored in terms of the old status 

quo at FNUC [First Nations University of Canada], but the 

critic last week, Mr. Speaker, said the taxpayers of the province 

should also cover the entire federal commitment to the old 

status quo, Mr. Speaker, the old FNUC approach. That’s what 

the critic said, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask members to 

allow the Premier to respond. I think there’s other members 

interested in hearing the answer. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this is the position of the 

NDP. It is not the position of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

The position of the Government of Saskatchewan is that we will 

make very key and significant investments in First Nations 

education. 

 

The money that was previously there for FNUC under the old 

status quo will be there in a new partnership for the University 

of Regina. We will continue to advance educational interests 

through technical schools like the Saskatchewan Indian Institute 

of Technology. And we will support, Mr. Speaker, the 80 per 

cent of Aboriginal students who actually take their 

post-secondary education outside of FNUC or the 

Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technology, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of Her Majesty’s 

Loyal Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier talks about the 

mismanagement at First Nations University and I think there is 

great recognition for the fact that that work that was needed to 

clean up and fix that situation, as it relates to finances, has 

happened. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know that when the Premier took over the 

province, the finances were in pretty good shape. There was 

$2.3 billion in the bank. We’re now $1 billion in the hole. And 

when he talks about First Nations University and points his 

fingers, what he has to remember is three are pointing back at 

himself. One of the worst examples of fiscal mismanagement 

ever in the history of the province under that administration. By 

his logic, is he arguing that they deserve to be turfed out at the 

first opportunity? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, if the Opposition 

Leader wants to debate the fiscal state of the province of 

Saskatchewan, we welcome that debate. When we took office, 

there was $6.8 billion of debt in the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, about 1.2 billion in the savings account. Today 

there’s $4.2 billion in debt, $700 million cash in a savings 

account, Mr. Speaker. That is a net improvement, a net 

improvement of over $2 billion in the state of the province’s 

finances, Mr. Speaker. We’ve paid about 40 per cent of the debt 

off, which is about three times greater than that member’s 

approval ratings, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4351 

Rental Housing Issues 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, Saskatchewan families are struggling to cope with the 

rising costs of rents. And one of those renters is Stan, who 

recently received notice of an increase of up to 29 per cent on 

his Prince Albert apartment. Stan is here today to ask this 

government to institute a cap on rent increases. To the minister: 

will the government institute a cap on rent increases? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The rent 

control caps were removed by the NDP prior to our forming 

government. But we recognized when we formed government 

that housing was indeed an issue in a growing province, and we 

do have a growing province and we intend to keep our province 

growing. So that is one of the challenges. 

 

We struck a task force immediately upon the election to review 

the whole housing issues, and the task force came back with a 

number of recommendations, many of which we have 

implemented. What they did say and what the industry is 

saying, and we are listening to, is that rent caps prohibit 

investors from building multi-unit housing in the province. And 

we already have a stress on the lack of rental housing. We want 

to be very mindful that we don’t make that even worse by 

implementing something that will stop investors from building 

rental units. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well 

another person who came here today looking for answers is 

Nicholas. On January 1st of this year, Nicholas and the tenants 

of Borden Place Apartments in Saskatoon received notice of a 

$200-a-month increase. Many of the tenants in Borden Place 

are single-income families who now have to pay more than 

$900 a month for an apartment. Nicholas is here today to ask 

the government to take action on rising rents. To the minister: 

will the government do anything to help these tenants? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — What we’ve done as a government, 

and we did that very quickly, was to address the affordability 

issues. We increased and indexed shelter allowances. We 

increased and indexed rental supplements. Rental supplements 

are available to low-income families who are earning an 

income. So that is available. 

 

We also increased the Saskatchewan employment supplement. 

Many of the recipients of the Saskatchewan employment 

supplement are single parent families. That is to help them with 

rent and the cost of their children. We increased the rates paid 

to emergency shelters, and we increased the number of 

emergency shelters available in Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince 

Albert. We changed the resident tenancy Act to ensure that 

rents could not be raised every few months. So we have done 

that. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say again, we’re very mindful that we 

don’t create a further shortage in rental units if we put rent 

controls in place. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — And I just have a remark, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

interesting they’re raising the fee to visit the residential tenancy 

people to $50. That’s shameful. 

 

But many residents in Regina here are also facing massive rent 

increases. And one of those renters, Brent, lives in downtown 

Regina. On June 1, his rent will increase by more than 37 per 

cent. And a woman here today, living at the Canadiana 

Apartments, faces a rent increase later this year that will leave 

her with just $1.50 each month in income once she has paid her 

rent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, CMHC [Canada Mortgage and Housing 

Corporation] says the vacancy rate here in Regina is just over a 

half of one per cent. To the minister: how much longer do 

renters have to tolerate these rising rents before this government 

will do anything? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Part of the difficulty, for those who 

understand the housing continuum, is that we do have a 

growing province and that challenges the number of housing 

units that are available. We must be mindful that we do not 

make rental housing even less available. 

 

Mr. Speaker, part of the problem is, in the last two years of an 

NDP government, they completed less than 200 rental units to 

come on stream. In our first two years of government, Mr. 

Speaker, we completed over 500 units to help address the fact 

that we need more rental units on the market . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. There’s a handful of 

members who make it very difficult for the guests and other 

members to hear the response from the minister. I recognize the 

Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In addition 

to completing over 500 units . . . And I have a member opposite 

that said, where did the money go? Well these houses do cost 

money, or these rental units do cost money, so the money went 

into housing, Mr. Speaker. We have 900 units that are in 

construction as we speak and an additional 200 that are in the 

planning stage. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this minister likes to exaggerate 

all she’s done for the renters, but the facts speak for themselves. 

And in fact her government has done nothing for the first year 

but open, cut the ribbons on the projects we started. And I’d 

like to know what happened to the Lighthouse project. And 



4352 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

today, today she has the audacity to stand there and to claim 

that she’s building 900 housing units, when her own answers 

through her own written questions say it’s actually two-thirds of 

that; it’s closer to 600. 

 

Mr. Speaker, renters come here today. Renters came here today 

looking for one answer, for one answer. Will this government 

introduce some form of rent control? Yes or no. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to know, if 

the member opposite supports rent controls, why was it his 

government that removed the rent controls? Not our 

government. It was the NDP government that removed rent 

controls. 

 

We did change the resident tenancy Act. And I would like the 

member opposite to state here publicly, does the NDP support 

rent controls? What we do not support, Mr. Speaker, is 

high-income residents living in social housing units and 

displacing those that need the social housing unit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Selection of a Chief Electoral Officer 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my question is to 

the Minister of Justice: why did the Sask Party government 

change its mind about appointing the successful applicant to the 

office of Chief Electoral Officer? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

well aware that the office, the Chief Electoral office has had 

some history in the past and I think it’s imperative that we find 

a candidate that will have the confidence of all members of the 

House. 

 

The member opposite will also be aware that this is a process 

that goes by where the Board of Internal Economy goes through 

an advertising process and makes a recommendation back to 

members of the House. I can advise the members opposite, and 

they’re well aware of it, there are 58 members in this House, 

and will require the support of a majority of those people. I 

think though the Board of Internal Economy has got a bigger 

role, Mr. Speaker, and the role should be to find a candidate that 

will have the full confidence of as many members of the House 

as is possible. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is the intention of what we intend to do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the minister accurately 

describes the role of the Board of Internal Economy. I believe 

the minister sits on the board, and I believe the minister joined 

in the recommendation to appoint the successful applicant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current Acting Chief Electoral Officer won a 

fair and impartial competition, but the Sask Party government 

changed their mind about appointing him to the top job. To the 

Minister of Justice: why? 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated before, the 

Board of Internal Economy makes a recommendation. They do 

not in fact, Mr. Speaker, make any kind of a decision. There’s 

recommendations come from there. 

 

And to be fair to all members of the House, they should apply 

some rigour to those decisions. They should carefully look at 

the options that are put forward. And if they’re not satisfied 

with those recommendations, they should go back to Internal 

Economy and say to the Board of Internal Economy, those are 

people that may or may not have the support of all of the 

members of the House. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is the role of the members of this House, 

is to make those decisions. It is not the role of the Board of 

Internal Economy to make that decision in and of themselves, 

Mr. Speaker. The Board of Internal Economy is merely an 

entity that will make a recommendation and nothing more. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — The question to the minister may not be why 

he changed his mind. But the question to the minister might be, 

did he actually change his mind? 

 

Mr. Speaker, independent officers of the Legislative Assembly 

ought to be just that — independent. To quote the Premier from 

today, “The electoral contest should be fair and appear to be 

fair.” But it appears that the Saskatchewan Party government is 

ragging the puck until it can appoint a compliant individual into 

the position of Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

To the Minister of Justice: is this because of specific direction 

from the Premier? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this is not as a result of 

any particular direction from anyone. This is a matter of 

attempting to find an individual that will have the confidence of 

the vast majority of members of this House. It would be very 

nice, Mr. Speaker, if the individual that comes forward had the 

vote of 58 members of this House and that individual would 

have the confidence of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes without saying that that individual will 

have to take this legislature through two elections, a 

redistribution, and a major rework of the Act. It is not surprising 

that members on both sides of the House will want to look very 

carefully at that individual. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is my advice to all members of the House, 

on both sides, that this is a decision that ought not be 

politicized; that all members should, Mr. Speaker, apply some 

careful due diligence and apply some rigour to the 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4353 

decision-making process. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the minister was part of a 

non-politicized process, Mr. Speaker. That non-politicized 

process, I understand, interviewed a number of perhaps 

qualified individuals from across the country and chose an 

applicant that actually had experience in conducting 

by-elections in the province of Saskatchewan and has been 

acting as our Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

The minister was there, and he knows now we have a 

politicized process because some members on that side of the 

House clearly do not support the choice that was made at this 

non-politicized meeting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a column in the January 15th StarPhoenix states, 

and I quote, “Another issue in play, sources suggest, is whether 

an MLA is under investigation for violating spending 

provisions in the Elections Act.” 

 

To the minister: is he aware of such an investigation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it would be inappropriate 

to say that the members of the House should rubber-stamp a 

recommendation that came from the Board of Internal 

Economy. Mr. Speaker, in fact the members of both sides of the 

House should apply some rigour and some care in the decision 

making that takes place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do not negotiate labour contracts, either 

through the media or on the floor of this House, nor do we 

negotiate personnel matters. This is a personnel matter between 

all members of the House and an individual who will become 

the Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to urge all members of the House to 

take one step back and take a careful look at the process and 

take a careful look at the applicants as they come forward. I 

want to ensure all members of the House that the Board of 

Internal Economy will continue their good work to try and 

ensure that an appropriate candidate is brought forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I know it’s loud in here, so I’ll 

repeat: “Another issue in play, sources suggest, is whether an 

MLA is under investigation for violating spending provisions in 

the Elections Act.” 

 

Again to the minister: is he aware of the investigation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the work will continue to 

be done by the Chief Electoral Officer. There is an acting 

individual in place. The individual that is in place right now, the 

acting person that is serving that position, will continue to serve 

in that role. And whatever investigations are under way will be 

under the purview of that individual and will not be discussed 

or debated on the floor of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. We will allow that office, like any other office, to do 

its work, whether it’s the prosecution, whether it’s the police or 

the Chief Electoral Officer. And we will not conduct a debate 

on that matter on the floor of the Assembly. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again I want to reiterate to the members of 

the Assembly on both sides that we support the work of the 

Board of Internal Economy in finding a good and suitable 

candidate for that role. That is an important position, Mr. 

Speaker, and we look forward to trying to find somebody that 

will satisfy the needs of both sides of this House. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the needs on this side of 

the House are to have an independent officer, so I’m not sure 

we can have an officer that serves both the needs of the minister 

and the needs of this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the January 15th column in The StarPhoenix goes 

on to say, and I quote again, “. . . it’s well within the realm of 

the possible that MLAs might hold it against any prospective 

candidate who is investigating them.” To the minister: did the 

Sask Party change their mind about appointing the successful 

applicant to the position of the Chief Electoral Officer because 

of an investigation of one of its own? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, whatever investigations 

may or may not be under way should form no part of the 

process of selecting a Chief Electoral Officer. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to assure you and I want to assure the members of the 

House that it would be highly inappropriate for there to be any 

retribution against this particular individual that is there now or 

any other applicant that is there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the process that must take place must be one that 

is fair, open, and impartial and free of any kind of bias from 

anywhere else. Mr. Speaker, this is an important position. This 

position is fundamental to the democratic process in this 

province. And I’d like to encourage all members to take a 

careful look at whom we select and how the process takes place 

to ensure that we find, Mr. Speaker, the very best candidate that 

we possibly can to fulfill this role, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister won’t 

confirm or deny that he was aware of an investigation. The 

minister was aware of an investigation, sits on the Board of 

Internal Economy. I think the appearance of fairness, the 

appearance of fairness, is in question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one more quote from the same column of January 

15th of this year. “Given that the position has a lot to do with 



4354 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

how democracy is carried out in this province, let’s hope that 

politics isn’t the cause of the delay.” That’s the delay as of two 

months ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: is it really appropriately to politically interfere 

in the work of independent officers of the legislature just 

because the government is unhappy with how well they’re 

doing their jobs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the 

members opposite and all members of this House there has not 

been any political interference with the Office of the Chief 

Electoral Officer nor will there be, Mr. Speaker. That is an 

independent officer that reports to this House. There has not 

been nor will there be any political interference and I take 

strong issue with the member opposite raising it. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Motions Under Rule 59 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I have a statement I 

would like to make. On Wednesday, March the 17th, 2010, the 

Leader of the Opposition stood in his place and under rule 59 

asked for the opportunity to seek leave for a motion of urgent 

debate. 

 

Rule 59 says, “A motion may, in case of urgent and pressing 

necessity previously explained by the mover, be made by 

unanimous consent of the Assembly.” I neglected to give the 

member the opportunity to express the reasons for the motion 

and for that I apologize. I will however also mention that 

members have the ability to rise and to ask the Speaker at any 

time if they need a clarification on the rules or to bring them to 

our attention. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 103 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 103 — The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 

very much. It’s my pleasure today to stand and have my turn to 

speak to Bill No. 103, An Act to amend certain Statutes with 

respect to matters concerning Professional Discipline. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I see this Bill is some 18 pages long and 56 

clauses in length so we’re clearly talking about a Bill that 

affects a fair number of people, individuals in their own right — 

both people who deal with one of the roughly 40 groups, 

professional disciplines involved directly in this Act. 

 

So there’s members of the public that interface directly with, for 

example, architects. Every time we use an architect or a firm 

uses an architect, you have an interaction between either a 

company or an individual and an architect, either as an 

individual or as a firm. And the Bill clearly, clearly has some 

deep implications, some long, long implications. It is important 

that the people of Saskatchewan understand what the rules are 

that surround these disciplines, these professional disciplines. 

 

But it’s equally important of course that the professionals 

themselves in each of these disciplines have a clear set of rules, 

clear set of guidelines that enable them to do their professional 

jobs in a very professional way, in a way that everyone can 

simply count on that it’s going to just happen almost 

seamlessly. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, the more seamlessly that 

professionals are able to carry out their duties and the more 

seamlessly the general public feels that they are carrying out 

their duties, then the better it is for everyone. And in fact, you 

could argue that we have done our collective jobs in this very 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, each one of the groups affected, I point out, will 

have a completely different set of issues. I happened to pick 

architects. I could’ve just as easily picked assessment appraisers 

or the dental disciplines or agrologists. I could’ve picked 

chiropractors. But you can see, for example, an architect and a 

chiropractor are pretty divergent professions. I don’t think that, 

as the ad goes, I don’t think I would want to go an architect if I 

needed a chiropractic treatment. But I don’t think I would 

necessarily go to a chiropractor either if I was designing a 

building or a house or a football stadium or anything like that. It 

seems to me that for that design work, I would want to seek the 

professional services of an architect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Act will mean that members of the public can 

pursue legal actions against — I’ll just for the moment stick 

with the group I did, just by way of example, not because I have 

any particular axe to grind with any of them — but I’m 

presuming that if an architect were to provide a flawed design, 

that is a design that didn’t meet any of the promises or didn’t 

meet the promises that the architect held to be real and true 

characteristics of the building, I think then you might have 

cause for a lawsuit. And I guess that’s why we have the courts 

so that you could go that way. 

 

What this professional discipline Act as Bill 103 does, as I 

understand it, one of the important things it does is it provides 

for up to two years after — in this case I’m picking on an 

architect — after an architect resigns from architecture . . . Or is 

it resigns from the firm? I’m not sure, but let’s say resigns from 

architecture. For up to two years, an aggrieved individual or 

company can still initiate a lawsuit against that architect or 

architectural firm even though the, in this case, offending 

architect may no longer be in the business. But it allows a 

two-year time for that. 

 

And I think that’s very, it’s very reasonable that there would be 

a period of time. Some people might think they’re reasonable, 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4355 

given the period of time, to say that 20 years is but a fraction of 

time when you look at . . . I wonder who the architects were that 

did the architecture work for the great pyramids in Egypt, you 

know, and clearly 20 years is but a tiny, tiny, minute fraction of 

the time that they have been standing. So the statute of 

limitations, whether it’s 2 years or 20 years or 20,000 years, 

maybe there’s some legitimacy in raising that question. 

 

Certainly it fits the design of a house, for example, that we 

normally expect is going to last somewhere typically short of 

100 years, although there are certainly exceptions. And if you 

go to Europe, there’s many, many exceptions. In fact, there it’s 

the exception for the houses not to last as long. Mr. Speaker, 

maybe for a house a two-year time limit is the appropriate time 

limit. 

 

Maybe for a football stadium, we should be looking more at 25 

years or 50 years because many stadiums . . . I know we talk 

that football stadiums don’t last 50 years, but the harsh reality is 

Mosaic Stadium, Taylor Field is, well it’s beyond 50 years old. 

It’s had work done on it over the years, but the original 

structure, the original infrastructure there is beyond 50 years 

old. From time to time they update some of the seating and 

they’ve added some seats and they’ve updated the turf. And 

many of us will remember when they had just natural grass 

there, and then they went to an artificial turf and we thought 

that was just the most amazing improvement ever. I’m not sure 

if they’re on the third or fourth set of artificial turf since that 

move was made. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, Bill 103 as it affects assessment appraisers. 

Assessment appraisers, I’m assuming we’re talking . . . Well 

and I shouldn’t necessarily assume we’re talking real estate 

property because you could I suspect have an assessment 

appraiser for other things beyond realty, real estate. But let’s 

stick with real estate for the moment. 

 

And if you have an assessment appraiser that gives a value, 

what is your recourse on that assessment appraiser if that value 

is demonstrably wrong? And I just don’t know the answer to 

that question today. I don’t know how far out is reasonable 

because I think all of us every day in every way stand up, we 

get up and we strike off in the morning to do basically the best 

job we know how, to do the best job we can. Whether that’s as 

an assessment appraiser or whether it’s as an architect or 

whether it’s a chiropractor or whether it’s being an MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], a public servant, we get 

up in the morning and we think, how can we do . . . how can we 

add value? How can we do a good job today and tomorrow? 

And how can we build for the future? 

 

And I don’t know that an assessment appraiser that is out 

perhaps 5 per cent in the assessment value, I don’t think that’s 

an unreasonable thing on the surface of it, unless it’s done 

wilfully. It’s sort of the best, using the tools that that profession 

has, I think it’s their best assessment on that, on that point of 

time. But, Mr. Speaker, with the value of property, you know, a 

10 per cent change in property tax can be pretty significant if 

you’re talking for tax implications. 

 

[14:45] 

 

But if you were for instance trying to buy or sell a house for 

example, that might be worth 400 or even half a million; 

400,000 or half a million dollars, you know, a 10 per cent 

variance on a half million dollar property is $50,000. And now 

we’re not talking chump change. Now we’re talking a value that 

is worth pursuing. It’s worth trying to figure out. Nobody wants 

to pay $50,000 more than a property is worth, but I can assure 

you that no seller wants to sell a property for $50,000 less than 

it’s worth either. So there must be some clear guidelines for 

assessment appraisers. 

 

And its professional organization, Mr. Speaker, should have a 

clear outline, a clear guideline that helps both assessment 

appraisers understand what it is is expected of them and what 

they’re held absolutely accountable for. And the same 

guidelines should make it quite clear to the general public that 

use the services of assessment appraisers — when I say general 

public, I of course mean individuals, but I also mean 

corporations, you know, companies that may use in this 

instance assessment appraisers — the guidelines should be 

crystal clear to the general public what recourse there is if 

there’s a dispute around the job that the assessment appraiser 

did. 

 

Again in a perfect world, there would never be a dispute. But 

wouldn’t life be dull and boring and uninteresting if we all 

simply agreed, and we could all simply agree on what fair value 

is and simply agree on how to resolve any minor disputes? You 

know, maybe it’s go out and share a glass of milk and be done 

with it, shake hands and pat each other on the back, and have a 

group hug and away you go. But that’s not the world we live in, 

is it? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is all the more reason that we get this Bill 103 

right. It’s all the more reason that we should be looking at every 

one of these roughly 40 occupations that are affected by this 

all-encompassing Bill. What did I say, 56? Yes, 56 clauses in 

this Bill. We should be making sure that we have scrutinized 

this Bill from start to finish, and we want to make sure that 

we’ve done it right. 

 

At first blush, absolutely, to have up to two years to start a court 

action or a law action seems like an improvement, but I’m not 

sure it is. I’m just not sure it is. So we have to do the 

consultation. We have to make sure that not only are assessment 

appraisers good with this, but that the Canadian Information 

Processing Society of Saskatchewan, which is the next group I 

wanted to talk about, is also comfortable, in favour of, and sees 

this Bill 103 as a step forward. 

 

Because we have privacy legislation now, both at the provincial 

level and the federal level — I should perhaps know this, but I 

don’t know whether we have it at the municipal level passed in 

its own right, but I know we certainly do at the two more senior 

levels of government — and increasingly, as we are in a 

litigious society, it begs the question of, if my privacy is 

crossed, if some of this legislation is crossed, who’s 

responsible? 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, every day and every way, 

information is gathered about virtually every one of us every 

day and every way. Every time we use a credit card, there’s 

information gathered, and they track what your purchase is and 

what your interest is. And all too often, you wind up having 



4356 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

made a purchase and within a week or two or a month or two, 

you start getting offers to subscribe to, if you bought a fishing 

rod, to a fish and game magazine or something like that. And it 

just seems to flow, one from the other. 

 

And there are, as I say, Mr. Speaker, some privacy issues that 

we would want to make sure are dealt appropriately with. I’m 

not today saying that it’s inappropriate to get an offer for a 

hunting magazine if I bought a fishing rod or something like 

that. But there is some sharing of lists that goes on and lists are 

bought and sold, lists that describe my interests. And I’m not so 

sure I feel real good about that. 

 

So I think we need to, I think we need to look very carefully 

and figure out what are the ramifications for the Canadian 

Information Processing Society of Saskatchewan. Because 

maybe what I’m concerned with isn’t what the concern is or 

should be. Maybe that is possible. 

 

But what we need to do is make sure before we pass Bill 103, 

the professional discipline Act, that we’ve had an opportunity to 

understand what this does for the Canadian Information 

Processing Society of Saskatchewan. I’m not sure that they’re 

in favour of, I’m not sure they’re opposed to, I’m not sure how 

aware they are of this professional discipline Act that is being 

proposed. So I’m just not sure how that society feels about it. 

I’m certainly not sure how many individuals or companies 

belong to the Canadian Information Processing Society of 

Saskatchewan. I suspect that that list is growing. 

 

But I wonder, Mr. Speaker, how does this affect any 

information that might have gotten outside of Saskatchewan’s 

boundaries? Because we deal . . . certainly if you’re dealing 

with the financial industry, with a credit card, chances are huge 

that the home office of the credit card company is not in 

Saskatchewan. Chances are huge you’ll be talking or dealing 

with somebody from away, as they say in the Maritimes, 

somebody from away. And we might be dealing with somebody 

in the Maritimes, but we might just as easily be dealing with 

somebody in Alabama or Mississippi or who knows where. 

 

So I wonder how this professional discipline Act binds on 

things like that. Once the information is passed out of 

Saskatchewan, is it then fair game for everybody, or do we have 

some legitimate say here? Does the Canadian Information 

Processing Society of Saskatchewan have some legitimate 

involvement, some legitimate say in what happens with that 

information as well? I just don’t know. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, the organizations that we’re talking 

about have an obligation. You know, they are keepers of 

professional ethics. They have an important role there. They 

mentor new people and see that normal standards are 

maintained in that professional discipline. They have a role to 

play in supporting one another and supporting the professional 

guidelines of that discipline. 

 

And inevitably when you have responsibility for licensing and 

allowing members into a discipline, along with that comes the 

discipline angle of it. What do you do when you have an errant 

member? And that’s in no small measure what this legislation is 

all about, is to try and help make that as clear as we possibly 

can for the members of, in this case the Canadian Information 

Processing Society of Saskatchewan, but for all members of 

that particular professional discipline and for all members of the 

public. 

 

We want it fairly straightforward. We shouldn’t ought to have 

to go straight to the Supreme Court of Canada to get an answer 

to any of these issues. And I doubt very much, Mr. Speaker, if 

we could go that far with most of these. But it should be . . . 

You want laws to be passed that are usable, that are beneficial 

to the organizations they are passed in favour of. 

 

And in this case, I hope that that means the professional 

disciplines people in the various disciplines are pleased with the 

legislation. And, Mr. Speaker, I hope that the public is equally 

pleased and see this Bill 103 as a step forward, as an 

improvement. Not necessarily the ultimate or penultimate 

legislation on the matter, but nevertheless a significant step 

forward for everybody involved. And if we can do that, I think 

at the end of the day we will all be able to say that we’ve done 

our jobs and done it fairly well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you head into the next bodies of occupations in 

the professional discipline, and it’s accountants and accounting 

consultants. Mr. Speaker, nowhere in our world in 2010, I think, 

is there areas that’s more, I guess, clearly defined than dollars 

and cents. Everybody has a notion about what’s proper and 

what’s not proper with dollars and cents. 

 

In fact we just not that long ago witnessed in question period 

some talk about dollars and cents, and talk back and forth, and 

who’s spending it, why, and how. And everybody has an 

opinion. This is probably good. 

 

Accountants and management consultants, certified 

management consultants, all have a huge obligation. 

Government, all of us in this Chamber, make decisions based 

on what accountants will tell us. Not solely, but clearly you 

have to have . . . be watching the finances. You have to be 

watching. You have to be forecasting what’s likely to happen. 

You have to have some sense of direction. 

 

You have to have a sense. Is the economy expanding? Is it just 

standing still, or is it contracting? And you have to have a 

personal sense or a corporate sense of what you do in each of 

those different circumstances. But we rely on, I hope, I know 

we should be relying on the accounting professions to give us 

the hard data and then rely on our good judgment to try and 

figure out what we do from there on. 

 

But what do we do when the data isn’t accurate or isn’t 

presented in a fair way? Well there are rules right now. There 

are rules that can see and in fact — I believe I’m fairly safe in 

saying this — every day there are lawsuits going on that 

accountants are involved with. Every day before the courts we 

see decisions being asked for and decisions being made 

respecting who was right and who was wrong or who was 

legally correct and who was legally incorrect in a given 

situation. 

 

So we need, Mr. Speaker, to be as clear as we can that while we 

welcome . . . I’ll just pick. I’ll pick certified management 

consultants off this list. We welcome the job that certified 

management consultants do. We think they provide outstanding 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4357 

service, but we know just as sure as there are little green apples 

on this world, there will be disputes over whether a certified 

management consultant provided the proper advice, the proper 

background, the proper material so that a decision could be 

made. We want to make sure that not only can’t a professional 

certified management consultant, not only can they not resign 

from the profession and thereby avoid any potential lawsuit or 

ramifications for having done a job in a less than stellar way, 

but we need to know that they’re not being maltreated either. 

We need to know that the rules are fair, and we need to have an 

understanding what the rules are today before we pass Bill 103. 

 

[15:00] 

 

We need to know, what is the situation with certified 

management consultants today? How are they treated? How are 

they treated in a legal sense? And does this provide cover where 

cover maybe isn’t warranted, or does this provide light and 

openness where that’s presumably warranted? But we don’t 

want to at any time drive, in this instance, certified management 

consultants away from Saskatchewan either. 

 

We want to make sure that we’re all working together, Mr. 

Speaker, to the best of our potential. We need to work to make 

Saskatchewan grow and prosper, and to help create jobs and 

viable businesses, and make it a great place for not only us but 

our children and our grandchildren and generations following 

that if we’ve, again if we’ve done our job well. 

 

So Bill 103, how does this legislation affect certified 

management consultants, chartered accountants, certified 

general accountants, certified management accountants? These 

are just four of the accounting areas, if you like, and I’m not 

sure that they’ll all understand or know — they probably 

understand it fairly well — what the ramifications are of Bill 

103. I hope they do. I hope they’ve had a chance to be consulted 

by the government. And I hope that they’re in favour of Bill 

103, or else I hope we defeat the Bill. That’s the choice. But 

I’m ever the optimist, Mr. Speaker, and I hope that this Bill was 

put forward for the proper reasons and that is that it would be 

better for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, trade is opening up all . . . certainly Saskatchewan 

trade is opening up, North American trade is opening up, world 

trade is opening up at a pace faster than ever before. How does 

the certified management consultants or the chartered 

accountants or any of these groups, how does their advice, how 

is it that we can hold it accountable in a proper way? And does 

this legislation have anything to say about if perhaps a company 

maybe hired a chartered accountant firm from British 

Columbia? I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, that we have anything 

much to say about the standards there. 

 

But I’d like to think that it’s fairly seamless, which leads to the 

next question, which is, where is similar legislation to what is 

being proposed in Bill 103? Where is there similar legislation? 

Is British Columbia or Alberta or Manitoba, Ontario, any of the 

Maritimes, any of the territories? Do any of them have a Bill 

similar to No. 103, An Act to amend certain Statutes with 

respect to matters concerning Professional Discipline? 

 

I don’t know. I’m really wondering if in fact there is a connect 

or a disconnect. And we’d sure like to know what jurisdictions 

have done it. Because we can learn from jurisdictions if there is 

one somewhere that’s done this legislation. It’s fairly easy. It’s 

kind of like riding a bike. You know, you can pick somebody or 

some group there and call them up and say, how’s it working? 

You know, has it been a good experience? Has it been a so-so 

experience, or would you run as fast as you can from it? And 

these are the sorts of things that we would like to see happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have some community planning professions. 

That’s one of the roughly 40 groups that are affected that are 

self-regulated groups in Saskatchewan. Community planning is 

really an interesting area, Mr. Speaker. I can remember years 

ago when Regina got its computerized lights, traffic light 

system, and they were so proud of it. And every time I went 

from the north end, my home, down the Lewvan, it seemed to 

me I hit more red lights. It was just almost like I had something 

in my vehicle that said, oh there comes this guy, turn red. 

 

It was really not very much fun but I couldn’t see much point in 

trying to sue the community planning professionals over it. But 

there are frustrations. I guess that’s the whole point of my 

comment on the traffic lights. There’s frustrations around 

school closures. There’s frustration around the potential 

opening of schools. There’s frustration around halfway houses. 

And oh absolutely have a halfway house, but not on my block. 

This is the common reaction. Don’t do it next door to me. 

 

Well all of these things, it seems to me that the community 

planning profession has some involvement in, Mr. Speaker. So 

what is the culpability of community planning professionals in 

this? Are there ramifications? Is there potential litigation that a 

member of the public could bring, you know, if in the case of, 

as I pointed out, there’s either a closure of some public building 

— I used schools as an example but it could be almost anything, 

any public building — or when there’s a proposal for something 

to come in. Maybe it’s something as innocuous as a 

confectionary, a corner confectionary. And I remember well on 

11th Avenue a big fight 20 years ago around it, and the 

confectionary store is there. It got built and it’s there and it 

continues to be there. But there was much public discussion 

around it. The people weighed in. Many were against it and 

some were for it. And at the end of the day, the drugstore was 

built. Or not drugstore, the confectionary store was built and it 

has continued operating all of these years later. 

 

But what’s the role of community planning professionals? And 

how do they . . . Just what is their role? And who would they 

answer to in instances like this? Are they involved in the setting 

of or proposal for how bylaws are set at the municipal level? So 

that, you know, you could have . . . I believe Regina’s got a 

bylaw that makes Regina a no-go zone for the nuclear industry 

and that was passed by the city under Mayor Archer’s term. I’m 

pretty sure it was then. I don’t think it was before that. But was 

that solely a civic matter or was there some community 

planning profession involvement in that? I don’t know the 

answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, dental disciplines are something that’s near and 

dear to our hearts. And the dental disciplines have gotten so 

much better in our lifetime. Just it’s phenomenal, the changes, 

and I can hardly wait to see where they’re at five years, ten 

years, fifteen years into the future with respect to dental work, 

and perhaps even the non-invasive dental work that will be 



4358 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

coming in the future. It’s just getting better in every way and 

virtually every day. 

 

But what ramifications are there? What can the dental 

disciplines, their professional discipline, what are the rules 

around how that’s handled, Mr. Speaker? Is it a cavity that’s 

filled and falls out badly or falls out? Is there then . . . I think 

that probably happens with some degree of regularity. Some 

known percentage of cavities, of fillings might cause grief over 

years, but what is the standard? Should a filling last 20 years or 

should it last 40 years or should it last a lifetime? I don’t know. 

 

With respect to cleaning, with respect to the manufacture and 

fitting of dentures, you know, these are all issues that affect a 

profound number of individuals. And what is the responsibility? 

I don’t know. What if you have an individual that has some 

allergy to the dental material? And I know of an instance where 

this has happened. What is the culpability of the dentist or 

whoever did the manufacture and fitting of the dentures? I don’t 

have an easy answer to that. 

 

But these are things that should, should . . . If this Bill 103 is as 

clear as it should be, this should help us know that it’s covered 

under the discipline of this particular profession under their own 

Act. It’s a self-discipline thing. Or we need to say, to the person 

in my example, you need to seek other restitution. Perhaps you 

need to see a lawyer; perhaps you need to see your politician, or 

perhaps you need some other recourse. But it should be clear 

that here’s where the responsibility lies, or here or here or, you 

know, wherever it is, as much as possible so that all of our 

legislation is user-friendly for the very people that we are trying 

to pass the legislation for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again I say we’re trying to pass it for the general public, 

but we’re clearly trying to pass it for each of these professional 

disciplines as well. Because I just refuse to believe that 

members of this Legislative Assembly on either side would be 

trying to create roadblocks to professional disciplines, to people 

who practice in any of the professional disciplines. I think we 

all value the work that these professionals do and want that 

work to continue to grow every day in every way, and we want 

to help them thrive and do even better work for us. 

 

When it comes to, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the discipline 

there’s some question about . . . Under this Act, when it comes 

— Bill 103 — when it comes to the question of discipline under 

Bill 103, there’s also an interesting question about whose 

dollars are spent to do the investigation and who is the 

investigator beholden to. 

 

So we need to get some of that ironed out so that there’s . . . 

justice not only is done but justice is seen to be done, and that 

whether it’s — to stick with my dental disciplines — someone 

in one of the dental disciplines has a fair hearing for themselves 

when they’re charged with having committed some offence, 

real or imagined, but equally the individual that feels aggrieved 

should have a sense that they’re going to get a fair hearing, that 

they’re going to be listened to and listened to as respectfully as 

possible and they’re going to try and find some resolution 

between this person in the public and the person, in the instance 

I’m using, in the dental discipline. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Bill 103, which is to amend certain statutes 

with respect to matters concerning professional disciplines, is a 

big Bill. It’s a big Bill. I’ve gotten all the way up to the 11th out 

of a list of 40 different occupations. I have spent more time on 

the 11 disciplines than I plan to spend on the remaining 29 

disciplines. I know that’s a relief to many, but I’ve wanted to 

use those 11 disciplines, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I spoke about each group — you know, the architects, the 

assessment appraisers, the Canadian Information Processing 

Society of Saskatchewan, the certified general accountants. I’ve 

spoke of the certified management accountants, certified 

management consultants, chartered accountants, chiropractors, 

community planners, and dental disciplines, and that’s my list. I 

briefly mentioned agrologist, but I didn’t use an example with 

agrologist. But that’s my list of 11. I used them to point out the 

divergence of challenges that each of their organizations will 

face and that each person working in this professional 

discipline, the challenges that each individual will face that are 

unique to their own area of huge expertise — not to downplay 

their area of expertise because it’s an area of huge, 

extraordinary expertise. 

 

[15:15] 

 

You cannot become an architect by hanging a shingle up and 

saying, I’m an architect. You cannot become an assessment 

appraiser by saying, well I know property; I’m an assessment 

appraiser. You can’t become a Canadian Information 

Processing Society of Saskatchewan member just by saying, I’d 

like to be a member. Here’s my, whatever the fee is, you know, 

my registration fee. It isn’t that easy. You have to go through, in 

most cases, years of studies. You have to go through something 

that’s similar to an apprenticeship program. You go through a 

mentoring and supportive phase where you’re a newcomer into 

the profession that you’re in and you will get . . . You have the 

right to expect a reasonable amount of support from your 

colleagues. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we come along in this Bill 103 and we just 

have to keep asking ourselves, how is it that this is going to 

work? How is it that we can stop the frustration that both the 

wronged individual and the professional body feels when 

somebody feels that they’ve been wronged? How do you 

resolve that? 

 

And I know that in some of the instances it’s happened where 

professionals practising in an area, rather than risk being fined 

and losing a lot of money out of their personal pocket, have 

simply resigned from the profession. Typically I think, I think 

the fear is that typically then they would resurface in another 

jurisdiction. Resign from Saskatchewan and perhaps go to 

Alberta or Manitoba or Ontario or who knows where, but some 

other jurisdiction. Because, after all, they will have graduated in 

their profession. They’ve simply resigned in Saskatchewan and 

then moved away. 

 

Some people would call it skipped town. I’m sure that every 

single individual that goes through the process I just described 

would not describe it as skipping town, Mr. Speaker. They 

would describe it as, look, I was wrongly accused and it would 

just break me and I would have to spend so much of my time 

defending myself that I just did the only thing that is viable. I 

resigned from that particular profession and I moved to another 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4359 

province. Not because I’m a bad — take your pick of whatever 

the professional discipline is — not because I’m bad at it but 

because I’ve been unfairly charged. That would be their version 

of why they’ve moved. 

 

So we really need to make sure that this Bill works in 

conjunction with other provinces. So, and I’ve said that a 

professional might move to Manitoba or to Alberta — and I’m 

just for the interest of this discussion, that’s where I’m going to 

stick with — not because I particularly like or dislike either 

Manitoba or Alberta, but when I say those provinces, just take 

any jurisdiction certainly in Canada and you can put it in in 

their place. 

 

We need to work with other jurisdictions — Manitoba, Alberta 

and other jurisdictions — to make sure that this Bill 103 is 

binding, to make sure that we cannot have a member of . . . I’m 

going to go right back where I started, sort of — the architects. 

That an architect can’t resign being an architect in Regina and 

go to Winnipeg and hang up their architectural shingle. Avoid 

litigation here, but they shouldn’t be able to simply resign here 

and then sign on in Manitoba either. There should be a 

consistency for architects and there should be a consistency for 

the people who use the architects’ services. 

 

We ultimately want to have fair guidelines so that when there is 

a dispute, the dispute resolution mechanism — be it the courts 

or be it some other dispute resolution mechanism — that it’s 

effective and it’s fairly straightforward to access and that it’s 

not onerously costly. Because for many people, you know, the 

bigger the charge to pursue a wrong, the less likely they are to 

pursue that. 

 

Certainly if I think that the tax . . . an assessment appraiser has 

done a bad job of appraising our home and it wound up costing 

me $500 in extra taxes or I lost $25,000 in sale of my property, 

I might pursue a 25 or $50 effort to try and exact some 

rectification, some fix. I might do a simple application if it 

didn’t involve a whole lot of court time or a whole lot of legal 

fees or anything like that. If I could just sit down in an approved 

setting with the assessment appraiser involved and myself and a 

minimum of outside interference and we could resolve the 

situation according to a fairly straightforward set of guidelines, 

I might do that. 

 

But if I had to engage in a court case that was likely to cost me 

$5,000, I certainly wouldn’t do it for the $500 tax relief. And 

it’s doubtful that I would do it over the $25,000 loss in the sale 

of my home in the example that I just used. Because you know, 

you run the risk any time you go into a lawsuit of course of 

being seen to be wrong or being on the short end of the stick 

when it comes time to who gets what. 

 

And you run the certain risk of countersuit and who’s got the 

better lawyer and what the law says. And most of us just aren’t 

lawyers. Most of the population of Saskatchewan are not 

lawyers and we’re not litigious. We want to get along with our 

neighbours, and we want to get along with our architects. We 

want to get along with our assessment appraisers. We just want 

a fair shake in life. We just want things to go as smoothly as 

they possibly can. So, Mr. Speaker, we need to be pretty clear 

about that. 

 

Jumping down the list, I see funeral and cremation services, and 

this is a professional discipline and a very important discipline. 

Because when we’re dealing with people in the funeral and 

cremation business, we may be signing up . . . I may be signing 

up for my own memorial service and so on today expecting that 

I’m going to be around at least tomorrow and many years into 

the future hopefully. That’s what we may think. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, inevitably, even if let’s assume 

that I did that today, well at some point in the future I know that 

my family, whether it’s my wife or my kids or someone who’s 

going to be dealing with that very funeral operation . . . And 

it’ll be because I’m no longer breathing. It’ll be because they 

need their services that I’ve arranged. So inevitably the death 

rate’s 100 per cent. Inevitably we have to deal with the funeral 

and cremation services industry. We may not choose cremation, 

but it’s almost inevitable that we need to at least consider doing 

a funeral service. 

 

And it’s such a touchy time in the history of families, if you 

like. Because I know from experiences that are both personal 

and that I’ve heard about, Mr. Speaker, at the time of passing of 

a loved one, we always want to do absolutely the very best we 

can for them, and money is pretty much the last thing we want 

to think about. But you know, we have to be careful as 

legislators that we don’t set the stage for bad practice — and 

bad practice is a euphemism for a lot worse than that. 

 

I have to tell you that, Mr. Speaker, the funeral directors and 

people that I’ve had personal experience with in the funeral 

industry have been just first-rate. They have just been great 

individuals and doing a great job. I’m not here trying to paint a 

picture of individuals or specific funeral companies that may be 

doing a less than stellar job or providing a less than great 

service. But at the same time, we’ve all heard the stories about 

cremation and the, you know, the $2,000 coffin that’s being 

offered when there’s a much lower cost option, and it’s just 

going to be burned at the end of the day anyway. 

 

So what are the guidelines that are required under the funeral 

and cremation services, under their professional discipline? And 

how is it consistent with the guidelines under the chiropractors 

or the architects or the agrologists? And how is it inconsistent? 

How should the guidelines differ? But in every instance, how is 

it that we have a clear entry-level dispute resolution 

mechanism, a clear opportunity to resolve. 

 

And I’ll come back; I’ll stick with the funeral and cremation 

services because, Mr. Speaker, I can’t think of anything much 

worse than having to go through such a time with a loved one 

and then getting into some drawn-out fight with someone 

involved in the very funeral that, you know, in putting it on, in 

making it happen. I just can’t imagine the feelings that I would 

have of just frustration. 

 

And I would always wonder, well am I dishonouring or am I 

honouring my loved one that’s no longer with me? And I just, I 

don’t see that as being productive. I don’t see that as helping. 

So you want to have a clear and a fair dispute resolution 

mechanism. You want to have the rules, as far as you can, 

outlined so that it’s crystal clear. 

 

If I had . . . In this instance, I’m now a consumer. If I had a 



4360 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

dispute, I could ask my funeral home director, assuming I use 

one. And they would say, here’s the resolution. Here’s what you 

can do, and if that does not work, then clearly you need to seek 

some legal advice. But here’s what we’ll try and do. 

 

Funeral and cremation services are different than interior 

designers. Interior designers do important work, Mr. Speaker, 

as do funeral and cremation services workers of course, and 

they’re professionals in their own right. Actually have a interior 

designer in our family. And I’m very proud of the job that 

Norma does and the work she does, and I know that her many 

customers are very pleased as well. But when there’s a dispute, 

you want to make sure you have clear rules. Just everything 

about this whole industry is set up to or should be set up to 

work well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’re largely in favour of this legislation. 

Largely in favour of it. But we have some concerns, and we 

want to make sure that not only the list of professional 

disciplines have their opportunity to have their say, but we also 

want to make sure that the dispute resolution is fairly 

straightforward. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Some of the groups listed, Mr. Speaker, under this Bill 103, 

some of the professional disciplines are groups that we would 

expect to be there, and some of them deal with life threatening, 

life and death. Some of the groups just deal with day-to-day 

things, and other groups only deal with . . . you only meet 

occasionally. 

 

LEADS, the League of Educational Administrators, Directors 

and Superintendents, are a very powerful and important group 

in Saskatchewan. They’re hugely responsible for the education 

standards that are delivered in our schools right across the 

province. And I know that everyone has an opinion on the job 

that they’re doing. Fortunately many of us have an opinion that 

day in, day out, they do a pretty darn good job. 

 

Licensed practical nurses absolutely are an integral part of our 

health care system. But we need to know now what sort of 

support, mentoring and support is provided by the LPN 

[licensed practical nurse] organization, and what are their 

discipline rules? We don’t know that, whether that’s going to be 

changed under Bill 103 or whether it’s going to be left much as 

it is today. 

 

Medical laboratory technologists, medical radiation 

technologists, midwives, occupational therapists, and then we 

. . . My goodness, we hit quite a list of health professionals 

here, Mr. Speaker. It goes on from occupational therapists to 

ophthalmic dispensers, optometrists, paramedics, physical 

therapists, podiatrists, psychologists. I think this one probably 

shouldn’t fit into the health area because it’s registered music 

teachers. But I think that’s a blip of the alphabet rather than 

anything else because right after registered music teachers is 

registered nurses, registered psychiatric nurses, respiratory 

therapists, and then we head into a different subgroup of 

professionals. 

 

But the professional disciplines, there’s almost an entire page of 

my list of 40 that deal with health, and every one of those 

groups is just very important. Every one of those groups, 

someone is dealing with every day. Someone is. I say someone 

because I don’t always see my optometrist daily. In fact I tend 

to see my optometrist every two years whether I need to or not, 

and he does a very good job I think. Or I see. I’m not sure how I 

should say it. But I do see, and no small amount of credit is due 

there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we could move on to rural municipal 

administrators, and that’s a group that have just a huge job. I 

mean not only are they in charge of bylaws and making sure 

that their area that they’re administering is well run, but they 

typically have responsibility to supervise some considerable 

number of municipal employees. 

 

So the municipal administrators have a huge job. And of course 

they’re responsible for money and tax collection, and all those 

sorts of good things, and keeping the councillors informed and 

up to date on what’s going on, which makes it pretty important 

that we know not only what’s expected of these municipal 

administrators, but when they err, where do you go? How do 

you fix it? How do you resolve it? Is it simply a case of the 

municipal council getting together and deciding they’re going 

to seek a new administrator, or is there some other resolution? 

And hopefully we would try the other dispute resolution 

mechanisms many times before we go to the ultimate sanction 

in this case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nearing the end of the list, we’ve got science 

technologists and technicians. We have social workers. We 

have speech-language pathologists and audiologists, and we 

have urban municipal administrators. Much of what I said about 

the rural municipal administration, of course, just ditto for the 

urban. They deal with many similar type issues and some that 

are different, but the process is largely similar for the most part. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is the situation with respect to social workers 

and their legislation today versus what their legislation under 

Bill 103, An Act to amend certain Statutes with respect to 

matters concerning Professional Discipline? I’m not sure what 

the changes might be. 

 

I know that we want our social workers to be professional. We 

want them to do the absolute very best job they possibly can. 

We want them to be working to make our society a better place, 

a fairer place, and a place where, as much as we possibly can, 

there’s equal opportunities for everyone. We want to make it a 

situation where we work to eliminate poverty. Dare I say it? 

Eliminate — not just reduce. Certainly reducing poverty is part 

of it, but we should be working to eliminate poverty. We should 

be working to help social workers. We should be working to 

help people help themselves. 

 

What’s the situation if a social worker gives short change to an 

individual or a family? I don’t know, and I don’t know that 

there’s anything new under the sun in Bill 103 with respect to 

social workers either. 

 

But I do hope that that particular professional discipline of 

social workers in Saskatchewan redouble their efforts at helping 

mentor one another, to keep the profession as first-rate as they 

possibly can. I hope they redouble their efforts to support one 

another. 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4361 

And I hope that under Bill 103 they’ve put some thought into 

the discipline portion of the Act as well because it’s pretty 

important that, when you’re dealing in areas of social work, that 

you not have two polarizations, if I can describe it. People 

should be as much as possible treated as equals, as much as 

possible treated with respect, whether they’re the social worker 

or the recipient of whatever that service that the social worker is 

providing. So we want to make sure that we don’t get any of 

these professional disciplines into a situation of lopsidedness, of 

ability to be heavy-handed or anything like that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are clearly many, many questions in this list 

of nearly 40 professions under the professional discipline Act 

that are followed by Bill No. 103, An Act to amend certain 

Statutes with respect to matters concerning Professional 

Discipline. There’s much to be done here. There’s an important 

role that the professional organizations play. There’s much 

consultation that needs to happen on our part; there’s 

consultation that the government should always be undertaking, 

but we need to do this consultation. 

 

We’d like to find out where else this legislation or a similar 

legislation exists. And I’d like to find out if there’s some 

opportunity to make sure that if we pass this legislation that we 

couldn’t have — I’m just going to pick at random, and I happen 

to land on certified management consultants on my list — that 

we can’t have certified management consultants in some legal 

trouble here resign as a certified management consultant here 

and move to the greener pastures of Manitoba, hang their 

shingle up and continue being a certified management 

consultant there. 

 

If there’s problems, we want them dealt with here. We want the 

dispute resolution mechanism to be as clear as possible, as fair 

as possible for everyone involved. But we want things to be 

dealt with rather than for individuals to simply . . . Whether 

they’re in a profession or whether they’re a member of the 

public, we don’t think it’s fair that you should simply be able to 

pack up your bag and leave. So we want that to be looked at 

very much. 

 

We also would like to consider whose money is spent on an 

inquiry and how that might affect any potential discipline under 

this Act, whether it’s discipline from the organization and if it 

was unfair and it was used as an absolute. I’m not saying it is 

but, Mr. Speaker, if it was used as an absolute protection for 

any of the 40 on this list, to absolve individuals or corporations 

of the onus of responsibility, we don’t want that. I don’t believe 

that’s what this Bill is about, but we do need the opportunity to 

consider that, to ask some questions and to look around. 

 

We’d also like to have an opportunity to figure out why this list 

was chosen, how it was this list alone. Just right off the top and 

without the benefit of research, but it seems to me that I’m 

missing some public service like the professional firefighters or 

police. I don’t see ambulance. You know, why is it that some 

groups are absent? And it may well be with very good reason, 

but we would like to do some consulting and see if we can’t 

figure out how this 40 was chosen, and why not a list of 50 or 

30 or some other number. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, on Bill 103, An Act to amend certain 

Statutes with respect to matters concerning Professional 

Discipline, I move to adjourn the debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member from 

Regina Coronation Park has moved adjournment of debate of 

Bill No. 103, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional 

Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 115 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 115 — The 

Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 

2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la 

Reine be now read a second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m happy 

to wade into the debate and discussion on Bill No. 115, the 

Queen’s Bench amendment Act. 

 

This is a bit of a catch-all Act that houses all kinds of different 

things. There’s all kinds of things going on here in The Queen’s 

Bench Act. And at first blush, the Bill actually seems to contain 

just a number of procedural or housekeeping items. But I think 

that they’re likely and probably necessary to make, but I think 

that there are some questions that arise out of it. 

 

[15:45] 

 

One of the things that’s going to be taking place with this Act, it 

will abolish the common-law action for breach of promise to 

marry. And according to the Minister of Justice, this action is 

likely unconstitutional and does not reflect current societal 

views and expectations of persons intending to marry. So that 

may or may not be the case. I think that there needs to be some 

clarification around whether or not the action, this is in fact 

unconstitutional and perhaps why this no longer reflects current 

views. 

 

I think one could think this part of the Act was likely set out in 

common law when it wasn’t just couples negotiating and 

deciding to get married, but rather it was families. It was 

contractual agreements between families where there may have 

been property or assets involved. So if one of the families or 

one of the individuals decides the marriage needs to come to an 

. . . or the marriage isn’t going to take place, there could have 

been some loss. If you put 10 cows forward and, well, 

relationships go south and there can be some damages, some 

actual financial damages when marriages don’t take place. 

 

But in the context of today, I think we probably all know 

someone, I in my case actually know a couple of people who 

prepared for weddings. They had a great outlay of money, 

thousands and thousands of dollars, whether it was in rings or 

the cost of booking hotels, outlays in deposits for the 

celebration. So it’s not so much families anymore making these 



4362 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

agreements, but couples. And there can still be great damage, 

financial damage done when someone decides at the last minute 

or five months out even, that the marriage isn’t going to go 

forward. 

 

So this Act, abolishing this part of the Act doesn’t really leave 

any recourse for the person who might have been left standing 

at the altar. So again I think, as the minister pointed out, that 

this may be, this part of the Act may be unconstitutional, but I’d 

like some clarification on whether or not that is actually the 

case. 

 

And again, he said that it doesn’t reflect current views. But as 

I’ve said, I do know people who’ve been stood up at the altar 

and have not known what to do and don’t know what to do with 

the ring that they can’t return to the jeweller or how they’re 

going to make up for the loss of the thousands of dollars that 

were on the dress. It is definitely a difficulty. 

 

And actually one of my colleagues, interestingly enough earlier 

on in this debate, pointed out that, one of my lawyer colleagues 

actually pointed out that this part may not actually relate to the 

breach of promise to marry, but might relate to the breach of 

promise, which I think is quite interesting in the current context 

of Saskatchewan politics around breach of promise. 

 

And my colleague said we need to be mindful or this 

government should be mindful about putting the words, what 

does he say here: “And this government may actually not want 

to have those words anywhere in the common law or the statute 

law of Saskatchewan.” Just in light of the current broken 

promises that have taken place around whether or not you’re a 

municipality or a school board, perhaps. 

 

The other thing that I want to point out here, I believe it’s 

section 7. And section 7, according to the explanatory notes — 

pardon me, section 8 — is going to, is a section with many, 

many regulations. And right now, we’re going to be asked to 

amend it to change, to provide for regulations respecting 

enforcement of awards made pursuant to domestic trade 

agreements. So that raises a few flags here. 

 

So this proposed amendment, the explanatory notes indicate 

that all provinces have agreed to adopt this provision and that 

Manitoba, Quebec, Alberta, and the federal governments have 

all done so. So there is some concern whether or not this 

amendment relates in any way to TILMA [Trade, Investment 

and Labour Mobility Agreement] or the very ambiguous 

Western Economic Partnership Agreement on which this 

government has been quite silent. 

 

But I want to look at one of the other regulations that falls under 

this same section. We always need to be very mindful of what 

legislation we’re creating and how that has an impact on all 

kinds of people. That’s again, section 7, which is going to be 

. . . We’re asked to amend to add to that about trade agreements, 

also includes a provision around mediation. So the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council may make regulations respecting 

procedures for mediation. 

 

And I know from first-hand experience, again, when these can 

have huge ramifications on our lives on our daily day-to-day 

living and what goes on. Having been impacted by actually one 

of these regulations — mediation — when my marriage ended 

about 10 years ago, I had the opportunity . . . I was married 

quite young and perhaps quite quickly to someone who I 

discovered we had very different philosophical outlooks in life 

on the way we saw the world. And when our marriage came to 

an end, we had the opportunity, you can go the usual route and 

combative lawyer route, or you have the opportunity to use 

meditation. 

 

And despite the fact a marriage ending isn’t very much fun, and 

you usually don’t like each other very much at the end of a 

marriage, but we felt we had a very young daughter and thought 

we needed to take the opportunity to go through the mediation 

process. And it’s not easy to sit down next to the person whom 

you can’t agree to continue to live with and have those 

discussions about hashing out all those very difficult details 

around what is your child care arrangements or your custody 

arrangements going to look like, what are your financial 

arrangements going to look like. 

 

Mediation is a very, very important tool I think in making sure 

that couples when . . . And there’s a huge percentage of people 

who come to this place, actually, where marriages end. It’s very 

unfortunate, but it is a reality and mediation offers that 

opportunity to end a marriage in a much more conciliatory 

fashion. 

 

And I have to say, speaking 10 years out now, that this section 

on mediation was very, very important in shaping how we deal 

with one another. My former husband and I co-parent, and 

having been through a very positive mediation process, again it 

was not an easy thing to do, but it is definitely worthwhile. And 

again these regulations set out the parameters for mediation, 

and again now we’ll be setting out the parameters for awards 

pursuant to domestic trade agreements. So we need to be very 

mindful, when we pass legislation, in thinking about what the 

intended and the unintended consequences may be. That’s 

absolutely critical, thinking about what may or may not happen. 

 

Again just on that mediation point I, having been personally 

impacted by one of these regulations, I really, really want to 

emphasize the importance as legislators that we thoroughly 

understand the ramifications of our decisions because they do 

have long-lasting impact on us in our daily lives. And I can 

speak from experience that these parameters for mediation have 

shaped how my former husband and I co-parent our daughter 

and still have a pretty amicable relationship, where I can go 

over to he and his wife’s home and actually have a visit and see 

their lovely, new little daughter. So this, it’s important to be 

mindful of this as legislators when we are debating and 

discussing and pondering what we’re putting forward. 

 

So the Act actually, Bill No. 115, the Queen’s Bench 

amendment Act also makes, also makes some changes to the 

declaratory Act surrounding the historical dates of transfer of 

Rupert’s Land from the Hudson Bay’s Company of Canada. So 

this is relatively been benign, but as one of my colleagues 

pointed out, quite interesting as well. And the minister’s 

indicated that this particular amendment will not change the 

legal effect of the provision, but simply make it easier to find in 

the statutes. 

 

I have to confess, as I’m not a lawyer, and there’s been the odd 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4363 

moment where I’ve looked through some of this legislation — 

my background is in journalism, social work, and public policy 

— and sometimes it can be a bit daunting when you’re looking 

at some of these Acts. But, you know, it just takes a little bit of 

time, some careful consideration and review, and questions 

definitely arise. And I’d like to actually, I’d like to leave some 

opportunity for some of my colleagues to also enter into the 

debate, so I would like to adjourn debate on this motion. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale has moved adjournment of debate on Bill 

No. 115, the Queen’s Bench amendment Act, 2009. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 112 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 112 — The 

Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 

modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — All rise, Mr. Speaker. Order in the court. 

Okay, I’ll quit jacking around. It’s a pleasure to participate in 

this debate, Mr. Speaker, in terms of An Act to amend The 

Justices of the Peace Act, 1988 and to make consequential 

amendments to certain Acts. If we could have a little order in 

the court, please. Thank you. 

 

It’s a fairly straightforward Act. In terms of changing the age of 

retirement for the justices of the peace, currently it’s at age 65. 

The intent of the Bill is to move the age of retirement to the age 

of 70. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, that’s in keeping with the trend 

of recognizing that seniors are remaining vital and vigorous. 

They’re living longer. The age of 65 is perhaps not the most 

appropriate marker in terms of asking that people leave the 

workforce and retire.  

 

And certainly the notion that moving it from 65 to 70, justices 

of the peace, and there are a lot of wise individuals there, Mr. 

Speaker, and of course with any pursuit such as this, there’s an 

expertise and a knowledge base that you expand upon and 

sharpen up as your time in the position goes on. And certainly 

there’s an argument to be made that just as justices of the peace 

are perhaps hitting their stride as in their practice of the 

position, that presently they have to retire at age 65. 

 

Moving that age to 70 provides for five more years of 

individuals being able to carry on their duties as justices of the 

peace. And certainly the fact that they’re able to then build upon 

their base of expertise and add to their wisdom and their 

knowledge in the pursuit or in the execution of their duties as a 

Justice of the Peace, we think that’s to the good, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly it’s been said that throughout a number of fields.  

 

Saskatchewan, back when the previous administration was in 

power, had removed the mandatory retirement age of 65 both 

on the grounds of human rights and with regards to the 

beneficial aspect for the labour force. And certainly there were 

a number of people that we heard from in the evolution of that 

debate, people who had reached the age of 65 but certainly had 

a lot more to contribute and were feeling quite unjustly done by 

in terms of being forced out of their respective positions upon 

the attainment of the age of 65, which they saw as arbitrary and 

not particularly just, Mr. Speaker. The government of the day 

agreed with them and that’s certainly been the trend across the 

country. 

 

I do wonder in terms of, if there’s opinion that has been 

assessed in terms of moving the age of 65 to 70, if there are any 

sort of problems on the grounds of the question of 

discrimination based on age, if moving from 65 to 70 is, if that 

is adequate, or if there is perhaps some question of a different 

approach to managing the retirement of individuals who are 

serving as justices of the peace and moving from 65 to 70. Does 

that satisfy the question of whether or not there’s a 

discrimination based on age in that circumstance, and are we 

trading one arbitrary age for another when in fact this is perhaps 

a situation that is better addressed by closer management of the 

individuals who are serving as justices of the peace, and 

whether or not they are properly and adequately discharging 

their duties as justices of the peace? 

 

[16:00] 

 

So we have some questions around that and whether or not the 

Department of Justice in their drafting of this amendment to 

The Justices of the Peace Act, we have some question whether 

or not that aspect was considered. And we’d welcome further 

information on that front from the Minister of Justice and the 

department. 

 

I guess I should state for the record, Mr. Speaker, that justices 

of the peace are of course not judges. Usually in fact they are 

not even lawyers, but they do perform an important judicial 

function in our society. 

 

If you look on the courts of Saskatchewan website it 

enumerates the duties of the Justice of the Peace of which 

include administering oaths for criminal charges laid by the 

police or the public; confirming or cancelling police issued 

process such as a promise to appear, an appearance notice, or a 

recognizance orders; reviewing and signing court issued process 

such as a summons, a warrant for arrest or undertaking; 

reviewing and issuing subpoenas compelling witnesses to attend 

court; administering oaths for affidavits, affirmations and 

declarations; the consideration of applications for search 

warrants; releasing people under conditions who have been 

arrested and are being held in custody; conducting show-cause 

hearings, more commonly known as bail hearings, Mr. Speaker, 

to determine if someone should remain in custody until dealt 

with by the law. 

 

Justices of the peace can also perform certain court functions in 

the absence of a provincial court judge, so thereby providing an 

important backstop to not just the system generally, but if 

there’s a circumstance where there’s an absence of a provincial 

court judge, the JP’s [Justice of the Peace] been able to step in 

and help out with accepting guilty pleas from and sentencing an 



4364 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

accused person charged with an offence punishable on 

summary conviction, such as receiving an accused person’s 

election for their mode of trial or the granting of an 

adjournment of a matter. 

 

In Regina and Saskatoon there are specially designated and 

trained senior presiding justices of the peace. They of course 

have authority to conduct trials for offences under various 

provincial statutes including traffic, liquor, and wildlife 

offences. I don’t know if they’ve ever hauled my colleague 

from Regina Rosemont in on any sort of wildlife offences. 

Probably not. He’s too conscientious when it comes to the 

hunting and the conservation of habitat . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Perhaps the member from Silver Springs, who 

seems to be speaking out there about wildlife offences, but 

we’ll just try and decipher the words that he’s saying over there 

the best we can, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These senior presiding justices of the peace also have authority 

to conduct trials for offences under various municipal bylaws 

including parking, noise, and domestic animal violations, again 

providing a valuable sort of safety valve or a supplement to the 

existing judiciary and to help make our court process more 

efficient and to perhaps take some of the pressure off the 

existing court process. 

 

We know that there are a number of backlogs in the system, a 

number of bottlenecks in the system. And again we think that 

more effective, more fulsome use of officers such as justices of 

the peace hold out some help in that regard to alleviate backlogs 

and to make the process more efficient. 

 

Historically, Mr. Speaker, the practising lawyers have not been 

eligible for appointment as justices of the peace. It’s another 

amendment or another key aspect of the amendments proposed 

in this legislation that they would be allowing practicing 

lawyers to be appointed justices of the peace, provided that they 

are not practising criminal law and that they are not otherwise 

in a conflict of interest, for example acting for or against the 

government in a lawsuit. 

 

We in the opposition benches, Mr. Speaker, on the face of it this 

would seem to be a reasonable move. There is a need to 

increase the pool of qualified applicants for these positions. 

That being said, the legal community in Saskatchewan isn’t 

overly large by any stretch of the imagination. There’s a fairly 

tight-knit legal community and there’s a reasonable assumption 

to be examined concerning the fact that a good many practising 

lawyers will be involved in a legal action involving either the 

federal or provincial governments. So the notion that this, 

changing the previous prohibition against bringing in practising 

lawyers as long as they’re not in a conflict of interest, it remains 

to be seen just how that expands the pool of possible applicants 

for this position, again given the fact that there are many 

practising lawyers currently involved in different federal or 

provincial matters and how this will affect their eligibility under 

the guidelines outlined in this amendment. 

 

And again the change to move from a mandatory retirement 

age, justices of the peace, from 65 to 70, one of the things that 

does is brings the retirement age here in line with that of 

Provincial Court judges. That’s again . . . I think it’s good in 

that we’ve got something of an analogous body of experience 

that we can examine to see how that has worked in that regard. 

 

Perhaps, you know, obviously sitting as a Provincial Court 

justice is a bit of a different deal than being a Justice of the 

Peace, but are there lessons to be learned from the experience of 

changing the retirement age from 65 to 70 in the case of 

Provincial Court justices and its impact on justices of the peace 

and moving the retirement age from 65 to 70. 

 

It is again to say, Mr. Speaker, and it’s not to speak against the 

wisdom of youth or anything like that, but certainly the life 

experiences that are gained over the years . . . Obviously I’m 

sure there are a number of justices of the peace that draw upon 

their life experience in the conduct of their duties and, you 

know, it bears to some reason that the more life experience you 

have, the more you’ve got to draw upon in the execution of 

your duty as a Justice of Peace. 

 

And again, when previously the notion was that you hit 65, 

you’ve reached the zenith of your career and then it’s time to 

head out for a rest, that notion has changed in our society, Mr. 

Speaker. And increasingly there’s that recognition — not just in 

practice but also in law — that the age of 65 has been somewhat 

arbitrary. 

 

Again we have some questions around whether or not 65 being 

replaced with 70 is not in and of itself yet another arbitrary 

designation of retirement age, or whether or not that age limit 

should be removed all together to keep it in broader sort of 

concert with the rest of the practice as to be evolved with the 

removal of age 65 as the then mandatory retirement age. But 

again, we’ll see if there’s information brought forward 

concerning the constitutionality of that practice by the 

Department of Justice and the Minister of Justice as we further 

consider this legislation. 

 

Again when individuals are older there’s an argument to be 

made that age can bring . . . age and life experience can bring 

judgment and perspective. That’s not always the case, Mr. 

Speaker. Certainly I’m sure we all know individuals that would 

prove as exceptions to that rule, both in terms of younger 

individuals and older individuals. But if there is a generalization 

that can be made, perhaps it’s that the more experience, the 

more perspective, the better the execution of duties as a justice 

of peace. And we’ve now got five more years to see that take 

place. 

 

In terms of the other changes in the Act it’s apparently a fair 

amount of housekeeping, again to use more gender-neutral 

language throughout the Act. Again we support that, Mr. 

Speaker. There are a number of female justices of the peace that 

certainly provide excellent service to the province in the 

execution of their duties — and language is important, Mr. 

Speaker — it’s important to have that reflected in the 

legislation, in the law of the land. People should be able to look 

into their Bills and not see themselves being excluded but 

seeing themselves be included. 

 

So we welcome the changes to bring the legislation up to date, 

not just in terms of the removal of the age of retirement, not just 

in terms of expanding the pool of possible applicants, but 

certainly, though of a housekeeping nature they may be, it is 

important that we bring in the . . . that we make the changes so 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4365 

that that gender-inclusive language is brought into the Act. 

 

Turning to the Bill itself, Mr. Speaker, again this justices of the 

peace Act, this current iteration dates back to 1988. Some of the 

amendments included changing definitions of the non-presiding 

Justice of the Peace, repealing the definition of the presiding 

Justice of the Peace in section 2. Section 3 again, a relatively 

. . . you know, it’s more housekeeping in terms of striking the 

word presiding from subsection 3(1). 

 

There are new sections being proposed, 5 and 6. “5 Sections 5 

to 7 . . . repealed and the following [are] substituted”. Again, 

changing the notion or making some refinements to the notion 

of conflict of interest. Section 5 states as follows: 

 

Unless otherwise provided by law, a justice of the peace 

shall not, during his or her term of office: 

 

(a) practise . . . law; 

 

(b) act as legal counsel for or against the Government 

of Saskatchewan or the Government of Canada; or 

 

(c) be in a position of conflict with his or her duties as a 

justice of the peace. 

 

There’s a new change made to the categories in section 6(1). 

“Subject to”, and I quote: 

 

Subject to subsection (3), the following persons are not 

eligible to be appointed as a justice of the peace: 

 

(a) an employee of the Government of Saskatchewan or 

a Crown corporation; 

 

(b) an employee or member of: 

 

(i) a police service within the meaning of The Police 

Act, 1990; or 

 

(ii) the Royal Canadian Mounted Police; 

 

(c) a member of the Corps of Commissionaires; 

 

(d) a member of the board as defined in The Police Act, 

1990; or 

 

(e) an elected member of a council of a municipality. 

 

So for example my city councillor, Mr. Wade Murray, would 

not be able to serve as a Justice of the Peace. Nor for that matter 

would Ensio or Debbie or any of the fine folks who serve in this 

building as part of the Corps of Commissionaires. 

 

Section (2) describes that, “If a person who is a justice of the 

peace attains a position described in subsection (1), the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council may cancel the appointments 

of the justice of the peace.” 

 

Section (3): “A person who is appointed as a court official in 

accordance with The Court Officials Act, 1984 may be 

appointed as a justice of the peace.” 

 

Section (4): 

 

A justice of the peace, other than a justice of the peace 

who is a court official, shall perform those duties and 

exercise those powers that are prescribed for a justice of 

the peace in the regulations, in any other Act, in any 

regulations made pursuant to that [or an] other Act, in an 

Act of the Parliament of Canada, in any regulations made 

pursuant to an Act of the Parliament of Canada or at law. 

 

[16:15] 

 

That particular section winds up with point 5: 

 

A justice of the peace who is a court official shall only 

perform those duties and exercise those powers that are 

prescribed in the regulations for a justice of the peace 

who is a court official.” 

 

My colleague from Regina Northeast is asking for a further 

explanation on that score. But I think what we’ll do is move on 

to the next section. We’ve got a lot of sections here and I want 

to make sure that they all get their due. So with apologies to my 

colleague from Regina Northeast, I guess I’ll carry on through 

the consideration of the other sections. 

 

New section no. 8. You might want to pay close attention to 

this. It regards the term of office. It regards the term of office, 

something that should interest the member from northeast 

mightily. It of course relies on the previous section 8 being 

repealed and the following substituted: 

 

“Term of office 

8(1) Unless early removed in accordance with this Act, a 

justice of the peace holds office until the earliest of: 

 

(a) the date he or she reaches the age of retirement 

prescribed in subsection (2); 

 

(b) the date he or she resigns in accordance with 

subsection (3); and 

 

(c) the date his or her appointment is cancelled pursuant 

to subsection 6(2), 11(2) or 12.8(4). 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it provides for different mechanisms to 

terminate the performance of duties by a Justice of the Peace. 

Not just on age, not just on bare eligibility, but we’re presuming 

as well in terms of the proper execution of duties, proper pursuit 

of the role of Justice of the Peace. 

 

Section 8(2) states that, “Every justice of the peace shall retire 

at the end of the month in which he or she attains the age of 70 

years.” Again, Mr. Speaker, there’s something a bit arbitrary in 

that if 65 was an arbitrary date and we’ve decided to do away 

with it on the grounds of it being arbitrary. Then replacing 65 

with age 70, we’re not entirely certain how that meshes with the 

Constitution, with basic questions of human rights, with basic 

questions of not being discriminated against of the basis of age. 

 

So I don’t know if my colleague from Regina Northeast is 

looking to take that up pro bono or pro forma or what have you 

or just as a matter of great interest. But in all seriousness, we do 



4366 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

have a question about the . . . if 65 was regarded as arbitrary, 

how is it that 70 years is not just arbitrary plus five years? 

 

Section 3: 

 

A . . . justice of the peace may resign his [or her] office by 

sending a written notice of his [or her] resignation to the 

minister and his [or her] resignation is effective on the 

later of: 

 

(a) the date the written notice is received by the minister; 

and 

 

(b) the date specified in the written notice. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, we’re presuming that originals must be 

preferred in these cases. That it’s not enough to phone it in, or 

to fax it in, or to email it in, or to send it through other means, 

but there must be an original copy of a letter sent in. Whether or 

not that copy would need to be notarized or if it’s sufficient that 

it’s coming from the desk of a Justice of the Peace, we would 

be interested to have some clarification on what is sufficient for 

proper notice in that regard, proper written notice in that regard. 

 

Section 10 is amended with 7. Section 10 of the English version 

is amended by striking out “his” and substituting “his or her.” 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we don’t have exclusive 

language in these things. Certainly not in the laws of the land. 

Certainly not in the laws that describe the duties of people who 

are there to carry out the laws of the land, to adjudicate the laws 

of the land. So again, it may seem like a relatively minor thing, 

but we think it’s very important that gender-inclusive language 

is brought into these pieces of legislation and that those changes 

are made. 

 

Again in terms of the French language, the changes are 

provided in the French translation. Also an important thing, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of the officers of the court who are carrying 

out the laws. It’s important that we have these. It’s important 

that the laws of the land be there in the official, the two official 

languages of Canada, but all the more so when it pertains to 

individuals who are charged with presiding over courts, 

presiding over the very enforcement and execution of these 

laws. 

 

Section 12.8 is amended, and it is amended by (a) repealing 

clause (1)(e) and substituting the following, (e) stating: 

 

recommending to the Lieutenant Governor in Council, in 

the case of a justice of the peace who has been assigned to 

a category of justice of the peace established in the 

regulations, that the category to which the justice of the 

peace is assigned be changed”; 

 

Let me take you through that one more time, Mr. Speaker: 

 

“(e) recommending to the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council, in the case of a justice of the peace who has been 

assigned to a category of justice of the peace established in 

the regulations, that the category to which the justice of 

the peace is assigned be changed”; 

 

So again, in terms of the different categories under the 

legislation and where the individual justices of the peace are 

assigned, that has impact on that practice. 

 

9(b) by repealing subsection (3) and substituting the 

following: 

 

“(3) If the council recommends that the appointment of a 

justice of the peace be cancelled, or that the category to 

which the justice of the peace is assigned be changed, the 

chairperson of the council shall forward a copy of the 

recommendation to the Lieutenant Governor in Council”; 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, ensuring that there’s proper 

communication between the different branches of government 

and the legal system between the executive branch and between 

the courts, the court components of our parliamentary 

democracy. 

 

Section 9(c) is an amendment to section (4) by striking out: “the 

designation of the justice of the peace or”. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s to bring the language further, the 

subsequent language in the legislation in line with the changes 

in principle that have been made earlier in the legislation. 

 

There’s a new section 13 that is being proposed, Mr. Speaker. 

Section 13 . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . My colleague from 

Regina Northeast is obviously very interested in this one. So on 

with the explanation. 

 

It of course deals with duty rosters. And as a one-time Deputy 

Whip, I’m sure he’s particularly interested in the whole 

question of duty rosters. 

 

Section 13(1) states that: 

 

The chief judge shall have general direction and 

supervision over the duties and the sittings of justices of 

the peace. 

 

Again in terms of making sure that that chain of command is 

straight and well understood within the judiciary. It’s important 

to have that very clear that who the justices of the peace are 

answerable to. 

 

Section 13(2): 

 

Subject to subsections (3) to (5) and (7), no justice of the 

peace shall perform any duty except in accordance with a 

duty roster established by the chief judge. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it pertains to the manner in which our 

judiciary is managed and the important role that the Chief 

Justice or the chief judge plays in the proper management and 

function of our judiciary and the means by which we coordinate 

in the role of justices of the peace with those roles executed by 

the Provincial Court judges. 

 

Section (3), 13(3): 

 

Subject to any regulations prescribing the duties of a 

justice of the peace, the chief judge may designate: 

 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4367 

(a) a justice of the peace, other than a justice of the 

peace who is a court official, to hear and determine 

matters involving alleged contraventions of municipal 

bylaws. 

 

And just to pause there for a moment, Mr. Speaker. Again it’s 

important that you don’t have that conflict between a court 

official, that you want to have the individual presiding as a 

Justice of the Peace over a particular case, in this regard 

concerning municipal bylaws. You want to make sure that you 

have that separation clearly delineated and that there is an 

absence, not just an absence of conflict of interest, but certainly 

the appearance of an absence as well. 

 

Section (3)(b): 

 

a justice of the peace to sit in the place of and exercise 

the powers of a judge of the Provincial Court. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, this refers to the practice of, in certain 

circumstances, the Justice of the Peace is able to stand in for the 

Provincial Court judge in the execution of duties. And again — 

in terms of making for a more efficient system and to help 

supplement the very important role of Provincial Court judges, 

perhaps alleviate something of their workload — this is an 

important consideration in the way that justices of the peace do 

their job. 

 

Section (4): 

 

If the chief judge designates a justice of the peace 

pursuant to subsection (3), the chief judge shall specify 

the place at which and period during which the justice of 

the peace may do the things mentioned in that subsection. 

 

Let’s just hit that one more time. Section 10(4), in the 

replacements, pardon me, section 13(4) in the replacements to 

the repealed section 13: 

 

If the chief judge designates a justice of the peace 

pursuant to subsection (3), the chief judge shall specify 

the place at which and period during which the justice of 

the peace may do the things mentioned in that subsection. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, this refers to the proper management of the 

duties of the justices of the peace, the important role of the chief 

judge in assigning those duties and prescribing those duties and 

making sure that they are done in accordance with the law. 

 

Section (5): 

 

A justice of the peace who is designated pursuant to 

subsection (3) is entitled to be paid a fee that is prescribed 

in the regulations for services provided by him or her in 

carrying out his or her duties mentioned in that subsection. 

 

Again, entitled to be paid a fee that is prescribed in the 

regulations, the regulations of course being set by the provincial 

government no doubt in consultation with the judiciary and the 

provincial court system and the ability to be remunerated for 

their duties. 

 

New section 13, 13(6): 

The duty roster established pursuant to subsection (2) 

must be available to the public during normal business 

hours of the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan. 

 

So again it’s not just important to have those duties assigned, 

but in terms of the public being able to understand it more 

clearly, where the different JPs are going to be pursuing their 

duty, where the duty roster has placed individuals, what is the 

timing of it. All of that needs to be made clear and certainly to 

do so within the normal business hours of the Provincial Court 

of Saskatchewan would seem to make fairly good sense. 

 

Section 7 . . . I’ll just grab a drink of water here, Mr. Speaker. 

Section 13(7) in the replacement to or the new section 13, 

section 13(7): 

 

The fact that a justice of the peace performs the duty 

otherwise than in accordance with the duty roster 

established pursuant to subsection (2) does not invalidate 

any act done or matter decided as a consequence of the 

performance of that duty. 

 

And again it would seem this would seem to point at the fact 

that in terms of certain circumstances arising that are also 

prescribed in this piece of legislation, just to clarify that the 

performance of those duties under one provision of the Act does 

not mean that they’re invalidated in terms of the other aspects 

of this legislation. 

 

(8) The chief judge may delegate the exercise of any of 

his or her powers prescribed in this section to a 

supervising justice of the peace, and the exercise of those 

powers by the supervising justice of the peace is deemed 

to be an exercise by the chief judge”. 

 

So again this refers not just to the proper management of the 

system and the proper management of justices of the peace, but 

also what circumstances that the chief judge who normally 

oversees the system, what are those circumstances in which a 

presiding or a supervising Justice of the Peace can step in and 

make those determinations, and to help in the management of 

the system and the assignment of the various justices of the 

peace. 

 

Section 15 amended, it states that: 

 

(a) in subclause (a)(i) of the English version . . . [has 

the] striking out [of] “him” and substituting “him or 

her”; 

 

Again the importance of gender inclusive language, Mr. 

Speaker. Section (b) again replacing “him” with “him or her.” 

 

Again in a country where we’ve got not just some outstanding 

female lawyers and female judges, and in many cases, female 

Supreme Court justices, Mr. Speaker, we’ve also got certainly a 

number of outstanding female justices of the peace. And they 

should be able to look into their legislation which authorizes 

them to do their job and not see themselves being excluded by 

outdated language. 

 

[16:30] 

 



4368 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

Section 11(d) in the amendment of section 15 states that: 

 

(d) by repealing clause (d) and substituting the 

following: 

 

“(d) prescribing the remuneration, benefits and fees to 

which a justice of the peace is entitled”; and 

 

(e) by repealing clauses (g) and (h) and 

substituting the following: 

 

“(g) establishing categories of justices of the peace; 

[and] 

 

“(h) prescribing the duties that may be performed by 

justices of the peace or a category of justices of the 

peace”. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s just making certain that they’re 

keeping the categories of justices of the peace straight, and 

certainly the duties that attach to those various categories to 

keep them straight and well delineated as well. 

 

Section 16 amended: 

 

12 Subsection 16(1) is [now] repealed and the following 

substituted: 

 

“(1) A justice of the peace who has possession, custody 

or control of any records, or other things belonging to or 

relating to his or her office that are not his or her private 

property shall give up possession of those things and 

deliver them to: 

 

(a) his or her successor in office on the day that he or 

she ceases to hold office; or 

 

(b) a person appointed by the council to demand 

possession and receive them, immediately when 

requested to do so by that person”. 

 

Again this refers to the orderly transition that needs to take 

place when you have people vacating their positions and the 

different documents and possessions that attach to the execution 

of your duties as a Justice of the Peace and the need to make 

sure that there’s an orderly transfer of those items from the . . . 

upon the retirement or the cease of duties by one individual to 

the incoming individual. 

 

We’ve got in the transitional, consequential, and coming into 

force sections of this legislation, again the transitional provision 

13(1): 

 

In this section “former provisions” means that The 

Justices of the Peace Act, 1988 as that Act existed on the 

day before coming into force of this Act. 

 

Again ensuring that there’s that proper transfer between the 

legal authorities of the various pieces of legislation. 

 

Transitional provision, section (2): 

 

Every person who, in accordance with the former 

provisions, was a presiding justice of the peace on the day 

before the coming into force of this Act is continued as a 

justice of the peace pursuant to The Justices of the Peace 

Act, 1988. 

 

Again relatively housekeeping in nature, but it provides for the 

clear delineation of what happens to the existing justices of the 

peace when the new Act comes into effect. 

 

My colleague from Regina Coronation Park is asking me about, 

why are justices of the peace important? And certainly I think it 

dates back to that time when there was that greater desire to 

involve more of the citizenry within the pursuit of justice and 

the execution of the laws of the land. Certainly this is a 

province where people who may not have had the formal 

education have had the opportunity to amass a great deal of 

perspicacity or perspective and wisdom . . . And I guess I’ll 

cede the floor to my colleague from Regina Lakeview, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Why is the member 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to get leave to 

introduce a guest in the Speaker’s gallery. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. I’m very pleased to introduce to you 

and through you to all members of the legislature a person who 

is actually quite well known to everybody here, but you may 

not recognize him in his retired form. This is Mr. Carl Cherland 

from the Luther College, and for 33 years he was the director of 

the choir. And from the early ’80s up until last year, every year 

he would bring the choir to the legislature to sing Christmas 

carols in the rotunda. And so many people here heard the 

concerts that he directed and provided here at the legislature 

during Christmastime. 

 

Carl is a Saskatchewan person who, I think, ended up growing 

up a big part of his life in Estevan area, but he then went to 

school in the States and eventually got his doctorate in choral 

directing from down in Arizona. And he’s been, like I said . . . 

He taught at Luther College here in Regina for 33 years, and 

over most all of those years he’s been a personal friend of mine 

and somebody who I’ve spent time with over the years 

discussing many things, but especially politics. 

 

And so now that he’s retired he has more time to observe what 

kinds of things we’re doing here in the legislature. And he’s in 

that role today, to come and listen a little bit and also to further 

basically educate himself, but also to take that knowledge and 

spread it to others. And so anyway it’s my pleasure to introduce 

him today. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

for Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4369 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 112 — Justices of the Peace 

Amendment Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 modifiant la 

Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 

(continued) 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much. And I join in 

welcoming the individual to his Legislative Assembly and I 

thank the member from Cypress Hills for his encouragement in 

this important deliberation on this item of legislation. 

 

Just to wrap up with the sort of line-by-line consideration in 

terms of what is presented, and before I get into some of the 

more philosophical impact of this legislation and the history of 

this legislation, again under the subsections dealing at the end, 

in terms of the transitional, consequential, and coming into 

force provisions, section 13(1) Transitional provision. The 

“former provisions” meaning that again there’s that orderly 

transition between the previous item of legislation, The Justices 

of the Peace Act, 1988 and the coming into force of the new 

piece of legislation that we have under consideration here today. 

 

And section 2 of that coming into force “Transitional provision” 

ensuring that there’s that orderly transition in terms of the 

authority of the existing justices of the peace so that they’re not 

left out by the new legislation, and that they are, in fact, covered 

by the legal authority prescribed here in this legislation. 

 

I’m going through the remainder of the sections. There are a 

number of, again coming in to the end, it’s fairly housekeeping 

in nature but I’m just making sure that those broader changes in 

terms of (a) the change of the retirement age from 65 to 70, (b) 

the clarification around the different categories of justices of the 

peace, (b) who’s in charge in terms of the responsibility of 

managing those individuals. Who’s the presiding official in this 

case who has . . . What is that chain of command? Who is 

assigning duties? Who is assigning locations and timings of 

hearings? Who’s presiding over the duty roster? 

 

Again, the section 43 of The Interpretation Act again, 

subsequent amendment to other legislation, requires a change to 

section 43 of The Interpretation Act, 1995, wherein the 

amendment is made to strike out: 

 

“presiding or non-presiding justice or” and substituting 

“a justice of the peace or a.” 

 

Subsection or, you know, it also calls for subsequent 

amendments to The Traffic Safety Court of Saskatchewan Act, 

1988. It’s amended in the manner set forth in this section, 

wherein: 

 

(2) Section 2 is amended: 

 

(a) by repealing the definition of “presiding justice of 

the peace”; and 

 

(b) by striking out “presiding” in the definition of 

“traffic justice”. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just within the legislation itself that 

there are changes that are required by the change in the 

principles, but of course in terms of that web of legal fabric and 

the consequential amendments that are required, depending on 

the changes that are made in one piece of legislation, how they 

impact other pieces of legislation. 

 

Section 2 is, or pardon me, “(3) Subsection 4(3) is amended by 

striking out “presiding”;” Again, reflecting upon that change in 

the different categories and the delineation of duties in the 

current justices of the peace legislation, and how that is 

impacting the traffic safety court Act . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Well that’s a good question. My colleague from Regina 

Northeast has asked who the government has consulted in the 

question of this legislation. We’d be interested to know what 

the current justices of the peace have had to say about this 

legislation. Is this merely a matter of changing the legislation to 

bring the retirement age of justices of the peace in line with 

those of Provincial Court judges, moving the age of retirement 

from 65 to 70? Again, if you argue that 65 is arbitrary, then 

certainly 70 being arbitrary as well, there’s certainly a valid 

argument to be considered there. 

 

And we would be interested to know if this has in fact been 

brought forward by the court officials and by justices of the 

peace as desirable change in legislation. Does that 65 actually 

. . . Does the 65 being changed to 70, does that satisfy their 

concerns around the retirement age in this regard? We’ll await 

further explanation from the Justice minister in that regard. 

 

Section 4 in The Traffic Safety Court of Saskatchewan Act, 

1988. 

 

(4) Section 5 is amended: 

 

(a) in subsection (1) by striking out “presiding”; 

 

(b) in subsection (5) by striking out “65” and 

substituting “70”; and 

 

(c) in subsection (6) by striking out “presiding” 

wherever it appears. 

 

Again in terms of bringing this subsequent piece of legislation 

in line with the changes in principle that are made in the justices 

of the peace legislation and how that impacts The Traffic Safety 

Court of Saskatchewan Act. 

 

Section 5 wherein: 

 

Section 6 is amended: 

 

(a) in subsection (1) by striking out “presiding”; and 

 

(b) in subsection (2) of the English version by 

striking out “presiding”. 

 

(6) Subsection 7(3) is amended by striking out 

“presiding”. 

 

And 16, the standard coming into force item that appears in, 

you know, any piece of legislation is: 

 

16 This Act comes into force on assent. 

 



4370 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2010 

So I guess we’ll await the visit of the Lieutenant Governor for 

that coming into force, and of course the further explanations of 

the Minister of Justice in terms of what they have done around 

consulting on this piece of legislation. 

 

[16:45] 

 

I’d like to draw on a quote that my colleague, the member from 

Regina Lakeview, has quoted when he was participating in this 

debate. And it’s applicable in a way that is more, even more 

evident than might first appear. It’s from a recent book that 

came out, Saskatchewan Politics: Crowding the Centre. It was 

edited by one Howard Leeson, a professor at the University of 

Regina. And why it’s particularly interesting in this context, 

Mr. Speaker, is that this is an individual who was very much a 

spearhead or a champion in terms of changing the mandatory 

retirement legislation and provisions here in Saskatchewan and 

who obviously is still making a vital contribution to the public 

policy discussion that goes on in the life of this province. 

 

And that of course is no little surprise, Mr. Speaker, because 

that’s certainly what his career has stood upon, is making a 

top-quality contribution to the public policy discourse in this 

province, both as a professor of political science at the 

University of Regina and as well as one of the key players in 

the intergovernmental talks leading up to the adoption of the 

constitution in 1982. He was the then deputy minister of 

Intergovernmental Affairs. 

 

And there’s a fairly interesting book about that experience from 

a Saskatchewan perspective involved in the patriation 

discussions called Canada — notwithstanding, which of course 

was written by John Whyte, Roy Romanow, a former premier 

of this province and a former long-standing minister of Justice 

and obviously a vital contributor to the public discourse 

himself, and by one Howard Leeson. 

 

So that Dr. Leeson is still making a great contribution to the 

public discourse in this regard is not surprising. And in the book 

Saskatchewan Politics: Crowding the Centre, there’s a fairly 

interesting article written by John Whyte, who’s now teaching 

at the law school in Saskatoon but again was a deputy minister 

of Justice throughout most of the ’90s and a brilliant mind, Mr. 

Speaker, and certainly someone, for example, on the question of 

the secession of Quebec or whether or not a unilateral 

declaration of independence was possible or the reference that 

was made by the federal government to the Supreme Court on 

the whole question of the validity of the separation of Quebec. 

 

Certainly John Whyte was one of the . . . did yeoman’s service 

for the province and, I would argue, for the country in the 

contribution he made to the intervention made on the part of the 

province of Saskatchewan. There’s a very eloquent piece of 

language that sticks out in terms of that intervention where 

Canada is a fabric woven from the threads of a thousand 

accommodations, I believe was his turn of phrase. And certainly 

it does speak to the beauty of something like the mosaic and, 

you know, many people from many different backgrounds. 

We’re here in a province where our provincial slogan is “from 

many peoples strength”. 

 

And Saskatchewan in particular, we should understand the 

wisdom at the base of a saying such as Canada is a fabric 

woven from the threads of a thousand accommodations. And 

again that whole notion of stronger together, that whole notion 

of diversity being brought together though to constitute 

strength, and the tremendous experiment in nationhood that 

we’ve been pursuing here in Canada for some time, and the way 

that it informs the way we live here in Saskatchewan, and the 

way that that’s intervention impacted the ultimate ruling on the 

part of the Supreme Court as regarded the setting the guidelines 

for such a thing as the question of Quebec’s separation or not. 

 

But again the article in question here comes from the Leeson 

edited book, Crowding the Centre. The passage I’d like to quote 

from was from an article written by John Whyte, again now 

teaching law in Saskatoon at the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] College of Law, and Thomas Gusa, who I 

believe is practising in Edmonton. It talks about justices of the 

peace, but it talks about why one changes aspects of the judicial 

system in response to how the community is changing. 

 

So again, to quote from page 95: 

 

Our legal system’s prestige — perhaps even its majesty — 

rests on its transcended quality, existing above, and 

avoiding corruption by, the exigencies of daily demands 

and passions. Its constancy is its strength. 

 

Again if I might add parenthetically, Mr. Speaker, you know, 

elegant language to be certain. To return to the quote: 

 

Its content and its processes have developed slowly over 

time and are not be battered by the demands of our 

current situation. And, yet, it seems that our legal system 

responds to our needs, including our need to see justice 

done, so imperfectly. The administration of justice faces 

no greater challenge than to preserve the rigor and 

impartiality in the way that law works in our society 

while subjecting it to the changes that will make it an 

effective social instrument for all people in [all] their 

vastly different social contexts and with all their vastly 

different social needs. 

 

To return to the quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Certainly two places where this adaptation must take . . . 

[place] is in having the legal system available to all on a 

more equal footing and in the response to social disorder 

through the administration of criminal justice. 

 

Law, after all, is manifestation of the self-determination 

ideology that has shaped both our political system and our 

sense of personal entitlement. Both as individuals and as a 

political . . . [committee] we can make choices with the 

confidence that when those choices are expressed in law 

they will be honoured and that these attempts to shape our 

future condition will be vindicated. But if law in this way 

is so closely tied to our public and private integrity it must 

itself have integrity. This is to say that law — the 

mechanism of justice — must itself meet the underlying 

conceptions of justice which are: the right of all to be 

treated with dignity (with respect for personal capacity 

and not to enslaved through poverty, poor health, low 

status, or dispossession) and the right to equal treatment. 

Law’s challenge is to reflect in its operation the political 



March 22, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4371 

values that led to its development, values of respect, 

dignity and equality. These values ground the connection 

between people in our political society and govern the 

way we act and develop as a political community. When 

law is not serving these values, either because it is not 

available to some or because it is detached from the 

reconciling and restorative function it is meant to 

perform, then it has become hollow and sterile, and our 

political community is vulnerable to the diseases of low 

commitment, resentment over tyranny and bitterness over 

being rendered invisible and insignificant. When we 

worry about inadequacies in the administration of justice 

we are doing nothing less than worrying about the future 

of our community. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, there’s a trust that is involved in this 

legal, political, social contract that we are part of here on the 

floor of this Assembly in terms of ensuring that the legislation 

reflects the changing times — perhaps rests on certain 

principles as those very eloquently enunciated by Mr. Whyte 

and Mr. Gusa — but keeping in tune with the times to make 

sure that there isn’t that dissonance, that there isn’t that lack of 

resonance between the temper of the times and the means by 

which we would pursue, we provide the ability to pursue justice 

in our legal system. 

 

And if we don’t do that, Mr. Speaker, Messrs. Whyte and Gusa 

point quite rightly to the fact that there are some very distinct 

consequences to the fact of not living up to constantly pursuing 

proper changes to our legislation and keeping that legislation in 

tune with the times. 

 

And in nowhere is that more important, Mr. Speaker, than in 

terms of the officers, the individuals who execute the 

adjudications upon which our case law history presides. If 

we’re not paying close attention to an institution such of that as 

of Justice of the Peace, then we’re not doing our system justice 

itself, and by that, by extension from that, an injustice to the 

people who have sent us to this legislature and the people who 

rely on the proper execution of the justice system and the 

different roles therein to have that fairness, to have that equality 

under the law. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, there’s an evolution that is taking place in 

this province. Certainly we pride ourselves on our frontier 

history. Certainly, McCalls, my forebears came to this part of 

the world in the 1880s, homesteaded in and around Montmartre, 

Saskatchewan. And in terms of the way that a society or the 

way that the North-West Territories at the time, and then 

subsequently 1905 seeing the entry of Saskatchewan into 

Confederation as a province — though without control of its 

natural resources, as was the case with other provinces — there 

was a need at that time for people to step forward to provide to 

help for the proper functioning of those important social 

functions that society, that a civilized society rests upon, such 

as the legal system. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, while there may have been individuals 

without that formal education, without the official designation 

as lawyers and how that translates into progress into becoming 

a judge, there were certainly many wise individuals that our 

communities depended on in no small part. And justices of the 

peace were certainly one of those institutions where people that 

were recognized as wise, as having perspective within their 

community, that had the respect of their neighbours and their 

peers, they had a role to play in terms of the proper functioning 

of the justice system and making sure that the system worked 

for their neighbours, their friends, and for the citizens of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Again there’s a change over time that has taken place. It would 

be interesting to look back historically to see what that mix was 

back in the day, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps in 1883, when my 

forebearers were filing their homestead claim, what was the 

balance between the function of justices of the peace and those 

of Provincial Court judges? Were there more JPs that were 

performing their duties, given that we were then very much a 

frontier society? What was the balance, what was the division 

of duties between the two offices? And, you know, how these 

circuit judges also performed their duties, some of them on 

horseback going from court to court, it’s a fascinating history, 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the way that our system has evolved. 

 

And I do know that again, justices of the peace have played a 

vital role in not just making sure that we pass laws, but to make 

sure that they’re upheld and adjudicated properly for all the 

citizens in that equality before the law. 

 

Justices of the peace, there’s an evolution with the times. It used 

to be that age 65 was mandatory retirement, that you’d see the 

end of your working life and off you would go. This law 

changes the retirement provision from 65 to 70. It expands the 

possible pool of who’s available to apply for work as a Justice 

of the Peace. We’re interested to see what the constitutionality 

of that change in the age provision is. We’re interested also to 

see where the pressure for this piece of legislation comes from 

. . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. McMillan): — It now being 5 

o’clock, this House stands recessed until 7 o’clock. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................... 4343, 4344 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4343 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4343 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4343 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4343 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4343 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4344 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4344 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4368 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4344 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4344 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4345 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4345 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4345 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4345 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4346 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4346 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4346 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4346 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4346 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4347 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4347 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4347 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4347 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4347 

 Affordable Drinking Water 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4348 

 Saskatchewan Protective Services Awards 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4348 

 Z99 Radiothon Supports Neonatal Unit 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4348 

 Conserving and Protecting Water 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4348 

 Huskies Win National Title 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4349 

 Content of Blog 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4349 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 First Nations University of Canada 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4349 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4349 

 Rental Housing Issues 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4351 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4351 

 Selection of a Chief Electoral Officer 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4352 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4352 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Motions Under Rule 59 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4354 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 103 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4354 

 



 

 Bill No. 115 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o
 2 de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4361 

 Bill No. 112 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1988 sur les juges de paix 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4363 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


