




















































Hansard: April 19, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 46A  MONDAY, APRIL 19, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4879 

 April 19, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to members of the Legislative Assembly it’s an 

honour to be able to introduce a special guest that’s seated in 

your gallery today, a bona fide Canadian and Saskatchewan 

hero, and a resident of our capital city. Joining us today in the 

Assembly is Warrant Officer Jeffrey Dickson, known to many 

who listen to certain sports radio shows simply as Sarge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he has served 22 years in the armed forces of our 

country — four tours in Bosnia, one in Cyprus, and was part of 

the first tour in Afghanistan in 2006. He and his wife are raising 

William here in the great city of Regina. And he’s currently at 

10 Field Regiment in the Queen City, where he is a mentor to 

many who have volunteered to be reservists. And, Mr. Speaker, 

he’s joined us to witness the proceedings in his Legislative 

Assembly today. I’d ask all hon. members to give him a warm 

welcome to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

the Legislative Assembly a great-looking group of students 

seated in the eastern gallery. They are from Sacred Heart 

Community School. There are 40 grade 4s and 5s. Have you got 

a big wave? Give us a wave. Yes. There we are. They are 

headed up by their teachers Carey Dziaduck and Darlene 

Wurm. They’re also accompanied by a chaperone and Sacred 

Heart institution, Mary Giambattista. 

 

We had a really excellent meeting, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 

elected leadership in advance of their visit to the legislature, so 

leaders Friday, Sparvier, and Fiddler put me through my paces. 

But I think this is a group of students that knows what it is to be 

wanting to be part of the solution and not part of the problem. 

 

So I’ve got some bit more to say in a member’s statement about 

the great school that is Sacred Heart, but certainly these are 

some exemplary students from a fine school and an excellent 

riding in Regina Elphinstone-Centre. Please join me in 

welcoming all these students and their teachers and Ms. 

Giambattista to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to introduce our 

victim services volunteers and would request leave for an 

extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 

all members. Mr. Speaker, this is Victims of Crime Awareness 

Week in Saskatchewan, and seated in your gallery are 13 

individuals who serve with the police-based victim services 

programs in Saskatchewan. And I won’t be introducing them 

individually. but would like to ask them all to stand up while I 

introduce them. 

 

Earlier today it was my pleasure to present each of them with a 

gift commemorating their 10 or 15 years of service as victim 

services volunteers. As time does not allow for individual 

introductions, I will mention only the victim services volunteers 

work out of the Churchill River, Moose Jaw, Northeast, 

Parkland, Prince Albert, Regina, Southeast, and Southwest 

victim services programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as our victim services programs have evolved over 

the years, dedicated volunteers such as these have given of their 

time and energy. They have connected with victims in their 

communities and supported them throughout the criminal 

justice process. I would ask that all members join me in 

expressing our appreciation for all of these dedicated 

individuals and all of our victim services volunteers for their 

years of service to the people of their communities. 

 

I would remind the volunteers that this is only a milestone, not a 

retirement. And I hope to see many of them again five years 

from now to commemorate their 15th and 20th anniversaries 

and for another five years after that. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask 

all members to welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

opposition, I would like to join with the minister in welcoming 

the victim service volunteers to their Legislative Assembly. If 

history is any indication, Mr. Speaker, the minister does not 

need to be concerned that they will be back here in five years 

and, in many cases, in 10 years. 

 

I had occasion, sad occasion sometimes, as Minister of Justice 

to visit victims of serious crimes in the province of 

Saskatchewan, people who were still living with the ongoing 

fear of violence or threat of violence in some cases, Mr. 

Speaker. And the support, forget the tangible work that these 

people do, but the support and being there I know is invaluable 

to their neighbours who they assist. And so again I want to join 

with the minister in welcoming them here, thanking them for 

their service. And I appreciate those aren’t very comfortable 

seats, but I hope you had more comfortable ones when you 

received your honours that you so well deserved earlier today. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Along with the 

minister and the critic, I would like to recognize one special 



4880 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2010 

member of the group today. Not only is he involved with this 

group, he’s involved with many groups that I’ve been involved 

with myself. His name is Eugene Dutchnitski. Give me a wave, 

Eugene. I’ve know Eugene for quite a number of years, not the 

least the group we are involved with is CASARA or Civil Air 

Search and Rescue, myself as a search pilot and Eugene as a 

navigator and spotter and safety officer. He’s done some 

amazing work in the Yorkton area, not only with victim 

services but many other groups that he’s involved with. So I’d 

ask members to especially welcome him to this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your gallery 

are two guests that I would like to introduce to you and through 

you to all members of the Assembly, John and Eleanor Moore. 

If you could give us a wave. John and Eleanor are the parents of 

Stephen Moore who works in our caucus office. 

 

And while I’m sure they came all the way from Saint John, 

New Brunswick to visit their son, I think the real reason they 

came was for their granddaughter’s confirmation which 

occurred over the weekend. So it’s not every day we have 

guests from New Brunswick here in the province, or here in the 

Assembly at least, so I would ask all members to join me in 

welcoming John and Eleanor to the Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you, I’m happy to introduce some members in the 

west gallery, members of SCN [Saskatchewan Communications 

Network] Matters who are concerned about the way in which 

this government has dealt with this matter. I can’t see 

everybody up there, but I see Heather Malek who is a film and 

television editor. Give us a wave here. Heather is a film and 

television editor living in Regina. She moved here from Alberta 

in 1998. She’s worked on many SCN-supported documentaries 

and dramas, and she’s concerned that if SCN is terminated, 

she’ll have to move to another province to find work. 

 

I’d also like to introduce Robin Schlaht who is a producer. His 

company is Zima Junction Productions. He too actually has 

come from out of province and has been in Saskatchewan for 21 

years, and he’s concerned that he will also have to leave 

Saskatchewan. So I’d like everyone to join in welcoming the 

members of SCN Matters to the legislature. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens of 

Saskatchewan who are concerned over the condition of 

Highway 123. Mr. Speaker, this is a highway that is the only 

link to the outside world for the community of Cumberland 

House. And as you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s the one road in and 

the one road out. And this petition goes on to say that this 

highway has so many potholes that it requires considerable 

manoeuvring in order to avoid getting stuck in the mud. Mr. 

Speaker, the prayer goes on to read: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining and repairing of 

this highway. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this particular petition is signed by the good folks of 

Cumberland House, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of the protection of wildlife habitat 

lands, and it speaks to the issue that The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act protects 3.4 million acres of uplands and 

wetlands or one-third of all wildlife habitat lands in 

Saskatchewan in its natural state. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately and 

without delay recognize the importance of the protection 

of wildlife habitat lands and immediately withdraw 

proposed amendments that will negatively affect the 

protection of wildlife habitat lands; 

 

And in so doing cause the provincial government to 

commit to meaningful and adequate consultation with all 

stakeholders that will be affected by future legislative 

changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens of Biggar, 

Saskatoon, and Grandora, Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

from residents of Saskatchewan who are in support of a seniors’ 

bill of rights. And many of them say that seniors live on fixed 

incomes and are victims of physical and emotional and financial 

abuse, and they do have a right to social and economic security 

and a right to live free from poverty and that Saskatchewan 

seniors have a right to protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. The new petition reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take 

the following action: 

 

To enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which 

would provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and 

economic security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

I so present on behalf of residents from Regina and Saskatoon. 



April 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4881 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for protection for renters from 

unreasonable rent increases. We know that Saskatchewan 

renters are facing a combination of rising rents and low 

vacancies in many communities, and in fact the majority of 

Canadians, some 80 per cent, live with rent control guidelines 

including Manitoba, BC [British Columbia], Ontario, Quebec, 

and Prince Edward Island. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

consider enacting some form of rent control with a view to 

protect Saskatchewan renters from unreasonable increases 

in rent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the city of Regina and Regina Beach. I do so present. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition in support of Highway 135, concerns of 

Saskatchewan residents. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to pave the 7 kilometres of Highway 135 

through the community of Pelican Narrows as committed 

on August 24th, 2007. 

 

The petition is signed by the good people of Pelican Narrows. I 

so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to present a 

petition that is in support of calling on the Sask Party 

government to address high tuition fees in the province. And the 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to addressing the burden placed 

by high post-secondary tuition fees on Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitions will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Prince Albert. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of the expansion of the graduate 

retention program. The petition is circulated because the 

Saskatchewan Party government specifically amended the 

program to exclude master’s and Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] 

graduates, as well as post-secondary graduates from outside 

Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from the city of 

Prince Albert, St. Louis, and Paddockwood. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition today on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan who are dealing with yet another water issue. 

The Furdale residents, dealing in good faith with SaskWater for 

over 30 years, have paid large amounts for domestic systems 

and in-home treatment programs, for equipment. And an 

alternative water supply referred by a government ministry is a 

private operator offering treated, non-pressurized water at great 

cost with no guarantee of quality, quantity, or availability of 

water. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of hamlet of Furdale 

causing great hardship with no suitable alternatives, to 

exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further water service 

cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause under The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2002 

and The Water Regulations, 2002, and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Furdale and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition in support of maintaining quality health care services in 

our province. Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan 

must recognize the value of all health care providers by having 

a commitment to adequate funding and the installation of a 

good-faith bargaining process. Mr. Speaker, the Government of 

Saskatchewan demanded a conciliation process as part of the 

collective bargaining process and then misused the process to 

put forward an unacceptable final offer to the health care 

providers. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 



4882 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2010 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to negotiating a fair and just 

collective bargaining agreement with health care workers 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

This petition is signed by residents of Radville. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan 

concerned about this government’s disregard for legal, 

constitutional, and human rights. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon, and I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive $1 billion deficits and two years of debt 

growth under the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Muenster 

and Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased again to 

rise today to present a petition in support of the Saskatchewan 

film and television industry. The petition is signed by 

concerned residents who believe this government has let the 

film and television industry languish over the last two years and 

now, without due process and without consultation with the 

independent board, has kicked a very important institution, 

SCN, to the curb. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

the Legislative Assembly take the following action: to 

cause the provincial government to make changes to the 

film employment tax credit that will allow the 

Saskatchewan film industry to be more competitive with 

other provinces, to reverse its decision to shut down the 

Saskatchewan Communications Network, and to work with 

the industry to reverse the decline in film production. 

 

This petition is signed by residents in Saskatoon and Regina. I 

so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

World Hemophilia Day 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since 1989, 

patient groups and treatment centres have been coming together 

on April 17th to celebrate World Hemophilia Day. Over the 

past 20 years, World Hemophilia Day has become a unique 

opportunity to increase awareness about hemophilia and other 

bleeding disorders. April 17th was chosen to honour the birth of 

Frank Schnabel, a hemophiliac and founder of the Canadian 

Hemophilia Society and the World Federation of Hemophilia. 

 

Hemophilia is the most common disease of all inherited 

bleeding disorders. It affects up to 1 per cent of the population 

and affects women and men. Mr. Speaker, hemophiliacs often 

require transfusions of blood that can help prevent or stop 

bleeding. Canada is one of the few countries with a federally 

coordinated blood transfusion surveillance program. 

 

The theme for 2010 is, meet the many faces of bleeding 

disorders, united to achieve treatment for all. This year’s theme 

celebrates the whole bleeding disorders community — people 

with hemophilia and symptomatic carriers, men and women 

with von Willebrand’s disease, as well as those with rare factor 

deficiencies and inherited platelet disorders. Mr. Speaker, 

together we can bring bleeding disorder issues into the light and 

ease the suffering of many people, especially those who suffer 

from bleeding disorders here in our province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Local Students Win Battle of the Books 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

congratulate four students from Sacred Heart Community 

School who won the Battle of the Books on March 9th, 2010. 

James Iwasienko-Adams, Destin Martin, Noah Fayant, and 

Dominique Middleton demonstrated their superior reading 

comprehension skills while competing against teams from 16 

other Catholic elementary schools. 

 

In the Battle of the Books, teams of four read eight different 

books over the Christmas holidays, including titles from notable 



April 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4883 

Canadian authors Gordon Korman and Eric Walters. The teams 

were then asked specific questions about each of the books, and 

that, Mr. Speaker, is when the close readers were separated 

from the skimmers. 

 

Teams that answered more questions correctly moved forward 

in the competition, and at the end of the battle the four Sacred 

Heart students emerged victorious. Their proud coach, 

teacher/librarian Carolyn Yaskowich also deserves much credit 

for her team’s performance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Sacred Heart is a school that champions the 

importance of reading. They proudly display the number of 

books that the students have read this year on their sign at 

Elphinstone and 7th Avenue. The tally as of this morning was 

21,325 if you can believe that, Mr. Speaker. Excellence in 

English reading comprehension is crucial for personal and 

economic success. I would like to sincerely congratulate these 

fine students, their teachers, and all the reading champions at 

Sacred Heart Community School. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Innovative Emergency Room Unveiled 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today to recognize the unveiling of the newly renovated 

emergency department at the Regina Pasqua Hospital. On April 

14th I had the opportunity, along with the Minister of Health 

and the member from Moose Jaw North, to see the excellent 

example of innovation in the ways health care services are 

being delivered. One of the most important features that 

ensured this ER [emergency room] would suit everyone’s needs 

is the fact that the front-line staff designed the plans. That is 

why the dispensing room for medication is located in the centre 

of the plan and is an equal distance from all other areas. 

 

The WOW, which stands for Workstation on Wheels, is an 

electronic patient record provided to doctors and nurses that 

will contain the patient’s X-ray results, blood work results and 

the entire patient file. Everything from the enclosed ambulance 

bay which shelters the patients and the staff from harsh 

Saskatchewan climates to the patient status screen or the GPS 

[Global Positioning System] clocks to ensure accurate time 

stamps will all assist doctors and nurses in delivering timely 

and patient-focused care. 

 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating the staff and the 

Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region for planning and designing 

an ER that is truly patient-centred. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Organ Donor Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April is Organ Donor 

Awareness Month in Canada. Organ donation is literally a 

matter of life and death. This month is about increasing public 

awareness. A single donor can save or enhance the lives of 

many people. It is often true that there are enough people who 

say they would donate their organs to meet the need, yet the 

number of people who have taken the steps necessary to be 

counted as an organ donor doesn’t begin to reflect that high 

support. 

 

People can choose to become an organ donor at any age, 

regardless of medical history. Minors need only the permission 

of a parent or a guardian. Citizens of Saskatchewan can quickly 

and easily register to become an organ donor by signing their 

organ donor card and carrying it with their health card at all 

times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at a time when the Sask Party government should 

be encouraging organ donation and making it easier for people 

to receive organ transplants, they have done nothing to restart 

the kidney transplant program in Saskatoon. One hundred and 

six patients and their families are anxiously waiting for the 

opportunity to start a new life with a new kidney while this 

government does nothing but repeat their same old rhetoric and 

turn a cold shoulder to the patients. 

 

During this Organ Donor Awareness Month, it is absolutely 

essential that the kidney transplant program be immediately 

restarted, giving a clear signal of the government’s commitment 

to organ donation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

Constituents Part of Huskies’ Victories 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, on March 21st of this year, the U 

of S [University of Saskatchewan] men’s Huskies made 

basketball history by winning both the Canada West title and 

the Nationals for the first time in their 103-year history. 

 

Now although this has been covered previously, I wish to share 

a Cypress Hills twist to this story. Brothers Clint and Chris 

Unsworth, along with their teammates, were named the 2010 

CIS [Canadian Interuniversity Sport] national champions in 

Ottawa, Ontario. 

 

What you do not know about these two young men is that their 

father Art played on the U of S Huskies team in 1972. Sporting 

a green moustache and a stetson hat, proud father, Papa Art 

Unsworth from the town of Piapot supported his sons all the 

way to the final winning game. If you had an opportunity to 

watch the game, you would have witnessed Art’s presence, and 

he was really quite a media sensation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This past Friday evening, I had the opportunity to attend a 

celebration in Maple Creek to honour the Huskies and the 

Unsworth brothers known locally as the twin towers. This event 

included a potluck supper and video highlights, while Chris and 

Clint proudly displayed their trophies and banners. The 

community welcomed home these true ambassadors of the U of 

S Huskies and the entire province of Saskatchewan. I was 

honoured to address the crowd and acknowledge the important 

roles played by individuals, players, coaches, and fans in the 

run-up to this championship game. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time, would you please join me in 

congratulating Chris and Clint Unsworth and their father, Art, 

for their participation as players and supporters of this 



4884 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2010 

history-making team. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Exercising Judgment 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, this government continues to show 

the people of Saskatchewan that the Sask Party lacks the ability 

to exercise good judgment. And in order to understand why, we 

need look no further than the so-called leadership of the 

Premier himself. This Premier showed poor judgment by 

completely disregarding a ruling from the United Nations body. 

The UN [United Nations] had condemned the Sask Party’s 

legislation, but this Premier fails to take leadership and repeal 

this legislation immediately. 

 

The Premier and his party are involved in a court case related to 

millions of dollars for another political party, affecting their 

ability to run candidates in the next election and therefore 

altering the outcome in 2011. This Premier’s government is 

refusing to exercise good judgment by accepting the candidate 

for Chief Electoral Officer as recommended by a bipartisan 

committee and as endorsed by a majority of party leaders. 

 

When the Premier was working for the Devine government, he 

personally authorized delivery of thousands of dollars of booze 

and ice to a minister of the Crown at the taxpayers’ expense. 

This was an offence that The StarPhoenix said should be 

“Cause for jailing” and that “These cases are despicable, not 

just for their scale but for their intent.” The Premier had the 

opportunity to show good judgment and true leadership by 

repaying the $19,000 to Saskatchewan taxpayers, but he did 

not. 

 

Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, the people of the province deserve 

better judgment and true leadership from anyone elected to the 

position of Premier. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

New Television Series Coming to Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today the 

Ministry of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport in conjunction 

with Vérité Films, CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation], 

and SaskFilm announced that a new television series is coming 

to Saskatchewan. 

 

Vérité Films, the same producer who brought Corner Gas to the 

height of international fame, is now bringing a new series to our 

Canada-Saskatchewan Sound Stage. The new series, which is a 

comedy called Insecurity, features a group of high-level 

security personnel who don’t always operate with the greatest 

of efficiency. 

 

Attracting this new series to Saskatchewan shows how strong 

industry leadership can produce enterprising results, Mr. 

Speaker. The government and SaskFilm worked together to 

create a new program which helped to attract the new series and 

which will be available to all filmmakers. This new program 

from SaskFilm is the series incentive initiative. This incentive 

program will waive the rent to a maximum of $140,000 for the 

Canada-Saskatchewan production studios for the first year of a 

continuing series production or for producing a pilot. 

 

The new series incentive initiative demonstrates government’s 

commitment to Saskatchewan’s film and television industry. 

With programs like this and the efforts of the industry to work 

together to create new opportunities, we will further enhance 

our competitiveness in attracting new productions to 

Saskatchewan, and we’ll look forward to seeing even more new 

productions. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Status of Member 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, there are many unanswered 

questions after the news of late last week, but the most 

fundamental question here is the judgment of the Premier. This 

is a quote from the maiden speech made by the Premier’s 

legislative secretary for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing: 

 

. . . when I asked the Premier of our province would my 

background cause a problem, and he said your 

background will give you an expertise of what we want to 

do as a government for the least of, the most vulnerable 

of, for those who need a solid and strong government to 

live by their word and their actions, then I took that 

invitation and I allowed my name to stand in Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

To the Premier: will the Premier confirm that he personally 

recruited this individual to his government and that he stated 

that a background of criminal activity amounts to expertise? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we want to obviously state for 

the record today, in the wake of the events of Friday, that 

immediately upon hearing of the notional potential for some 

laws to have been broken with respect to drugs, to illegal drugs, 

that all that information was provided to the Regina Police 

Service for their further direction, consideration, and potential 

investigation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As leader of the party, I’m involved in encouraging people to 

run in constituencies. This particular riding had a contested 

nomination, and so the party would have been encouraging 

people to step forward. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would just say this, that with respect to the 

background of the individual that’s just been raised by the hon. 

member, there are . . . What has not changed today, 

notwithstanding what we find out from the resolution of all of 

this information, what has not changed today is the fact that 

many young people’s lives have been changed, markedly for 

the better. Young men have been able to break free of an 

addiction as a result of the work of Teen Challenge and other 

efforts on the part of this particular member of the Assembly, 



April 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4885 

now independent. And, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding the 

information that’s come forward, none of that good work has 

changed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the individual who the Premier 

appointed as his legislative secretary for Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing was on the 100 Huntley Street TV show last 

May. Near the end of the interview, a photo of the individual’s 

swearing-in ceremony was shown in which he was signing the 

MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] registry. 

 

Referring to the Premier, the host said, “He’d had a dream after 

reading your book that one day you’d be signing this book in 

the legislature.” The Premier’s legislative secretary for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing replied, referring to the 

Premier’s quote, “He thought it was predestination I’d be 

signing this book, and he told me while he was watching me 

that he kind of teared up.” 

 

To the Premier: will the Premier confirm that the reason he 

recruited this individual to his government is because he had a 

dream and believed it to be predestined? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — No, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, as a result of this recent news, the 

people of Saskatchewan are questioning the Premier’s 

judgment. To the Premier: what assurances can the Premier 

give to the people of Saskatchewan that he will exercise better 

judgment going forward? Will he at least consider referring the 

allegations to the Conflict of Interest Commissioner 

immediately? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the course of 

action that has been taken to date by the government is to turn 

over all the information to the Regina Police Service. That’s the 

appropriate body to determine if further investigation needs to 

occur, Mr. Speaker. The government undertook that action with 

the counsel of the . . . Well the Hon. Leader of the Opposition’s 

shaking his head. The Ministry of Justice actually counselled 

the government and said that is the appropriate action to take. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we’ve done. 

 

When there was an NDP [New Democratic Party] caucus 

scandal before this Legislative Assembly, the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner’s investigation did not occur at the same 

time as the police were investigating the situation, which was 

the right thing to do then, Mr. Speaker. It would be appropriate 

to let the police look at everything and make their decisions, 

and then whatever happens after that can be the subject of some 

discussion and debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the Premier’s focus 

in such situations is often misplaced. When his government 

mistakenly released a dangerous sex offender last fall, the 

Premier went on a witch hunt instead of addressing the real 

issue. To the Premier: how can the people of Saskatchewan 

trust that his actions in this case will be any different? Has he at 

least attempted to track down the laptop of his legislative 

secretary for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing so that it 

can be examined? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the premise of the hon. 

member’s question with respect to the corrections worker is 

false. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the Premier again: can the 

people of Saskatchewan trust that his action in this case will be 

any different? Has he at least attempted to track down the 

laptop of the legislative secretary for Corrections, Public Safety 

and Policing, so that it can be examined? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member that the 

member refers to has indicated that that laptop . . . He does not 

have that laptop any longer . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Opposition Leader maybe wants to ask a 

few questions or get in on the debate, and that’s reasonable. We 

want to answer the questions. The answer to this question is that 

the laptop in question is said to have been lost by the member in 

question. Mr. Speaker, the information though has been turned 

over to the Regina Police Service — all the information that the 

government has. We’ve also requested that CBC turn over the 

original of the audio recording to the Regina Police Service. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding, as of just moments ago, 

that CBC has said they’re going to provide that tape to the 

member, the now independent member for Northwest. And I 

assume then it will go to the police as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we know from past examples that 

the Premier’s preferred approach in such situations is simply to 

shield himself from further embarrassment rather than getting to 

the bottom of the issue. To the Premier: how can the people of 

Saskatchewan trust that he will not devote any taxpayers’ 

dollars or government resources to shield himself from 

embarrassment or to cover his lack of judgment? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve worked very hard as a 

government over two years plus to do the things that we said we 

would do in the election campaign, to keep the promises that we 

made, Mr. Speaker, to do those things we said we would do, 

and to not do the things that we said we would not do, Mr. 



4886 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2010 

Speaker. And I know that the government has — you know, as 

any government will discover — has had moments where there 

have been challenges, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I would say this: if the recent information last week out is 

any indication, the people of the province also agree that the 

government is one that keeps its word. Mr. Speaker, we have 

said quite publicly that we will not be providing any resources 

to the member in question in terms of clearing his name, to use 

his quote. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll keep that commitment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Support for Film and Television Industry 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Veronica Gamracy, Chair of the board of SCN, was never 

consulted about the government’s decision to shut down SCN. 

According to Saturday’s Leader-Post: 

 

. . . what Gamracy finds offensive is that the government 

would arbitrarily eliminate SCN without seeking 

consultation and without attempting to understand how 

SCN fits as an intricate part of Saskatchewan’s film 

industry puzzle. 

 

Actually, Gamracy would have even been happy with the 

simple courtesy of either of the Sask Party government’s 

culture ministers meeting with her or the SCN board in 

two and half years of government. 

 

To the minister: how could this government kill SCN without 

even consulting with its independent board? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And I want to thank the member for her question. Mr. Speaker, 

when we were formulating the 2010-11 budget for the province 

of Saskatchewan, certainly there were very . . . number of 

difficult decisions that had to be made, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this provincial government cut the budget of the 

province of Saskatchewan by one and a half per cent, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s not done without making some very 

difficult decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it was determined through the budgetary 

process, Mr. Speaker, that SCN was going to be, the operations 

of SCN were going to be wound down, Mr. Speaker, that 

decision was one that was a difficult one to make, but, Mr. 

Speaker, one that was made by this government. And it’s one 

that stands, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the article goes on to say that 

the Saskatchewan government’s line “. . . that only four per cent 

of Saskatchewan people watched SCN is wrong and — worse 

yet — dangerously misleading.” 

SCN’s last annual report says that, according to a survey, 16 per 

cent of Saskatchewan people had watched SCN at least once in 

the previous week. In a 500-channel universe, Mr. Speaker, 

those are impressive numbers and a sign that Saskatchewan 

people want to see Saskatchewan stories. 

 

To the minister: what is the government’s purpose in spreading 

misinformation about SCN? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, through this entire process 

I have stated from the start that the decision to wind down SCN 

was a decision that indicated that the government felt that it was 

no longer in the business of being a broadcaster, Mr. Speaker. 

But it wasn’t an indication that government wasn’t going to be 

involved in the film and television industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can tell you that this budget provides funding to the film 

employment tax credit of over $8 million, Mr. Speaker. 

SaskFilm budget has remained intact, Mr. Speaker. And also, as 

the member has obviously heard, the sound stage remains 

intact. And, Mr. Speaker, we had a very good announcement 

today where we’ve announced that a major, a major national 

production is coming to the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. And it shows that the province of Saskatchewan is 

very competitive when it comes to film and television 

industries. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this minister is bragging about 

the $8 million that we spend here in Saskatchewan on the film 

employment tax credit. They spend double the amount to our 

neighbour to the east. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SCN matters to people in southwest Saskatchewan 

who have depended on SCN to provide a regional newscast. 

SCN matters to families because it provides non-violent 

children’s programming. SCN matters to our economy because 

it keeps talented people here and attracts millions in outside 

investments. SCN matters to people right across the province. 

According to a recent survey, a mere 3 in 10 residents support 

the decision to fade SCN to black. 

 

To the minister: now that the true impact of this decision should 

be clear to the government, will the minister reverse his 

decision to kill SCN? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

think that same survey indicates that this Premier leads that 

Leader of the Opposition by 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I could also tell that member without changing the 

film employment . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the member from 



April 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4887 

. . . Order. I’d ask the member from Prince Albert Northcote 

and the member from Regina Walsh Acres to allow the minister 

to respond to the question placed by the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

I recognize the Minister Responsible for Tourism, Parks, 

Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, in 

the preface of her question, talked about competition that we 

face from other jurisdictions, particularly from the province 

next to us, Mr. Speaker, to the east. I can tell that member that 

this production that was announced today for the province of 

Saskatchewan, they looked at Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, and they 

chose Saskatchewan. I think that shows that we’re very 

competitive when it comes to the film and television industry. 

 

I can also say, Mr. Speaker, that a large working group was 

brought together on Friday, Mr. Speaker — I believe 20 

members of the community, not only from the film and 

television community, Mr. Speaker, people from SaskFilm, 

from my ministry, from other agencies. Mr. Speaker, that work 

is going to continue going forward over the next couple of 

weeks as we come up with some very creative ideas of 

stabilizing the industry, Mr. Speaker, like what we saw today 

with waiving the first year of rent at the sound stage for a series, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, no broadcast licence means no 

access to funding bodies which means no production, which 

means waiving the costs on the sound stage is a bit of a moot 

point. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an article today in . . . Pardon me. SCN . . . I’m all 

over the place here. Mr. Speaker, an article in today’s paper 

quotes Robin Schlaht, a 21-year film industry veteran who’s 

thinking of leaving our province: 

 

“Without SCN, our product volumes are going to drop. 

We know how the system works and we know there’s no 

mechanism (to) replace (SCN).” 

 

And a young filmmaker in a weekend letter to the editor wrote: 

 

Those of us who are thinking of leaving are not doing so 

because we simply forgot about other resources like 

SaskFilm and . . . employment tax credit. We’re . . . 

[leaving] because we understand our industry and SCN’s 

vital role in it. 

 

To the minister: why is he driving talented and creative people 

out of the province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t how that member 

could call today’s announcement a moot point. Mr. Speaker, 

$10 million in spinoff that will be created by this one series 

alone, Mr. Speaker, and 120 people, full-time equivalent 

positions created by this one production, Mr. Speaker — that’s 

very significant for this industry, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to put 

people back to work that have faced some challenging times 

over the last couple of years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:15] 

 

We’re going to continue working with the larger working group 

that’s been brought together, Mr. Speaker, to identify some 

other ways like we’ve done on waiving the sound stage fee for 

the first year on rent, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and we’re also, 

as I’ve told the member opposite, the expression of interest 

process began officially on Friday, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’re going to see over the next couple of weeks what type 

of interest comes in for somebody to continue with the 

broadcasting of SCN or of that licence, Mr. Speaker. And I look 

forward to hopefully having a successful proponent come 

forward. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

911 Response 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Kerri 

Canepotatoe, an 18-year-old woman from northern 

Saskatchewan, died in the area near Big River when she 

attempted to walk for help after the car she and three other 

people were travelling in was stuck in the mud on a logging 

road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, three 911 calls were made, and nobody responded. 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister of Public Safety: this 

minister and this government needs to explain why nobody 

responded to these frantic calls for help. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’re always saddened when a tragic 

incident occurs such as this, and our thoughts and prayers go 

out to the family involved. But I think the member opposite 

doesn’t have his facts quite correct. 

 

There was three attempted 911 calls. One went through. The 

911 dispatcher then contacted the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police] dispatcher because the call came in for a tow 

truck. And this was the correct procedure. What happened with 

the RCMP dispatcher is now under an RCMP investigation 

because they were concerned as to what happened with the 

phone call that was transferred from the 911 operator over to 

the RCMP dispatcher. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the minister misses the point. It 

doesn’t matter if there’s one call or three calls. And don’t go 

blaming staff members as well. You are responsible, sir. You 

are the minister. It goes directly to him, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, along with Kerri in the stranded car was her 

stepsister, Melissa Rabbitskin, and two children, 10-year-old 



4888 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2010 

Cashton and five-year-old Jerome. Not for two days, not for 

three, not for five, but for seven excruciating days they waited 

— cold, wet, and scared — in the car for help, assuming help 

was coming, believing a tow truck was on its way. Mr. Speaker, 

nothing happened. No tow truck came; no rescue team; nothing. 

 

To the minister: what happened to the 911 call, and what is he 

doing now, without pointing a finger at anybody else, to make 

sure a tragic event like this never happens again? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I just 

explained to the member that the matter is under investigation. I 

don’t know how clear I can be that the phone call went from the 

911 dispatcher to the RCMP dispatcher. If he wants to call that 

shuffling blame, I don’t know how I could explain it any clearer 

to him. 

 

Now there is an investigation by the RCMP. They have elected 

to do an investigation as to the conduct of what happened from 

the dispatcher of the RCMP. Now I understand they get an 

awful lot of call for such things as tow trucks, and so this is why 

the investigation is going to take place. 

 

What we have done and been asked for from the Ministry of 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing is to provide an 

independent observer to the investigation. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that is in fact what we will be doing. We have appointed an 

independent observer from the Saskatoon Police Service to 

observe the proceedings of the investigation. And I don’t know 

how much more clear that could be to the member opposite 

because we are . . . There is an investigation going on and we 

are providing an observer. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we don’t need an observer. We 

need a new minister, Mr. Speaker. And I want to point out, Mr. 

Speaker, Ms. Canepotatoe’s uncle, Paul Rabbitskin, says, and I 

quote: 

 

They have to correct things or this could happen to 

somebody else. They can’t just take serious 911 calls and 

then forget about them. The 911 system failed. It failed. 

And now we have a dead young woman who would have 

gone on to become a great mother. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister make the results of the 

investigation of this tragic event so the people of northern 

Saskatchewan know that he’s taken this issue seriously? And 

what does he have to say today to the family of Kerri 

Canepotatoe? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, the 

investigation is taking place. We will look at the investigation 

when it’s completed and determine if there are other initiatives 

that need to be done through the RCMP. 

 

The 911 call that was placed to the 911 dispatcher was handled 

in accordance with procedures, so now it’s a matter of seeing if 

the dispatcher of the RCMP handled it in accordance with their 

procedures. That’s what the investigation is for. We will be an 

observer at the investigation. The investigator is appointed by 

the deputy minister of Justice. That individual is required to 

give a confidential report back to the deputy minister of Justice 

and at that time we’ll have a look to see what the 

recommendations are. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Health Care Issues 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday after 

hard questioning by the media and the opposition, the minister 

had an aha moment and said he “has certainly learned a lot 

more about the kidney transplant program than he knew on 

Monday.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s a very disturbing admission by the Minister 

of Health. To the minister: the kidney transplant program has 

been closed down since July of 2009. That’s nine months. Why 

did it take pressure from the media, the public, and the 

opposition before the minister would pay attention, do his job, 

and finally look into the problem? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I did say at the end of 

last week that certainly by Thursday I knew more about the 

transplant program as far as vascular surgeons, all the 

specialties that go along, specialties that are available that can 

do both procedures of the vascular surgeon as well as the other 

specialists. Mr. Speaker, that isn’t the detail that I was aware of 

before Monday and before we went through the process. So, 

Mr. Speaker, I am, absolutely I know more about the program 

today than I did last Monday, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That being said, we have been working with the Ministry of 

Health as well as with the health region to ensure that this 

program is up and running. I have set a very tight timeline of 

three to four months to have this program up and running. Mr. 

Speaker, the ministry has had conversations with Dr. Shoker, 

Mr. Speaker, already. Mr. Speaker, I have as well. And I think 

we’re on the same page to have this program up and running in 

the near future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — For two and a half years the minister has 

laughed and joked his way through his responsibilities. Last 

week in one aha moment, the minister had an awakening and 

said, oh, he is responsible for the health system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is the minister finally going to take responsibility 

for failed contract negotiations with health care workers, the 

torn up contract with the chiropractors, the almost 50 per cent 

increase in physician vacancies since 2007, the failure to build a 

children’s hospital, the broken promise to build 13 long-term 

care facilities in rural Saskatchewan, the decision not to build 



April 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4889 

an ambulatory care centre in Regina, the failure to build a 

mental hospital in North Battleford, the decision to send 

patients to BC and pay a premium on the surgery, and the 

broken promise to fund the Moose Jaw Union Hospital, to name 

but a few? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I will stand in my spot 

and defend what the Ministry of Health has done and what this 

government has done in two and a half years of our 

government, and I’ll compare it to 16 years of their government 

any day. Mr. Speaker, if it comes to funding Avastin, those 

members turned their backs on hundreds and hundreds of 

people, Mr. Speaker. We’ve covered Avastin. Mr. Speaker, 

when it comes to . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, if it comes to signing a 

partnership agreement and having peace with the nurses, 

something that government never did — in fact they absolutely 

ignored the plight of nurses — and it’s really interesting coming 

from that member who likes to prop herself up as the head of 

nursing in this province for many years when that government 

simply turned their back on them. 

 

If it comes to physician recruitment, Mr. Speaker, I’ll put our 

record against their record any day, Mr. Speaker. And I will put 

our record of 13 new long-term care facilities in this province 

against 52 hospital closures under that government, Mr. 

Speaker. I’ll defend our record every day in the week. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the members to 

come to order so we can hear the reading of the introduction of 

Bills. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 1,459 through 1,496. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1,459 through 1,496 are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 104 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 104 — The 

Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to rise in the Assembly here today and speak to Bill No. 104, An 

Act to amend The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990, Mr. 

Speaker. This piece of legislation has aspects and objectives for 

which certainly the opposition lends support. The question, Mr. 

Speaker, as in any piece of legislation, lies in the actual impact, 

Mr. Speaker, of this legislation and what the actual implications 

and consequences are because what we know about the Sask 

Party, Mr. Speaker, is that they lack the oversight and the 

scrutiny required to put forward legislation that actually fulfills 

the objectives that they desire. 

 

Now what gives me some confidence in this piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, is that I understand the Saskatchewan 

association of police chiefs have offered their support to this 

legislation, and in fact the objective that’s trying to be achieved 

through this legislation is supported by those individuals, those 

chiefs, Mr. Speaker, who are an integral, important aspect of 

our province, Mr. Speaker, in providing the kind of community 

safety required. So that offers some confidence that we’re 

moving in the right direction with this piece of legislation. 

 

We do have questions, Mr. Speaker. We need to make sure than 

we understanding fully what the changes within this legislation 

are and making sure that they do achieve the objective that we 

support. Certainly as it relates to the Act allowing for tickets to 

be served via mail, this is a change, Mr. Speaker, from the 

status quo where a ticket must be served in person. And this 

would appear to be a decision that we would support by the 

principles of becoming more efficient and making sense from 

that perspective. 

 

And when you think about it, likely many of our . . . I don’t 

know the statistics on this, but many violations, many tickets 

might be the result of individuals from out of province or in 

very remote circumstances or from out of country. It would 

make sense to be able to find a more efficient way to present a 

ticket on this front, Mr. Speaker. It would be our goal to make 

sure that in creating this efficiency that we can allow our police 

chiefs and our police officers and our forces to continue to do 

what they do so incredibly well, Mr. Speaker, and that is of 

course fighting crime, making our communities safe places. Mr. 

Speaker, they do a great job of that. 

 

What we do need to do is make sure that this legislation allows 

those efficiencies to be passed on to where they should be, Mr. 

Speaker, that being benefits within the community. And I know 

that’s where, in speaking with my constituents, Mr. Speaker, 

within Regina Rosemont, that’s what’s important to them as it 

relates to this legislation: making sure that we have created 

efficiencies that enhance the service provided to Saskatchewan 

people from those individuals for whom we trust and do a 

wonderful job of fulfilling those requirements, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We certainly have many, many questions that we will be 

needing to ask in committee, Mr. Speaker. We have more 

consultation to do. It’s become a trend of the Sask Party to 

completely not consult as they derive legislation. This is 



4890 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2010 

something that we need to make sure is done at this point in 

time. We need to be speaking with others for whom this 

legislation affects, Mr. Speaker, and we will certainly be doing 

that. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we need to always be urging the 

government to be addressing the big issues of the day, Mr. 

Speaker, that as we meet around the province in all 

communities in every corner of this fine province, Mr. Speaker, 

that are being raised with us — and that’s the Wall 

government’s failure as it relates to health care, Mr. Speaker, 

the Wall government’s failure as it relates to cost of living, and 

the Wall government’s failure as it relates to financial 

mismanagement. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Those are the big issues of the day that we’re being urged to 

bring back to this Assembly and to focus the attentions of this 

Assembly. And it’s my pleasure to take that every opportunity 

that I have to urge the government to be addressing those big 

issues, Mr. Speaker, because when we’re out meeting and we’re 

doing so regularly in every corner of this province, those are the 

issues that are affecting Saskatchewan people — specifically, 

Mr. Speaker, as we look at health care and we look at the Wall 

government’s broken promises as it relates to doctor 

recruitment within rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we see is the vacancies, the need for doctors is growing 

under the Wall government and Saskatchewan people recognize 

this as a complete failure, Mr. Speaker. And it amounts to 

broken trust, Mr. Speaker, with a government that this is 

becoming all too common on so many fronts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as I speak to Bill No. 104, The Summary Offences Procedure 

Act, it’s important that I drill down on what’s important and 

what we’re hearing from my constituents, Mr. Speaker, and 

constituents and residents from across Saskatchewan in every 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s our fear, Mr. Speaker, that too many of the constituencies in 

this province don’t have a voice, Mr. Speaker, that in many of 

the cases where a Sask Party MLA represents many, many 

ridings in this province, Mr. Speaker, that we’re hearing time 

and time again, whether that be in coffee shops or in legion 

halls or in seniors care homes or in our own offices that the 

Sask Party members aren’t taking their issues and (b) listening 

to them. Many of them are simply phoning our offices or 

making contact with us because they have no other outlet, Mr. 

Speaker. And then they feel that they are not advancing that 

agenda at the caucus table and certainly not advancing on the 

important priorities of Saskatchewan people. 

 

We think it’s a shame, Mr. Speaker, to be at a point in time with 

a government that’s completely ignoring the needs of 

Saskatchewan people as it relates to health care, cost of living, 

and financial mismanagement among many, many others, Mr. 

Speaker. And we urge this government to put that on their 

radars, on their caucus meetings, at the cabinet table and to 

make that the kind of focus that they . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’m just bringing to the 

member’s attention I’m having difficulty tying the current 

comments from the member to Bill No. 104, The Summary 

Offences Procedure Amendment Act. I recognize the member 

from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I guess I 

come in with such sincerity just as a bit of, by way of 

background as we are speaking to Bill 104, The Summary 

Offences Procedure Act. This Act, we do support the principles 

and objectives that are outlined within this Act. 

 

What I want to mention and make sure . . . And I made the 

commitment, Mr. Speaker, to many people throughout the 

weekend that I would raise these issues when given the 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker. And it’s important to me, Mr. 

Speaker, to make sure that when I know many of the MLAs 

opposite don’t take those messages to the caucus table and 

cabinet table, that when I get the opportunity to speak to the 

public and to the government, to the Premier, Mr. Speaker — 

who I know is certainly not listening to the message here and 

now, Mr. Speaker, but people are asking that Premier to start 

listening to these important issues — that I’m going to take 

every opportunity that I can, Mr. Speaker, to raise these issues 

as it relates to the failure of the Sask Party, specifically as it 

relates to health care and surgical wait times, doctor recruitment 

within this province and retention, Mr. Speaker, and the cost of 

living that is a burden and a challenge for so many families and 

businesses within this province, and of course, Mr. Speaker, the 

grave consequences of the gross financial mismanagement that 

we’ve seen in this province, the reckless fiscal management, 

Mr. Speaker, that we’ve seen. And that’s why, when I had a 

quick opportunity within this Bill, I want to make sure that I 

outline the priorities of the people at the same time. 

 

As it relates to Bill 104, The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 

there are many questions that we want to ask within committee, 

Mr. Speaker. I think there’s good questions as to making sure 

that the Bill fulfills the objective that we certainly support, Mr. 

Speaker, and finding efficiencies to get traffic offences out to 

individuals or tickets and offences out to people across Canada 

and possibly around the world, Mr. Speaker. We want to make 

sure that we’re finding a best use of our resources, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we know one thing, Mr. Speaker, is that when you have the 

Saskatchewan association of police chiefs, a fine group of 

individuals who lead within every . . . across Saskatchewan and 

within our communities, when they are pushing for this kind of 

change, we need to make sure we get it right, Mr. Speaker. And 

so the objective is certainly something we support, something 

that’s endorsed and pushed by the Saskatchewan police chiefs. 

 

But we need to make sure that this government, a government 

that does not have the ability, it would appear, to put forward 

legislation that actually fulfills the needed objectives of 

Saskatchewan people, we need to make sure that that’s gone on. 

So it’s our job as the official opposition — and unfortunately 

this shouldn’t always be the case — but we need to make sure 

the kind of scrutiny and consultation that is required goes on, 

Mr. Speaker, to make sure that what we put forward is in fact a 

Bill that’s effective in meeting the objective that it’s trying to 

meet. 

 

We need to make sure that the consequences are the intended 

ones, Mr. Speaker, the goals of the police chiefs and of 



April 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4891 

Saskatchewan people and not unintended consequences that 

may not have been contemplated because of a lack of 

consultation. That’s all too common, Mr. Speaker, with a 

government that chooses not to consult, Mr. Speaker. And I 

could give you speech after speech as you would know, Mr. 

Speaker, as it relates to a lack of consultation and why we need 

to make sure we get it right in this piece of legislation here, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But the basic principle of where I stand, Mr. Speaker, is with 

the constituents of Regina Rosemont and the individuals and 

citizens from across Saskatchewan who are wanting and 

desiring us to find some efficiencies within police forces, and 

for police officers who bring peace and safety, structure to our 

communities, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that we can fight 

criminal activity and make sure that we have the kind of 

communities that we’re so proud of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in our goal to make sure that this legislation meets its needs, 

we need to make sure that the impact and the result is that we 

enable and pass along that efficiency that we’re trying to create 

here to the very people, Mr. Speaker, who are making our 

communities safer on a day-to-day basis. My greatest thanks 

goes out to all the police officers within Saskatchewan, 

certainly all of those that I represent in Regina Rosemont, and 

the police chiefs, Mr. Speaker, who are standing up for a piece 

of legislation that appears to make sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, the opposition New Democrats 

are urging this government to make sure we get this piece of 

legislation right, Mr. Speaker, that we bring the kind of 

efficiency that we know that it can be achieved, Mr. Speaker. 

And we need to make sure the intended consequences are 

exactly what’s going to be achieved, Mr. Speaker, and that 

there’s not a host of unintended consequences that are 

problematic for police forces, Mr. Speaker, for police officers, 

and for communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s certainly questions we have as it relates to the actual 

process of mailing out these tickets, Mr. Speaker, potentially 

out of province and in many cases out of country, the actual 

timelines there and the security aspects around that to make 

sure that the integrity of our system is in place, Mr. Speaker, 

and that privacy concerns are being addressed. Those are just 

simply the types of questions that’ll be well served at the 

committee table, Mr. Speaker. And we need to make sure we 

fully understand because the minister has been incredibly vague 

on this, as to how we ensure that the tickets in fact have been 

received by somebody who may not be in our country at all, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what this amounts to — because in many cases we’re 

going to be dealing with individuals receiving tickets or 

enabling that process outside of our province, Mr. Speaker — is 

we’re talking about people that are visiting our province that we 

want to welcome to our province, Mr. Speaker. But we want to 

make sure that if in fact they haven’t come in and been in 

accordance with our laws, Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure 

that they’re accountable for that, Mr. Speaker. And that’s an 

important aspect of this legislation. 

 

And I think of the numerous, numerous people who come in 

from a tourism aspect to our province for hunting and fishing 

specifically, Mr. Speaker. And we invite these individuals from 

around the world. And in fact if we have anybody tuning in here 

today, Mr. Speaker, throughout . . . from afar, through the 

United States or anywhere else, Mr. Speaker, I would say, come 

and find some of the best hunting and fishing in our province, 

Mr. Speaker. We have outfitters that are world-class, and we 

can provide just an incredible experience. 

 

And at the same time, something that the vast, vast, vast 

majority of those individuals coming to our province for this 

kind of tourism do, Mr. Speaker, is they conduct themself in a 

lawful manner, Mr. Speaker. And we certainly know that would 

be the case, so I provide that invite. I know in many ways our 

outfitters are struggling at this point in time within our 

province. And I would remind all those watching, Mr. Speaker, 

about the incredible game within this province as it relates to 

animals and fish and the great products of our land and our 

natural environment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I urge the legislators here today to continue to ask the 

valuable questions to stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, to make sure 

that the important intent that we support is achieved, Mr. 

Speaker. And we know that that’s going to be able to occur at 

the committee structure. We know that those meetings have 

been ongoing; they’ve been valuable, valuable meetings. 

 

I want to take one last time to thank the police chiefs of 

Saskatchewan, particularly their association for the leadership 

they provide to our communities and specifically the leadership 

that they’ve provided in urging this Bill, Mr. Speaker. And we 

need to work with those exceptional leaders in our communities 

to make sure we have it right, right here, Mr. Speaker, to make 

sure this is exactly what they need, Mr. Speaker, and to make 

sure that at the same time the consequences of that legislation 

are appropriate, Mr. Speaker. Certainly we support the 

objectives that are laid out here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So at this point in time there’s valuable questions, Mr. Speaker, 

that can be asked at the committee table. As I’ve said — with 

many, many meetings, Mr. Speaker, throughout this past 

weekend — people across our province are wanting us to urge 

our attention, to focus our priorities on that government, on 

their failures as it relates to health care, cost of living, and 

financial mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. And at every moment 

that that government can focus that attention, Mr. Speaker, we 

ask them to do so. And I’m proud to stand up and share the 

people’s priorities here in their Legislative Building here today 

within our chambers. 

 

At this point in time, with more questions to be asked on a piece 

of legislation for which we support the principle, for which we 

thank the input and continue to invite the input of the police 

chiefs of Saskatchewan, we’ll refer this Bill to committee where 

much of that work and scrutiny can occur, Mr. Speaker. What I 

would say is that we need to get out of a habit that the Sask 

Party has gotten themselves into where they derive legislation 

in a vacuum. They don’t scrutinize and understand the 

consequences of their legislation, and they make mistakes, Mr. 

Speaker. And we need to make sure that this piece of legislation 

fulfills the objectives that it’s intended to and that’s something 

the opposition New Democrats are committed to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So at this point in time, it’s been a pleasure to speak on this 



4892 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2010 

Bill, one that we need to stay focused on the point of providing 

efficiencies back to police officers and to police forces, Mr. 

Speaker, so that they can address the important issues of 

community safety and crime within our communities, Mr. 

Speaker, something that they do an incredible job of addressing. 

Mr. Speaker, we need to make sure this enables them to do even 

more and provide them the latitude to make our communities 

even safer, Mr. Speaker. At this point in time, I’ll urge 

questions and discussion to be related at the committee level 

and I now refer this Bill, Bill No. 104, The Summary Offences 

Procedure Act to committee, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 104, The 

Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 104, The 

Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) be 

referred to the Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee.  

 

Why is the member from . . . Government House Leader on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 

move a motion on substitutions on committees. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 

leave to move a motion regarding substitution of committees. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Substitution on Committees 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave I 

move: 

 

That the name of Delbert Kirsch be substituted for that of 

Serge LeClerc on the Standing Committee on Private 

Bills, that the name of Delbert Kirsch be substituted for 

the name of Serge LeClerc on the Standing Committee for 

Privileges, and that the name of Jim Reiter be substituted 

for the name of Serge LeClerc on the Standing Committee 

for Human Services. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved the Government House 

Leader by leave: 

 

That the name of Delbert Kirsch be substituted for the 

name of Serge LeClerc on the Standing Committee for 

Private Bills, that the name of Delbert Kirsch be 

substituted for the name of Serge LeClerc on the Standing 

Committee for Privileges, and that the name of Jim Reiter 

be substituted for the name of Serge LeClerc on the 

Standing Committee for Human Services. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 114 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 114 — The Small 

Claims Amendment Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 

1997 sur les petites créances be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

today to stand and speak on Bill 114, An Act to amend The 

Small Claims Act. This is a Justice Bill. And I want to state very 

clearly for the record that on this side of the House, the 

opposition side, we’re always supportive of any improvements 

that can be made to small . . . well, to the judicial system, 

period. But relating directly to this Bill, any improvements that 

can be made in small claims court are welcome, and indeed we 

would be supportive of it. 

 

I want to further say that I was a much younger man when the 

Al Blakeney government introduced the small claims first 

legislation in Saskatchewan in the 1970s. And that was viewed 

as a massive step forward in justice for people that weren’t 

necessarily overly monied, that is, people that for whom hiring 

a lawyer at whatever fees was a bit of a problem. 

 

But it’s much more of course than simply whether or not an 

individual or a family or people involved can afford a lawyer. 

Really, small claims, Mr. Speaker, is all about providing what 

people on the street would, that you’d run into would say, this is 

justice. This is a case of us able to sort out in the least 



April 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4893 

complicated way, issues of justice. 

 

The small claims court provides for anything under $20,000 in 

value for individuals to go to small claims court. Don’t need a 

lawyer, it’s a less formal hearing, and you stand a good chance 

of reaching a resolution that’s hopefully a little fairer because 

it’s not solely based on a point of law, but there is more of a 

sense, I think, of justice coming into small claims. 

 

And I can just hear my calls coming in to my constituency 

office as I say this from everyone who’s been to small claims 

court, thinks that the result wasn’t exactly what they were 

looking for. I want to say that justice is the goal at all steps, 

whether we’re talking small claims court or Court of Queen’s 

Bench or the Supreme Court of Canada or any other judicial 

system. Justice is what we would strive for, but it isn’t always 

pretty and it isn’t always effective. And it isn’t always, it 

doesn’t always reflect what we might wish for as an individual. 

 

So An Act to amend The Small Claims Act, Bill No. 114, is a 

welcome Act. We are welcoming of it, but we have some 

serious questions because you see, Mr. Speaker, the first change 

explicitly will let a judge, it allows for a judge to order an 

enforceable judgment against the party summoned to small 

claims. Well we’d have less problem with that than where it 

may have come from. 

 

In Bill after Bill after Bill — whether it’s this one or the 

previous one spoken to by the honourable member for Regina 

Rosemont or any number of Bills that I and other colleagues 

have spoken on — the one thing that, the absolutely common 

thread in virtually every Bill is the lack of meaningful 

consultation done by the Sask Party government, the lack of 

talking to people that are in the know, the people that the very 

legislation would affect. That lack of prior consultation often 

leads us to a bad result. 

 

And we don’t need to look terribly far. I mean there was no, 

there just could not have been any consultation before the Sask 

Party government dropped the contract with chiropractors. 

There clearly was no, it’s publicly documented, no consultation 

prior to the axing of SCN — SCN that we had questions of in 

question period earlier this day, and last week we had questions. 

 

Clearly the pattern is one of the Sask Party government not 

doing consultation in any significant or meaningful way and 

just deciding unilaterally to do something. I know in SCN the 

claim is they’re going to save some money. 

 

I know on Dutch elm disease, where there was previously half a 

million dollars in support for municipalities to monitor and then 

deal with elm trees if they became under attack or diseased with 

Dutch elm disease, but for a mere half a million dollars in a 

land of plenty, the Sask Party just unilaterally axed it. Then 

when opposition raised legitimate and serious questions, they 

had to do a partial reversal and say, well no, we are going to 

restore some of that funding because there are situations where 

clearly the public good has to be served and clearly the 

provincial government would be the funder of that public good. 

 

So unilateral action without consultation is clearly causing grief 

throughout the piece, clearly causing problems for the people of 

Saskatchewan. And we just have to wonder whether this Act to 

amend The Small Claims Act isn’t yet another example of 

simply changes for the sake of changes or changes that are, the 

changes that someone’s hobby, hobby horse . . . Someone really 

wanted to get that change in, but in a vacuum. 

 

If the changes were made because there had been a consultation 

with people who had, individuals and companies that had 

dealings with small claims, it could as simple as a survey, a 

questionnaire: did you find the small claims experience resulted 

in a judgment or in an outcome that you could support that was 

helpful? Did it in fact result in a quicker answer at a lower cost? 

These are the sorts of things you could ask. You could also ask 

people who’d been through the small claims system, how would 

you improve it? If you were the benevolent dictator for a day, 

how would you improve the small claims court experience? 

These are legitimate questions, and that’s a legitimate way to do 

consultation, but it didn’t happen that way. 

 

And so we really have concerns, Mr. Speaker, around things 

that, like the very first change that allows for a judge to order an 

enforceable judgment against a party summoned to small claims 

court if that person or party fails to appear at a case 

management conference between the two parties. Previously 

what judges could do was issue an appropriate order. But now 

it’s an enforceable judgment that can come down, and it may 

well be an improvement. It may be, but we have some questions 

around that. We have some serious questions. Where did it 

come from?  

 

I know that earlier today in question period I heard the Premier 

say that the government wants to move to meet its election 

promises, to keep . . . the words he used were, keep our election 

promises. Well forgive me for being skeptical, but the vacancies 

of rural doctors throughout rural Saskatchewan is up over 50 

per cent under the Sask Party watch. The promise to reduce 

wait lists for surgeries is going the wrong way. In the Premier’s 

own health district, the wait list for surgeries is up nearly 

double what it was when he became, the first day he was 

Premier. 

 

So this from a party that now governs, that had all of the 

answers the day before the last election in 1997 and seems to be 

going backwards in so many critical areas. It seems to be just 

sliding and going backwards, and this from a government that 

inherited a $2 billion surplus and has turned it into a $1 billion 

deficit. It’s more than a $3 billion turnaround in two and a half 

years, and it leaves us wondering, well where did the money 

go? 

 

I mean there was 13 long-term care homes that had been slated 

to be built in rural Saskatchewan, and they’re on hold, 

indefinite hold, and that’s under the Sask Party watch. More 

than half of the unionized workforce in the health system 

province-wide is without a contract, and that’s under the Sask 

Party watch. 

 

So we’ve got huge questions, Mr. Speaker, around any changes 

in legislation. We don’t know where it came from, what basis 

it’s there, and we’re even a bit skeptical who the legislation is 

designed to help. 

 

With respect to Bill No. 114, An Act to amend The Small 

Claims Act, the second change mandates that a document that 



4894 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2010 

begins a claim — what we would think of I guess as the 

summons — that it be delivered personally or by registered 

mail. And this is so that the other party knows that they’re 

involved in a claim. 

 

But we think that that’s certainly laudable for the other party to 

know that the claim is made against them, but our concern is 

this piece of legislation, this amendment seems to restrict or 

narrow the potential ways in which that message can get 

through to the other party. We think it’s narrowed the process 

as opposed to expanded it. 

 

So we’ll have some questions certainly in committee about how 

that’s going to roll out, how it’s going to work, and if . . . Our 

questions of course will be, is it possible for one side or the 

other to fall through the cracks, so of speak, and get missed 

under this new legislation proposal? And of course we do not 

want that. 

 

We want that the summons would be deliverable and that the 

way it’s deliverable should be in a straightforward manner that 

would reasonably and surely reach the party that’s being 

summoned. Because you don’t want somebody . . . You don’t 

want a situation where someone should know that they’re being 

sued or being asked for some restitution and that party not even 

know that there’s a problem or not know that there’s a court 

date or not know that they’re being required to appear before 

the small claims court. So we need, Mr. Speaker, to make as 

certain as we can that that in fact happens. 

 

The third change in Bill No. 114, an Act to amend the small 

claims court, will allow a judge to consider evidence that, in a 

Court of Queen’s Bench would not, strictly speaking, be legal 

evidence. It might be done on a much less formal way. It might 

be more a case of one of the parties saying, well you know, 

listen, this is the way it happened. This is what I did and this is 

what they did and this is what happened. 

 

And you know, it’s important that people be allowed to express 

their views in a small claims court. It is important that all 

parties be given the opportunity to express their version of what 

happened. That’s clearly a part of what small claims was 

intended to be, and we would be very supportive of that notion 

of relaxing some of the rules because it’s got to be intimidating, 

in the first instance, if I were on either side of it. If I was 

seeking a judgment against someone, it’s sometimes difficult to 

look them in the eye and say, no, I want $1,000 for that car you 

sold me, or whatever the situation might be. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And on the other hand, it would be maybe even more difficult if 

I were the recipient and someone was trying to seek some 

restitution from me, claiming that I owed them some money. 

And the only reason I say that might be a little more difficult is 

I’m very proud that, I don’t think, I owe anybody any money 

that’s not current. I probably have a credit card bill that’s paid 

off monthly, that sort of thing, but I don’t believe that I’ve got 

any outstanding debt to individuals . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Sure enough, I’ve got a colleague that wants his $20, and I 

want to assure everyone that that’s bogus. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it is intimidating certainly to appear in small 

claims court. 

 

But the flip side of this, and I think we’ll have some questions, 

are there guidelines for the judge in small claims court to make 

sure that, when someone is giving their version of what 

happened or their version of the evidence, that it’s germane and 

that it’s focused? Because we’ve all been around in situations 

where there’s no good beginning for a story and clearly no end 

for a story, just an endless middle, an endless middle. 

 

And, you know, we wouldn’t want that to be the situation in 

small claims court either. Because you have to have some focus 

or it just becomes irrelevant and becomes some — not to 

denigrate tea parties, but — it just becomes some afternoon 

social or a tea party as opposed to a serious look at finding a 

resolution to a potential or a real legal problem. 

 

So we’re concerned with where that came from. We’re 

wondering where that recommendation came from. Was it 

based on people’s experience with small claims court? Or did it 

just seem like, you know, we’ve got to do change for the sake 

of change or we’ve got to make a change, so let’s do something, 

and this is the something that got done? We want it to be 

workable. We want it to in fact help people that appear before 

small claims court. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fourth change refers to a setting aside of 

default judgments, that a party would now be able to get 

judgment in the absence of the other party. What we think this 

is going to do is we think it’s going to remove the ability of 

someone being summoned to simply not show up and thereby 

avoid responsibility. We think that this change is a good one. 

We think that’s what it does, is just doesn’t let you duck and 

hide forever, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it’s important that there be a protection because not 

everyone who doesn’t show up for their day in court doesn’t 

show up because they simply want to not be there. Sometimes 

there’s some . . . sometimes they didn’t receive the summons; 

sometimes there’s some medical emergency or crisis that they 

simply have to deal with. The obvious immediate things that 

come to mind are health problems, be it as, you know, as simple 

as a gallbladder attack which is not by any means a simple 

thing, but it certainly is debilitating enough that you would not 

appear before any court. So we’ve got to make sure that you 

can’t impose a judgment that’s binding without recourse for the 

person that that judgment has been bound, been made to. 

 

So this amendment imposes a 90-day limit on the ability to 

appeal or to set aside a judgment. So if I had a judgment made 

against me, as I understand this legislation that’s being 

proposed, once the judgment was made, the clock would start 

ticking and within 90 days I have got to speak up or that 

judgment is binding. 

 

I’m not sure how it is that we’re certain that I would even know 

that judgment had been made against me. The quickest example 

that I can think of, without getting into the name, but at a high 

school, a principal that relayed the story of another person of 

exactly the same name from the same area. And the one of 

course was a deadbeat, and my teacher claimed not to be. And 

actually I know he was not. He was a very, very fine, very fine 

gentleman. And in many ways, I owe a significant part of the 



April 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4895 

credit for my being here in the legislature to that very fine 

teacher. 

 

But in this instance, we have two people with the same name 

from the same general area. And what if there had been a 

judgment issued against one but that judgment delivered to the 

other person of the same name? Then where does that leave my 

friend, the high school teacher? What recourse would he have in 

the future? 

 

So there’s some very legitimate questions around this. And I 

raise that question, Mr. Speaker, not because I want for a 

minute to slow a justice process or to cause there to be 

roadblocks; on the contrary, on our side of the legislature we 

want to make sure that the legislation is well-thought-out, 

well-crafted, and that it in fact makes improvements for the 

lives of people of Saskatchewan. We really do want this Bill 

No. 114, the Act to amend The Small Claims Act to work on 

behalf of Saskatchewan people. 

 

We’re wondering what other measures there are pertaining to 

this subject matter that have been or were considered. What 

went into the considerations of the drafting? What were the 

drafting instructions? What went into this Bill as it went from a 

gleam in somebody’s eye, a thought to reality of a Bill in print 

before the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan? So we want 

to know what the thought process was. We’ve already . . . I’ve 

already said we don’t think the consultation process was 

adequate but we want to know what the thought process was. 

What was it they were trying — the drafters — thought they 

were going to fix? 

 

The amendments certainly seem to be reasonable, for the most 

part. There are questions. I think I’ve . . . I know I’ve tried to 

outline the questions as best I can, Mr. Speaker, questions 

around this Act to amend The Small Claims Act. We do want to 

make sure that the amendments get the intended results, that the 

targeted results are what they would be. That’s absolutely what 

we want and it’s very important. It’s very important that the Act 

to amend The Small Claims Act effectively improve the lives of 

working people. 

 

As I said at the very start, it was in the ’70s that the first small 

claims court Act, this first legislation came in, in Saskatchewan 

in the ’70s under the leadership of Allan Blakeney and the New 

Democrats. The last amendments happened again under our 

watch. And I’m pleased that these amendments are being put 

forward. It gives us an opportunity to ask in committee. 

 

We’ve raised the issue here in our second reading speeches, so 

certainly the ministry and the minister should have a pretty 

good idea of what some of our concerns are and hopefully that 

minister and officials will be able to answer most of the 

questions upfront in their introductory comments when we do 

get into committee. 

 

But there’s no shortage of concern about the lack of 

consultation. We’ve seen it. We see it where . . . Well you see it 

where chiropractic coverage was just simply axed in the last 

budget and there was nowhere — nowhere — that there was a 

recommendation that that would take place. Nowhere was there 

consultation done that would result in chiropractors being axed. 

 

There is nowhere that there is a recommendation — and in fact 

this is a matter of public record — even the board of SCN 

wasn’t consulted, wasn’t told, wasn’t given a heads-up. They 

just simply, as a matter of a budget decision, axed. 

 

And what’s even more astounding about SCN being axed is it 

was introduced at a time of much greater financial problem — 

much greater financial problem — when the Conservative Party 

was in office and Grant Devine was the Premier, and in his 

dying days of his government, he introduced and initiated SCN 

at a time when we couldn’t afford to keep it going, but there it 

was. And now axed at a time when, in the Premier’s own 

words, Saskatchewan chose not to participate in the recession. 

 

And yet, there’s no money now. No money for things they don’t 

believe in, but there’s money for their friends. And I can’t, I just 

can’t quite figure what’s happening there. I can’t figure out why 

when they inherited the $2 billion surplus that there’s . . . The 

number of rural doctor vacancies has increased more than 50 

per cent under the Sask Party watch. And I just don’t 

understand how that could possibly happen, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

just bizarre that a government prides itself, says that it’s largely 

rural in membership — not exclusively, but largely rural — that 

they would focus on rural problems. And we see the very 

problem that they were focused on, that of rural doctor 

vacancies, having grown by half — grown 50 per cent under the 

Sask Party watch. 

 

We know that they’ve targeted . . . much hullabaloo about 

patient first and reducing and eliminating, ultimately 

eliminating, the wait-list for surgeries. But we see surgical 

wait-lists growing in virtually every health district, nearly 

doubling in the Swift Current Health District. And you’ve got to 

wonder what’s happening there in terms of focus by the Sask 

Party government. 

 

Are they focused on the things that really matter to people, or is 

there something else, some other agenda? We know that they’re 

into privatization by stealth. We know that because we’ve seen 

a couple of examples of SaskPower where they have purchased 

new generating capacity when there’s absolutely no reason to 

purchase it. It should be done in-house where you don’t have to 

add a component of profit for some out-of-province 

corporation, where SaskPower would simply deliver the most 

efficient service at the lowest possible cost. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked much about the need for things to 

happen with respect to Bill 114, An Act to amend The Smalls 

Claims Act. I know that we’re supportive of any improvement 

to The Small Claims Act. We’re supportive of anything that 

brings some notion of justice and fairness to the people of 

Saskatchewan. We’re in favour of things that make that process 

easier not just for my constituents but for all of our constituents, 

for all of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We want the small claims experience, we want it to happen 

seldom because there’s no need for it. But when it happens, by 

gosh, we want it to work. We want it to work in an efficient, 

timely manner. And that’s indeed one of the great advantages of 

small claims court is the timeliness. And we want individuals to 

be able to present their information to the best of their ability 

and for that information to be respectfully heard and 

respectfully dealt with. 



4896 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2010 

We’ve got lots of questions on this. There are four changes that 

have shown up in this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:15] 

 

I just want to say this one more time. The ministry and the 

minister has had ample opportunity to hear the concerns 

registered by members of the opposition in our second reading 

speeches on this Act. We’ve had lots of opportunity . . . or the 

minister’s had lots of opportunity to hear some of my 

colleagues and certainly myself now explain some of the 

concerns we have with respect to this Bill, this Act to amend 

The Small Claims Act. 

 

I’m hoping that as a result of our speeches, that the ministry and 

the minister are able to address these concerns in the opening 

remarks of the committee so that we don’t have to glean 

through our speeches or somehow drag out the procedures 

because that certainly wouldn’t be our intention. We would 

simply want to make sure that we can expedite legislation, but 

we absolutely have to get it right. That’s the critical part, is we 

have to make sure that there’s been an adequate time for 

consultation and an adequate time for people and companies 

and anyone who has a view on it, adequate time for them to 

comment in, either to us or to the government directly or to the 

Ministry of Justice in this case, for the Act to amend The Small 

Claims Act. 

 

We want to make sure that people have the opportunity to have 

their say. And you know, that’s fairly, a fairly reasonable thing 

to ask. Because that’s really part of what this Act purports to be 

about, is giving individuals and companies an opportunity to 

state their point of view in a less formal way, but to say here’s 

the way I saw it happen, and then you have an unbiased third 

party that sorts it out and helps the two parties come to a 

resolution that they can both live with, hopefully, but at least it 

is a fair resolution of the problem. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got lots of questions. I hope that there’s 

an equal number of answers when we do get to committee. And 

we want to be able to ask the questions so that we can be sure 

that the answers are forthcoming. We want to make sure that 

the intended consequences of this Act are what happens. So I 

move that Bill 114, An Act to amend The Small Claims Act 

proceed to Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the Bill 

No. 114 presented by the Minister of Justice, that The Small 

Claims Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 114, The Small 

Claims Amendment Act, 2009 be referred to the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the 

intergovernmental and justice affairs committee. 

 

Bill No. 125 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 125 — The Crown 

Minerals Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to rise today to enter into the debate. This particular 

Bill, Bill No. 125, An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act, it 

looks like a relatively straightforward Act. We have some 

questions. And as we’ve said many times on this side of the 

House, our aim is to make sure it’s well thought out, that there 

are no unintended consequences, that we’re getting directly to a 

matter that needs to be served, that the intentions are 

straightforward. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, before I go too far, I have to tell you that I’ve 

learned some very interesting things about how we do business 

in Saskatchewan and Canada. I don’t know if you know this 

interesting stat, but 60 per cent of mines that are publicly traded 

are traded through Canada, primarily the Toronto and 

Vancouver Stock Exchange. And the reason for that is because 

Canada has such a strong reputation of having very good 

regulations so that when people are investing in our country and 

our province, they know what they’re getting. There’s not a lot 

of room for misinterpretation. The goods are relatively 

straightforward. And I think that’s a real feather in our cap, that 

we take a lot of time to do the legislation well, and we make 

sure that around the world . . . because people around the world 

invest in our province. And they’ve got to know, they’ve got to 

have the confidence that they’re getting the straight goods. 

 

And so that’s why we take this very seriously when we talk 

about potential amendments to legislation that has stood the test 

of time. And so as we go through this, there will be some 

questions. Of course we want to make sure that there has been 

thorough consultation and that the work has been well done. We 

know, as we’ve seen on other pieces of legislation, let us ask a 

lot of questions about whether this government can be trusted in 

terms of the work, the quality of work that they’ve done. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker — and I was just reviewing the fact 

sheet — when it comes around Crown minerals, it plays a 

hugely important role in Saskatchewan. So it’s very important 

that we get this right, that we’re not . . . We cannot at all think 

that minerals play a small part in Saskatchewan’s economy. In 

fact they play a major, major role. 

 

If I look at the fact sheet that the government produces, this 

one’s from July 2009, our GDP [gross domestic product] in 

2008 was some $64 billion — $64 billion. Half of that, almost 



April 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4897 

half of that, came from the value of mineral sales, and that was 

23 billion. Of course some minerals were having a banner year 

in 2008, and of course we look at potash which had a sale of 

over $7 billion. And of course that was wonderful. We saw 

what happened. Unfortunately 2009 was not so good. 

 

But we have values of other minerals that come up, step up to 

the plate, but clearly potash, petroleum, other minerals which 

include potassium sulphate, ammonium sulphate, sodium 

sulphate, bentonite, in the South here, coal, uranium, natural 

gas, salt, gold, and other base materials.  

 

And we think of those rare earth materials which are hugely 

important especially when we see we’re talking now about a 

new green economy, and we’re talking about batteries and 

power vehicles. And we know those rare earth minerals, 

Saskatchewan’s very fortunate. In fact we’re one of the few 

places in the world that has rare earth minerals — largest 

deposit in the world — and no doubt we’re blessed to have that. 

So we have to make sure we do the right thing and that there’s 

no confusion when you have investors coming in to take a look 

at this. 

 

And of course uranium is one that has caused a lot of 

conversation in Saskatchewan, but clearly in the North, it plays 

a major role. And many of us on both sides of the House have 

toured the uranium mines up north and their role in 

strengthening our economy. 

 

And of course the exploration of the potential sites for new 

mines plays a big role in terms of how well we do our business. 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have to make sure we do it 

right and that we get what we want to accomplish through the 

legislation actually done. 

 

Now I understand that this legislation mainly focuses on the 

amendments to the existing Act. And the Act was first 

introduced in 1984 on how we govern Crown mineral rights and 

how they’re granted and how that whole process happens. Of 

course there is a lot of work to be done in this area because 

clearly in the southern part of the province a lot of surveying 

has been done, and we have clear descriptions of land and 

ownership of land and explorations. But as we go up north, it’s 

not quite the same. 

 

And I know, and I know my colleague from Regina Northeast 

had a lot of time up north talking to folks. And in fact I know 

this played into the labour standards a lot, particularly when it 

came to exploration and how do we allow that to happen 

because clearly that needs to happen in a way that makes a lot 

of sense. And in the North, that really depends a lot on the 

weather and when you can get out there to actually do the 

exploration. And so you know, it’s interesting that we’re going 

into this modern era when we’re talking about online registries, 

but you still have to get out there, cut the bush, do some 

exploration, and find out what the rock is underneath. 

 

And so this is hugely important that, as we move forward, that 

we get it right and there is confidence not only by the industry 

but the investors because, as I said earlier, investors look 

around the world at what’s happening in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And we have a huge land base, and so there’s a 

lot of stuff under our soil. And people are looking at that and 

going, well if I invest here, they have to have the confidence 

that they’re getting the straight goods. 

 

So I see that one of the sections, section 17 allows for more 

regulation making. On one hand that allows for flexibility, but 

we do get nervous about that because we do like to think . . . to 

see changes come back to the House unless they’re a very good 

reason. When you leave too much in the hands of cabinet, 

things may go a little astray, and we get worried about that. We 

get a little nervous about that — when you have the powers to 

make regulations when for many years things had to come to 

the House. 

 

And so why is it now after some 25 years that we’re finding that 

things weren’t working as well? I’d like to know more about 

that. What changed in the 25 years since when this first piece of 

legislation was introduced to now that they need to have more 

powers to make regulations? I think it’s . . . I have some 

questions about that. 

 

Of course section 21 is, the proposal is to change it to allow the 

minister to withdraw and reopen land using the online website 

instead of the Gazette. And this does follow other shifts that 

have gone online, and for example oil and gas expiration 

notices, I understand, began to be published online in July of 

2006. So clearly that was during our tenure, so they’re keeping 

up with that good work and that seems to be working well. 

 

And so hopefully that is one that will go forward without any 

hitches. And so we’ll be asking questions about that in 

committee, about really, what does that all mean? What are the 

minerals and what’s the timeline? What are the schedules? And 

is it going to go ahead in a way that makes sense for industry? 

Which will be the minerals that will go forward, and will we be 

ready for that? 

 

And part II creates a Crown mineral dispositions electronic 

registry known as MARS or also known as mineral 

administration registry Saskatchewan — and this will handle 

the Crown dispositions — and also outlines parameters for the 

operation of this registry. So that seems to make some sense. I 

mean as we’re moving into this modern era, that if we can 

modernize the work, then clearly we need to take a look at that. 

We have to look at the benefits. We have to make sure we 

understand what are the downside of it, if there are any, and try 

to minimize the downside of that. We know more and more in 

this world that things are going online. There have been hitches 

with that, and clearly we want to minimize that as much as 

possible. 

 

And so, you know, one of the stated reasons for the timeline in 

terms of how long does it take to, the rate of communicating to 

industry the changes that are out there and who’s picking up the 

dispositions and that type of thing, we think that sounds like a 

good plan. You know, the question will be in the detail; the 

devil’s always in the detail here. Hopefully we will still be 

doing good, thorough work. We’ve been known for doing 

thorough work — clearly we don’t want to lose that reputation 

— but if we can increase the speed and also the public access to 

that information, then that’s a good thing. That’s a good thing 

because we know in this day and age people have come to 

expect that. 

 



4898 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2010 

[15:30] 

 

But it’s the integrity of the system that really we have some 

concerns about in this government. Often there’s been a 

question about the integrity in terms of the trustworthiness, in 

terms of the consultations, the intentions of their work. And so I 

do have some questions about that. How will they maintain 

that? I know they talk about an electronic signature, and that’s 

not uncommon. But we want to make sure that when people are 

accessing online data that it is the right stuff, that it has not been 

altered, and it cannot be altered by anyone other than those who 

are supposed to be doing that. 

 

And the whole issue around privacy is hugely important. And 

so if there are any concerns about privacy in terms of 

investment, that’s important to make sure that that’s done in the 

appropriate fashion. So it has to be to the highest standard 

possible. And that’s what people have come to expect, 

especially in the mining industry. 

 

You know, as I said earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that mining 

plays such a huge role in this province. Now we would hate to 

see it go down the same line as, say, forestry. When this 

government has let an industry so solid as forestry be under 

such attacks, such attack, that we would not want to see that 

same sort of scenario play out, that their sloppiness or speed to 

get things done that in fact we’ve taken two steps backward. 

This is not what we would like to see. 

 

Now I understand that there was feedback. It was requested 

from the industry representatives. But unfortunately we don’t 

have a sense that there were other stakeholders who were, who 

might have been asked. And I’m thinking of investors. I’m 

thinking of local communities. I’m thinking of the northerners, 

particularly when it comes to exploration. 

 

You know, as I said earlier, we had my colleague from Regina 

Northeast do extensive consultations in the North when it came 

to labour standards. And many people would say, well why 

would you do that? They would be happy. 

 

And of course, we found out, no, it’s important to engage 

everyone. And I think of many of the mining companies have 

gone that way, where they really truly do believe in local 

consultation. So I think all partners need to be part of the 

feedback loop. But we haven’t seen that. We haven’t seen that. 

And of course as I said earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve seen 

signs from this government that would lead us not to believe 

that’s the case. 

 

In fact, there’s a whole question of trust and whether we should 

be trusting these folks when they say it’s done. We look at what 

happened with SCN. Clearly consultations were not done, were 

not done, even some courtesy calls to the board to say, this is 

what we’re thinking of in two and half years. And then the 

board is cut. SCN is cut. So if this is their style of consultations, 

we have some real problems about that. We truly have some 

real problems with that. 

 

We also have an example, the chiropractors, where you have 

basically a contract negotiated, totally, completely negotiated 

and ready to be signed. In fact, they’re even preparing a press 

conference on the contract, and then at the last minute, it’s 

pulled. So what kind of consultation track record does that 

speak of, when you have a government like this that does that 

kind of thing? 

 

And as I said earlier, it’s so important, so absolutely important 

that people have confidence in the mining sector in 

Saskatchewan where you have a GDP of some 60 billion-plus 

dollars. And you have clearly the mining sector delivering a 

third of that, if not more, from petroleum, potash and so on. 

 

To say we’ll worry about the details later, people want to know 

the details right now. They’ve got to know right now or else 

confidence is really hurt. And so we have a question about that. 

And we need to see that this government is moving that way, 

you know, when we saw their enterprise initiative. And half the 

time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve not seen a lot out of that that 

really is different than before. 

 

On one hand, especially in oil and that, they’re keeping the 

royalty rates that we put into place. But yet they’re saying 

they’re doing a whole makeover of how they do business in the 

ministry — formerly known as department; I’m not sure if it’s 

just a name change — and more meetings. 

 

But you know, industry wants more than that. They want to see 

some action. They want to see what really . . . They want to see 

the rubber hit the road. And if this is that, then clearly we’re 

most in favour of that, but we have some big questions. 

 

I do have to add the caveat, because if there are unintended 

consequences, unintended consequences of northerners losing 

jobs, that’s huge, or in the South where we see such a huge role 

of oil and natural gas. We want to make sure that the right thing 

is being done and that this is going to be the right thing. And so 

that’s why I think it’s important that the consultation process is 

done completely, not just with one group — not just with one 

group because clearly you’re missing a big part of the picture. 

 

And I think they would be the first ones to say, you know, we 

heard that with the chiropractors. Because clearly they were 

talking to the doctors, but when the patients came in and 

explained the unintended consequences of cutting a basic 

service like that, we’re going to be paying for that. We’ve seen 

that with SCN where the unintended consequences . . . You’re 

saving a couple of million dollars but the unintended 

consequences is that you’re really hobbling several tens of 

millions of dollars of work in this province. So could that be 

happening here? That’s the question we’ll have, and we’ll have 

that further on. 

 

And I know that many of my colleagues will want to speak on 

this, but I do want to again say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I was 

surprised to hear how much of the publicly traded mining 

companies go through Canadian stock exchanges. And it’s 

because of the good regulations we’ve had and we will continue 

to have in Canada and in Saskatchewan. It’s some 60 per cent 

of publicly traded mines have their stocks traded through the 

Toronto or Vancouver stock exchange. And it’s because of the 

good work that we do to make sure things are on the up and up 

that we’re not having legislation that really you can drive a 

Mack truck through. We don’t want to see that. 

 

And so that’s why, when we ask about what kind of regulations, 



April 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4899 

when you have a section that’s allowing more and more 

regulations to be made by the cabinet, that’s when you start to 

have some problems because then you pick winners and losers. 

That’s not a good thing. And we’ve seen that in the forestry 

industry here; I’m thinking about Big River. Clearly we don’t 

want to see that kind of thing happen because we don’t . . . Our 

province has a great reputation for a place to do business, 

especially mining. And I think of the Saskatchewan Mining 

Association. We’ve always had a good working relationship 

with them. 

 

So we have a good reputation. It’s been built on for many, 

many decades, and it will continue to be that way. But we have 

some real worries if that’s going to be at risk, at risk. And we 

have communities right across this province who completely 

embrace mining activities in their communities because they’ve 

got a good working relationship with the companies that do 

business in their communities. We don’t want to see that put at 

risk. We don’t want to see that put at risk because of being a 

little too quick here, being a little too quick. 

 

We do embrace change, though. We think that’s a good thing if 

it’s done well and appropriately for the right reasons and 

making sure when the technology’s launched that it’s ready to 

do the work, that the horses are there. If the horses aren’t there 

to get the Internet going, we’ve got a problem. You know, so 

we’ve got to make sure that online registry is fully capable to 

do the work that people are expecting. And I think even when 

you read the language, the minister recognizes that because they 

talk about when they’re going to be closed down for 

maintenance and that type of thing, recognizing that there will 

be times when you have to do that type of thing. 

 

But I think in many ways we’ll have some very good 

discussions further down the road, but I think that in many ways 

— I know that my colleagues will have some more specific 

questions about this — but I think that when we look ahead at 

the future of Saskatchewan, clearly mining and minerals play a 

big, big role in that. And whether it’s rare earth minerals in the 

North which, so excited to see, because really when you talk 

about battery technology — huge, huge — and whether it’s 

powering hybrid cars, and I’ve got to tell you they are a 

wonderful, wonderful thing, or whether they’re saving the 

energy that’s produced off wind turbines, that’s a very positive 

thing. 

 

And so we have an opportunity to play a real leadership role 

and I know that when you’re exploring, whether it’s in the 

southern part of the province or the northern part of the 

province, the records have to be accurate. They have to be 

accurate because people are investing a lot of money in these 

small exploration companies. You know, it’s the start of some 

big things. And of course many of them start out and they’re 

hoping that the work they do will deliver the goods and really 

turn into some big opportunities. 

 

But we know that’s not always the case. It’s like so many 

investments that you have to put out a lot of things out there and 

to see what comes back. But you want to make sure when you 

do that the government’s doing their part too. If the 

government’s not doing their part in terms of making sure that 

all the records are fair and accurate and kept up well, then 

there’s confidence and there’s an integrity that they can count 

on. But as I said, we have questions because of the trust issue 

— trust is a key part of integrity and this . . . we have some 

questions about that. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill is an important one and it’s 

important to always reflect on how we can do business better. 

Clearly that’s something that we stand for. How can we do it 

better? How can we make things happen in a way that we can 

truly count on? 

 

But I know in a few minutes I’ll be taking my seat and we’ll 

have questions. But I know that many others will join in and 

want to get a few comments on the record. Because, as I said, 

when you have minerals accounting for a good third of our 

GDP . . . and they’re big numbers. They’re big numbers — 23 

billion, $20 billion — clearly significant, makes a lot of 

difference to a province like Saskatchewan. And sometimes we 

don’t think about that because we think that we do other things. 

But no, mining is a big part of our province. And so you have 

20 billion out of 60 billion. It can have a huge, huge impact. 

 

And so with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll be taking my seat. 

And I do think though this deserves a lot of attention and I 

know others will want to speak to it. So in terms of Bill No. 

125, An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act, I move 

adjournment at this point. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 125, The Crown 

Minerals Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 105 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 105 — The 

SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 

to be able to participate in this debate today. Interestingly 

enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the SaskEnergy annual report for 

2009 comes down today and it’s in the context of that that I’ll 

be making some of my remarks. 

 

But to start with, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a fairly 

straightforward piece of legislation, but it says volumes in terms 

of what it’s proposing. The main clause in this Bill is subsection 

42(1), changing $1.3 billion and substituting with $1.7 billion. 

Now that of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, refers to the debt limit 

for SaskEnergy. And any time we see the members opposite get 

into raising debt limits on things, you know . . . They do a good 

enough job on raising the debt of this province. So any time we 

see them moving to change legislation so they can do even 

more raising of the debt, it makes us mightily suspicious on this 

side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So moving from $1.3 

billion as the total debt limit for SaskEnergy to $1.7 billion, 



4900 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2010 

that’s the import of this Bill. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Now we had the annual report tabled today for 2009, Mr. 

Speaker. The overall financial health of SaskEnergy seems to 

be doing fairly well. But there were a number of things that 

took place over the past year and that seemed to be getting 

ready to be accelerated in their tendency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that give us pause for how that impacts the bottom line for 

SaskEnergy and then in turn how that impacts the ratepayers of 

this province, the people that have to pay the utility costs with 

SaskEnergy, to make sure that they can heat their house through 

their natural gas bill. 

 

So we saw a company come forward today with a fairly positive 

financial statement, but one of the interesting things about that 

financial statement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was the impact of the 

sale over the last year of Heritage Gas. Now Heritage Gas was 

an investment in Nova Scotia which SaskEnergy owned a 50 

per cent stake in that investment. It was returning a nice bit of 

revenue to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things about the 

natural gas sector, if that’s your business, it’s a tremendously 

volatile sector. And even within the past year between 2008 to 

2009 we saw a swing of something like $54 million in terms of 

the changes in fair value accounting that had to be made to 

reflect the cost of the commodity of natural gas. And you know, 

a $54 million swing in one year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a lot 

of, it’s a lot of change in the balance sheet, but it’s signal to 

how volatile the natural gas sector is and how SaskEnergy has 

to operate within an environment that is very volatile. 

 

Now what we find alarming about the sale of Heritage Gas and 

the proclaimed intent of the members opposite, we find it, we 

find it alarming from a number of perspectives, Mr. Speaker. 

For one, from straight sort of business sense, it makes sense to 

diversify your holdings. If you’ve got all your eggs in one 

basket, you shouldn’t be surprised if someone comes along to 

crush your basket full of eggs. And if you’ve got everything 

focused in the province of Saskatchewan — you may claim that 

it’s about being Sask-first, Mr. Deputy Speaker — but what it 

does is places the people of Saskatchewan, the ratepayers of 

Saskatchewan in a tremendously vulnerable situation. 

 

You know, they understand the process of hedging when it 

comes to buying, you know, natural gas when it’s cheap and 

storing it and bringing that on as conditions allow. You know, if 

they can understand it in that context, Mr. Speaker, surely 

they’d understand the concept of hedging as it pertains to 

outside investments. But it appears that escapes the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So Heritage Gas was put on the chopping block after they’d 

proclaimed the change in policy. And you can’t help but 

wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you’re the seller of an asset 

and you proclaim that you want to get that asset off your books, 

you want to put it up on the chopping block, you know, does 

that lend itself to getting the best possible price for that asset, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker? You know, I think your first-year 

business students would argue that no, in fact it does not. If 

you’re proclaiming a zeal, a desperation to get rid of an asset, 

you know, are you going to be getting the best price for that 

asset? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, they got the $8 million return on the 

investment with Heritage Gas. They applied, you know, 

proceeds from the sale against debt. It helped to change the debt 

position of the corporation for the 2009 report. 

 

I’ll get into the question of ongoing revenue momentarily, Mr. 

Speaker. But you can’t help but wonder that, if you’ve got a big 

for-sale sign being planted and a everything-must-go mentality 

being trumpeted from the top of that government, then guess 

what? People are going to buy it. And who’s got the advantage 

in that circumstance? Is it the people of Saskatchewan getting 

the best value for that asset? Or is it the potential buyers who 

look to see that, well, you know, these guys have got a fire sale 

going on so why don’t we snap up the assets while the getting’s 

good? 

 

So that’s, I think, the approach that’s been taken with regards to 

Heritage Gas. We’ll see what happens with the other assets that 

they’ve moved onto the chopping block, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

But again it’s the kind of practice that, if you turned in a paper 

with that on it for your first-year business class, your prof 

would say, well telegraphing it that much out is probably not 

going to get you value for your asset, let alone the whole sort of 

implications for the province or anything like that. 

 

So from a straight business practice perspective, this year’s 

annual report had some alarming news in it concerning Heritage 

Gas and the way that that practice that has been adopted by the 

members opposite as it comes to the stewardship of Crown 

assets is going to play out for this province. 

 

In terms of the way that an ongoing revenue stream has been, 

you know, cashed in for a one-time gain, again there’s some 

good-looking things in the balance sheet for SaskEnergy this 

year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but a lot of, you know . . . No small 

part of that had to do with the benefit realized from the sale of 

this one-time . . . the gain from this sale of an asset. 

 

And the way that plays out over time of course, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is that, you know, money that was available this year 

for reducing debt and to make the debt/equity ratio of the 

company look better, it’s not going to be there in any way, 

shape, or form next year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So again it 

narrows the holdings of the corporation in a way that’s very 

much . . . that has a lot of potential for danger down the line. 

And of course if the debt to equity ratio gets poor in a 

corporation, if they don’t hit their targets, what happens then, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

 

Well we’ve got legislation in the House right now that says, 

well one of the insurance policies against what happens there if 

they need to crank extra money out in terms of a dividend or to 

make the debt to equity ratio look better, one of the safety 

valves they’ve got now is to go to borrow more money. 

 

And if they don’t want to borrow more money, what else can 

they do if they’re not going to have external investments 

returning profit to the province? Well there’s an increased 

number of hookups. Well you know, that’s good, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but that’s one revenue stream — in what used to be a 



April 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4901 

number of revenue streams — that went to the health of the 

corporation and the way that that translated into low natural gas 

prices for consumers in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now that you’ve narrowed it and made it more, you know, 

reliant or hostage to a particular set of revenue streams, you 

know, what happens if they need to raise money to pay a 

dividend into Crown Investments Corporation or if they need to 

make sure that the debt to equity ratios look good? Well of 

course then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what they’ll do is turn 

increasingly to the ratepayers of this province. And if they 

haven’t got external revenue streams I guess that means that, 

you know, what happens with the internal revenue streams? 

That means that they’re all the more important to the financial 

health of the company, and that means that that’s it for the 

ballgame, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the options that the 

management at SaskEnergy has to avail themselves of. 

 

So in terms of, you know, putting the ratepayer or the utility 

payers of SaskEnergy at greater risk, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

see that in the actions of this government. Again it may look 

good for this year’s balance sheet where the dividend was paid 

out at an 80 per cent ratio, and they had, you know, one-time 

revenues to avail themselves of in terms of sale of assets. But 

next year of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s 100 per cent that’s 

been set for a dividend for SaskEnergy — 100 per cent, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And one of the tendencies that we’ve seen in other Crowns is 

the way that setting out dividends that need to be paid by the 

individual Crowns into CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 

Saskatchewan], into the General Revenue Fund, to backstop the 

fact that the members opposite couldn’t budget a bake sale, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the way we see that impacting the bottom line 

of a corporation like SaskEnergy is in the fact that they’re going 

to need to borrow more money. 

 

They’re forcing the borrowing off the general revenue balance 

sheet so they can say, well yes it’s, you know, 622 million on a 

consolidated basis, sure. But they’ll try to maintain this fiction 

that they’ve got a balanced budget after they’ve dipped into the 

rainy day fund and it’s, you know, nothing to see here when it 

comes to the $622 million projected on this here, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, let alone the billion dollars of last year’s deficit. 

 

So what do you want to do if you want to make your balance 

sheets look better out of the General Revenue Fund? Well you 

force a lot of that borrowing activity off into the Crowns. And 

again we see a dividend policy that would seem to indicate that 

they’re going to make sure that any borrowing that the Crowns 

undertake will be there to underwrite the dividends paid into 

CIC. We see that in terms of new capital expansion. You know, 

there’s some possibility that I’m sure some of that will be cash 

flow through existing profits in-year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But 

if they aren’t able to do that of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

well they’ll have to borrow it. And they’ll have to borrow it and 

that will add to the bottom line of what people in Saskatchewan 

owe. 

 

So the argument that gets made is that this is self-liquidating 

debt. It’s self-liquidating debt, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if there is 

in fact a reasonable dividend policy and there isn’t sort of this 

tendency to use the Crowns as a cash machine or a piggy bank 

or as your ATM [automated teller machine] of choice. When, 

you know, your one account runs out, you go off to the Crown 

account. And, you know, again the notion that it would be 

self-liquidating debt if it was entirely related to the bottom line 

of the Crown and the operations of the Crown and the ability to 

service that debt and on, that would be one thing. But of course 

it’s not. 

 

In the Sask Party world, where they want to get ever more into 

the day-to-day management of the Crowns and you know 

interfere to a greater and greater extent and to use the Crowns to 

backstop the fact that the General Revenue Fund is in an 

historic mess, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re going to use the 

Crowns to underwrite that behaviour. So they’re doing that 

already, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re selling off assets and 

using that to prop up the balance sheet for one year. 

 

But of course, you know, one year is one thing, but the year 

after that and the year after that, what’s going to happen to the 

debt to equity ratio? What’s going to happen to the ability of the 

Crown to service . . . or the ability of SaskEnergy to service 

these activities within its own revenues? Well of course they’re 

going to have to borrow. And you know what gives us pause for 

thought on that front, Mr. Deputy Speaker? The fact that we’re 

here entertaining a one-line Bill that moves the borrowing limit 

for SaskEnergy from $1.3 billion to $1.7 billion. 

 

So again they haven’t reached this $1.3 billion limit. You know, 

there’s some question as to whether or not this increase is 

actually needed, given the current financials with the company, 

but here we are debating it anyway, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And again within the context of SaskEnergy in and of itself, 

you wonder about the need for this. But the need for it of course 

makes all kinds of sense when you think about it in the context 

of the way that those members opposite run the finances 

overall. And when you take it into account like that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it becomes pretty plain in terms of what’s going on 

here. They want to use the Crowns as a piggy bank. They want 

to use it as a cash machine to underwrite their inability to run 

the budget on the general revenue side. 

 

So last year we had the great potash debacle where the member 

from Kindersley wanted to . . . He was telling his colleagues, 

well it’s going to be $3 billion. And you know he was bragging 

around like the big shot. And of course it wasn’t 3 billion. They 

booked it at 1.9, but of course at the end of the year they had to 

pay back the royalties that were prepaid. So that was last year, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

This year we think this budget is soft like butter on the 

expenditure side. And in terms of the health care workers’ deals 

coming up, in terms of the doctors’ deals coming up, in terms of 

the teachers’ deals coming up, those alone will put this, you 

know, projected 622, projected consolidated deficit over 1 

billion. We think that that’s the way it’s going to play out, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And then when that happens, what are they going to do next 

year to underwrite the way that they’ve tap danced their way 

through this year’s budget? Well don’t be surprised, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, if they don’t accelerate the process of cranking out 

ever larger dividends from the Crowns, and don’t be surprised 



4902 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2010 

that we’ve been here in the legislature debating things like 

raising the debt limit of Crowns like SaskEnergy so that they 

can avail themselves of those proceeds. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think I’m a paranoid 

person. I don’t think I’m speaking unduly here. This is the 

record of the books of this province over the past two years. 

This is what has happened in this province. 

 

And when you look at what’s happened before in the history of 

this province, I guess we ought not be terribly surprised, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because in the lead-up to 1991, there had been 

such a mess made of the different Crowns. You know, when 

they weren’t busy trying to sell them off outright, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — not piece by piece like the members currently are 

trying — there was such a mess in the Crowns and they had 

been loaded up to such an extent in terms of debt, that of course 

once the books got straightened out in the wake of the Gass 

Commission and, you know, the people coming in to take a 

forensic look at the books, well of course it took no small effort 

to get the Crowns back on a financial track that made sense for 

the people of the province, that actually bore some resemblance 

to the notion of good stewardship. 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s two short years with the 

members opposite at the helm. And we know that it took, you 

know, nearly a decade for them to wreak all kinds of damage on 

the Crowns and the finances of this province generally. But two 

years already, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve seen the 

second-worst deficit in the history of this province — $1 billion 

in the past year’s budget and, you know, Lord only knows 

what’s coming this year. 

 

And so when we look at them increasing things like the debt 

limit for SaskEnergy, you know, if you look at the books of 

SaskEnergy in and of themselves, you can say to that 

management team, you can say that those front-line workers, 

good job, well done. In terms of the job that’s been set out for 

you by the people of this province, you’re doing the best you 

can, and it’s pretty darn good by other comparatives. 

 

But when you compare it to the situation across the books and 

across the finances of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that’s where the worry starts to creep in. When 

you compare it to the ideological track that it’s been pushed 

onto by the members opposite in terms of what constitutes good 

business practice and not, then you start to get worried, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And when you see them bring forward an 

increase to the debt limit when, you know, by the year’s books 

there would not seem to be a huge requirement for that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, then you get a whole lot worried. 

 

So we in the opposition benches, we look at the activity of this 

government and how they’re approaching the finances of this 

province. You know, only the Sask Party would bring forward, 

of course they bring forward a Bill to raise the debt limit of 

SaskEnergy in this time of growth. Of course they didn’t tell 

you about their growth agenda being the growth of the 

province’s debt and deficit, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So at this point I see some other members would like to 

participate in debate on other items of legislation before the 

Assembly, so I will now move to adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 

105, The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2009. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 106 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 106 — The 

Labour Market Commission Repeal Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

this afternoon to join into the discussion on Bill No. 106, An Act 

to repeal The Labour Market Commission Act and respecting 

certain matters associated with that repeal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here in the Assembly when we look at legislation, 

there are obviously different types of pieces of proposed 

legislation that we examine. There are those that are of great 

significance, Mr. Speaker, where a new Bill is brought in to 

create a new corporation or to develop or institute a program 

that will have great significance on people. Sometimes, Mr. 

Speaker, the Bill is more a housekeeping nature where it’s 

modernizing the legislation or ensuring that the legislation 

matches with what the reality is actually like on the ground. 

 

And there are other situations, Mr. Speaker, where the 

government, due to a policy decision that it has taken, has 

decided to ask to repeal a piece of legislation in order to have 

the laws of the province better reflect the policy decisions the 

government has taken on a particular issue. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that is indeed the case here when we look at Bill No. 106, An 

Act to repeal The Labour Market Commission Act and 

respecting certain matters associated with that repeal. 

 

I thought, Mr. Speaker, before we got into some of my ideas 

and comments that I have about this approach of repealing The 

Labour Market Commission Act, I thought it’d be helpful to 

provide members of the Assembly and those watching at home 

a bit of background information with respect to what in fact the 

Labour Market Commission did and what its role was here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, prior to the change of the last government and 

the Sask Party’s election as government, the Labour Market 

Commission was brought in. And based on what was printed on 

its website at that time, it says: 

 

The Saskatchewan Labour Market Commission 

(SaskLMC) is a new corporation created under provincial 

legislation in 2007. The SaskLMC was formed on the 

basis that labour market planning and coordination is best 



April 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4903 

achieved through a partnership between labour, business, 

education and training institutes, government and other 

stakeholders. [It goes on.] The SaskLMC will have an 

industry focus on providing advice on Saskatchewan’s 

key strategic labour market issues. 

 

So it was the idea, Mr. Speaker, that when we in the province 

here were looking at what was needed for or what is needed for 

labour market needs — looking at the demand, looking at the 

issues that the province faces, looking at the availability of 

labour and what work, what initiatives can be pursued in order 

to ensure that we have an adequate supply to meet the demand 

and the needs here in the province. 

 

It was the idea that through working together by having the 

various members of the province of the various sectors 

involved, from business and labour organizations, from 

educational training institutions, with government input as well, 

that it was the idea that through co-operation, through a 

discussion, through finding out what are the concerns that are 

shared, what are some of the plans and visions that can be 

shared, what is the best way forward — the basic idea that 

through working together, through having the important and the 

necessary individuals around the table all providing input, all 

discussing the issues, all giving suggestions and ideas — 

through that approach, Mr. Speaker, we were best positioned as 

a province to have a system in place, a system in place to meet 

the labour market needs that we have here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think that’s, I mean that type of thinking, that type of 

co-operative approach, I think that’s often when Saskatchewan 

is at its best, when people from various backgrounds, various 

places in the province are working together, finding common 

solutions to issues that are faced by various groups. And to me 

that makes good sense. 

 

I can think of anyone in the community. This is often, this 

fundamental approach is what happens at the local level. If 

there’s an issue in a neighbourhood in any one of our 

constituencies, people mobilize from a variety of backgrounds 

to address that issue. So whether it has to do with safer streets 

or whether it has to do about the proposed development of a 

new swimming pool in the area or the loss of a swimming pool 

— I know that’s one concern in my home constituency that a 

number of people at the local level have come together — and 

so it’s people from various backgrounds bringing their different 

perspectives, bringing their different views and their different 

types of expertise to the table to discuss the issue, to talk about 

solutions, to show examples of where co-operation can occur, 

as opposed to strictly an adversarial system.  

 

It’s an approach of identifying where there are common 

concerns where progress can be achieved through working 

together. And I think for most people in the province, and I’m 

sure most members in the Assembly, that makes good and 

decent sense. And we’ve seen that work in our own 

constituencies, in our own areas of interest. So the idea of 

groups that often . . . not often, at times are up against one 

another, the idea of coming together and working in a 

co-operative manner. 

 

And from some of the discussions I’ve had, Mr. Speaker, with 

individuals from different groups, from business and from 

labour when discussing the Labour Market Commission, with 

some of the conversations I had, the feedback I received on it 

was generally positive where individuals, on the Labour Market 

Commission, felt like it was a worthwhile pursuit. And it was 

one of the areas where the co-operation between different 

sectors was bearing fruit and one of the areas where there was a 

good record and progress was being made. 

 

So I think that’s important to note, Mr. Speaker, that in the 

lead-up to the 2007 election through the Labour Market 

Commission there was a good amount of work being done, and 

work that was bearing fruit, work that was productive and 

bringing results. That’s a very important point to note. I think 

for members in the Assembly and viewers at home, we can 

think of the economic progress and the economic strength that 

our province experienced in the lead-up to the 2000 election, 

the years prior as well as the years just after. 

 

So we’ve seen a lot of the good work. I think that a lot of the 

good work that groups like the Labour Market Commission 

have done by coming together, identifying problems, discussing 

ideas, and pursuing a common plan, it was bringing results. 

That’s what individuals involved with the Labour Market 

Commission have said. And we can look at the strength of the 

Saskatchewan economy ramping up before the 2011 election 

for a couple of years, and then immediately following there was 

great strength. 

 

And sadly, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the record of 

members opposite in their role in the economic strength of the 

province, at least on the provincial front when looking at the 

books here in the province, we’ve seen a situation where we’ve 

gone from a huge surplus leading up to the ’07 election and 

immediately after to a situation now where the Sask Party’s 

been running consecutive deficit budgets. And we’re now 

running a deficit of over $1 billion. 

 

And that leads us to many of the problems the member from 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre was speaking of. When we look at 

many of the short-sighted cuts or short-sighted decisions that 

have been made in the area of the Crown sector, we’ve seen 

how the approach that the Sask Party has taken with the 

finances — the poor leadership and their, truly their inability to 

deal with the province’s finances in a responsible and prudent 

manner — we’ve seen the results of that. And we’ve seen that 

through the equity stripping in the Crowns, taking on of 

amounts, levels of debt which some would argue are not 

sustainable and not a good foundation for the Crowns. We’ve 

also seen a great amount of financial trickery in the accounting 

practices, changing these practices midstream in a term, hiding 

things in the Crowns. 

 

And this all ties into the larger factor, Mr. Speaker, of trust. The 

larger factor that people in Saskatchewan, I don’t think — when 

it comes to the issue of financial management, when it comes to 

the issue of developing a plan that has everyone involved, a 

plan that we saw through the Labour Market Commission — I 

don’t think people in the province trust them on this issue of 

having a plan in place that takes in all the considerations for the 

various sectors. 

 

And then when that is coupled with the horrible financial 

management that we’ve seen from members opposite in 



4904 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2010 

predicting revenue projections to do with resources, when that 

is coupled once again with the financial trickery that we’ve seen 

from members opposite when it comes to hiding debt, when it 

comes to changing the way that debt is reported to the public, 

when it comes to the issue of clearly stating what are the 

financial implications of wage settlements with various public 

sector groups — I think when you put all these things together, 

Mr. Speaker, there’s certainly a growing level of mistrust that 

the Saskatchewan people have with the Sask Party government 

on the issue of responsibly managing the finances and taking 

care of the matters of the province. 

 

So we saw some early indications, Mr. Speaker, on how the 

Sask Party government can’t be trusted on the issue of the 

labour market, and that was earlier legislation that was 

introduced in the House. We saw Bill 46 and this fundamentally 

changed the structure of the Labour Market Commission and 

the representation that was on it. And we saw very early steps in 

this government’s approach to the issue — one that was not 

encouraging growth, encouraging the strength of the Labour 

Market Commission, but one that was weakening it, one that 

was positioning it for the later approach that we’ve seen the 

Sask Party take on this issue. 

 

And I know it’s concerning for many people here in the 

province, especially the groups, Mr. Speaker, that were 

involved with the Labour Market Commission before, the 

individuals, the groups that were represented on that 

commission who generally felt like that the commission was 

doing some good work, that progress was being made. And it 

was one of the examples within the government structure and 

apparatus where you could point to some good achievements 

and co-operation occurring by groups that traditionally have 

gone head-to-head on different issues. So it’s refreshing, Mr. 

Speaker, when you see that level of co-operation occurring by 

different groups and some plans coming forward and progress 

being made. 

 

It’s troubling when the Sask Party government, given their 

inability to manage the provincial finances, given their inability 

to be transparent with the numbers, given their preference for 

financial trickery when it comes to clearly stating what the 

numbers are to do with the finances, to do with the economy — 

clearly when we see their inability to project revenue or to have 

revenue projections that were believable, accurate, projections 

that were not based on fantasyland budget calculations — when 

you put that all together, it worries Saskatchewan people 

because they’re going from a system that had brought good 

benefits to Saskatchewan, a system that had allowed the 

economy to flourish and to do so well, to going to a different 

system, Mr. Speaker, that I would suggest is one that does not 

serve the interests of Saskatchewan people to the same level 

and as well as what the previous system has allowed. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the good things about the Labour 

Market Commission was the level of consultation that it 

provided — consultation with the various sectors in the 

province, consultation with groups that, as I said before, often 

disagreed on different issues. But it provided a venue, provided 

a mechanism that groups with differing opinions on a variety of 

issues could come together and could come up with solutions. 

And that’s the type of consultation that should occur under 

government. That’s the type of consultation that occurs when 

you have a government that can be trusted on the issue of 

listening to people. That’s the type of consultation that occurs 

when you have a government that is seeking the outcome, the 

best outcome for all people in the province, for all groups of the 

province as opposed to a select few. And that’s the type of 

consultation, Mr. Speaker, that I think Saskatchewan people 

want and the Saskatchewan people want and demand when it 

comes to the labour market. 

 

And we see so many examples from recent months, Mr. 

Speaker, where, as opposed to taking the type of approach to 

consultation that we saw in the Labour Market Commission, 

we’ve seen an approach to consultation that has been 

short-sighted, an approach to consultation that has been very 

selective in who it talks to, a process of consultation that occurs 

after a decision has been made. We’ve seen a very, very flawed 

process of consultation, and in some instances, Mr. Speaker, we 

have seen a complete absence of consultation in any way, 

shape, and form. 

 

There are many examples to this, Mr. Speaker. One of the most 

salient examples that we’ve seen in recent weeks is the axing of 

SCN, the absence of consultation, Mr. Speaker, that occurred 

with the board in charge of SCN, the independent board. 

 

And there was a piece in the Saskatchewan newspapers this 

weekend. The board Chair, who described herself as 

sympathetic towards the philosophy of the Sask Party, but 

completely raked — in my opinion — the article and many of 

the quotes from the individual being discussed in the article 

raked the members opposite over the coals on their complete 

absence of consultation, an absence of consultation, Mr. 

Speaker, that occurred over a number of ministers. 

 

So it’s a pattern of poor consultation. It’s a pattern of not 

listening to people. It’s a pattern of simply doing what they 

want based on a short-sighted decision, a short-sighted goal and 

not taking the entire picture, the entire view of an issue into 

consideration. And that’s a worry. 

 

We also saw, in the same way that we’ve seen . . . Or another 

contrast to the good type of consultation that occurred through 

the Labour Market Commission is the consultation that we’ve 

seen on the issue of Dutch elm disease, Mr. Speaker, a cutting 

of the program. A small program relative to the entire 

Saskatchewan provincial budget — a small program but one 

that is very near and dear to the hearts of Saskatchewan people, 

especially people that live in some of our cities and towns and 

RMs [rural municipality] that have elm trees, have trees that 

they love. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a great beauty in the prairie landscape. But 

it’s also nice, Mr. Speaker, to have pockets of trees along the 

parts of the province where there aren’t as many trees. They 

provide shelter in windstorms, like we experienced not too long 

ago. They provide shade in the hot summers that we have and 

they break the wind in the cold winters. So to have these very 

valuable trees, trees that have been growing for decades and 

decades and decades, to have a short-sighted cut, to have a cut, 

Mr. Speaker, that occurs without proper consultation, that is a 

concern to many, many Saskatchewan people. 



April 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4905 

We also saw, Mr. Speaker, poor consultation — that contrasts 

so starkly with the type of good consultation that we saw 

through the Labour Market Commission — on many of the 

labour Bills that have passed through the Assembly. We saw, 

whether it’s Bills 5, 6, Bill 80 . . . 43 I believe is the trespassing 

Bill. On many of those Bills, Mr. Speaker, that so directly affect 

many of the working men and women in the province, we saw 

no consultation. 

 

We saw a bulldozer approach where legislation is introduced 

and then afterwards there’s a bit of discussion about what 

consultation could look like. But it’s clear, Mr. Speaker, based 

on the actions of government, there’s absolutely no interest in 

consulting with many of the people that are so directly affected 

by that legislation. And I know that is a great, great concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also see another example of failed and poor 

and weak consultation. An example that is very different than 

what we saw in the Labour Market Commission and that’s on 

the issue of kidney transplant and the transplant program here in 

Saskatchewan. How we’ve seen in recent days, Mr. Speaker, 

through the Legislative Assembly here in question period, we 

have a Health minister admitting that many of the major points 

of the transplant program, he’s just recently learned. Well it’s 

no wonder, Mr. Speaker, there’s a waiting list with nearly 100 

people needing kidney transplants, desperately needing kidney 

transplants. 

 

And if the members opposite would take the time to consult 

with the people on that waiting list, the 100 people on that 

waiting list, I think they would get a different answer and an 

answer that would better inform their decisions. 

 

We’ve seen how consultation works with the Labour Market 

Commission. We’ve seen how it can work well, how groups 

that have different views can come together, come forward with 

some good recommendations and pursue those 

recommendations. But from the Sask Party government, over 

and over and over again, we see an approach of failed 

consultation. 

 

Another example I can think of, Mr. Speaker, is . . . And you’ll 

note the examples that I’m giving are across a variety of 

responsibilities for ministers. I’ve touched on the Environment. 

I’ve touched on Culture and Tourism. I’ve touched on Labour 

and I’ve touched on Health. Well another area, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to show where there’s been completely a failed 

approach to consultation is in the area of reducing the number 

of educational assistants here in the province. 

 

Once again, a complete absence of consultation with the people 

that are affected, whether that’s the actual educational assistants 

themselves, or whether that’s the many, many families that rely 

on those EAs [educational assistant] to help with the education 

of their children or to simply provide a better learning 

environment for all the children in the classroom. It’s not an 

issue simply about children and parents who might be directly 

working with an EA. It’s the whole classroom. And it’s the type 

of, it’s about the type of education we want to pursue in the 

province. 

 

Well sadly, from the Education minister, Mr. Speaker, we saw a 

type of consultation that was completely after the fact that the 

news of this change was going to be made. Well you know once 

. . . It didn’t take long for the minister to backtrack, to 

backpedal in a major way, recognizing that there was some 

major concern about the short-sighted decision. 

 

But why, Mr. Speaker, why force the Saskatchewan families, 

the Saskatchewan individuals working as EAs, to go through 

that phase of uncertainty, of worry, of concern? Why not have a 

process of consultation that sits down with them beforehand, 

that is clear, that is fully transparent, that listens to all of the 

perspectives present, all of the perspectives on this issue? Why 

not have a consultation process that allows for . . . to hear from 

all those people, as opposed to leaking or randomly letting out 

the information and creating a bunch of worry throughout the 

entire sector? It’s a backwards approach to consultation and it’s 

one that worries many, many Saskatchewan people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen horrible examples of consultation 

from the Minister of Culture and Tourism, from the Minister of 

the Environment, from the Minister of Labour, from the 

Minister of Health, from the Minister of Education. Well 

another area, Mr. Speaker, of horrible consultation and we’ve 

seen this in the area of sharing revenue, a percentage of the PST 

with municipalities. And so for the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs . . . And clearly Finance has a role in this as well 

because the Minister of Finance is the ultimate bean-counter, 

and also the Premier wears a lot of the responsibility on this 

one. He wears a lot of the responsibility on all the issues I 

mentioned because he’s in charge of setting the overall tone and 

approach to consultation. 

 

But on the area of breaking the promise of providing a 

percentage of the PST to municipalities, members opposite once 

again failed to consult. I don’t understand, Mr. Speaker. You’d 

think ministers opposite would start to learn from the missteps 

of their colleagues within cabinet. But time and time again, 

across all of the ministries, we see this same approach of failed 

consultation. 

 

So on the issue of breaking the promise of providing a 

percentage of the PST to municipalities, we saw the Premier 

announce this through the media. And members in 

municipalities — mayors, councillors — were completely 

caught off guard and were completely offended. In fact, many 

members of that local level of government were asking for an 

apology, asking for the Premier, for ministers on the other side 

to show some contrition and to recognize they made a horrible 

error in the approach to consultation that they pursued and to 

take a different approach. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen . . . And I’m providing these 

examples, Mr. Speaker, of failed consultation because I think it 

provides such a good contrast to the good consultation that was 

occurring through the Labour Market Commission. So we’ve 

seen failed consultation with SCN, failed consultation — and 

that’s the Minister of Parks and Tourism and Culture, across a 

number of ministers, the present minister as well as the previous 

minister. 

 

We’ve seen failed consultation by the Minister of the 

Environment on Dutch elm disease. And I’ll be giving another 

example shortly. We’ve seen failed consultation, Mr. Speaker, 

by the Minister of Labour in consulting with labour groups, in 



4906 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2010 

consulting with the men and women in the province. We’ve 

seen failed consultation by the Minister of Health in consulting 

with patients on the waiting lists for kidney transplants. We’ve 

seen failed consultation by the Minister of Education on the 

issue of reducing the number of educational assistants here in 

the province. 

 

We’ve seen failed consultation, Mr. Speaker, by members 

opposite on the breaking of the promise of providing a 

percentage of the PST to municipalities. And that promise is 

broken by the Premier, the Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs, as well as the Finance minister because all of them 

could have stepped up to the plate and consulted in a true and 

honest, transparent way. 

 

The other area, Mr. Speaker, the forestry sector, we’ve seen 

failed consultation with the people of Big River, the people in 

Big River who had an option of some renewed activity in the 

forestry sector in their area. But we did not see the Minister 

Responsible of Energy and Resources properly consulting with 

the people of Big River, listening to the concerns they have, 

responding to the concerns they have, and looking at some of 

the very real and viable options on the table. We have not seen 

that. So another example, Mr. Speaker, of a minister failing to 

consult. 

 

And I’m sure members in the Assembly now are starting to see 

a pattern emerge where, across the ministries, across the sectors, 

across the various types of Saskatchewan people that are being 

affected, we have seen a failed, failed approach to consultation. 

 

The last example I’ll give, Mr. Speaker, in looking at failed 

consultation — and this provides a contrast to the good 

consultation that occurred through the Labour Market 

Commission — that, Mr. Speaker, is through the decision by 

the Minister of the Environment to once again not properly 

consult with the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations] in the province about cuts to an environmental 

program that was being operated in co-operation. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, another example, and we saw in my 

opinion a strongly worded letter from a vice-chief from the 

FSIN commenting on the approach that Sask Party government 

has taken to this issue of consulting and working with some of 

the most important groups here in the province, I mean it’s . . . 

Certainly the actions of the Ministry of Environment are closely 

tied to the inaction of the Minister of First Nations and Métis 

Relations. The Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

who told the member from Cumberland, the member from 

Cumberland, that he doesn’t visit the communities of the North. 

Forgetting that the member actually lives in the constituency, 

has travelled widely throughout the constituency as a member 

involved with the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan, as involved 

on school boards, Mr. Speaker, and then as an elected 

representative travelling widely throughout the North — not 

only in his own constituency but also in the constituency of 

Athabasca. We saw the Minister of First Nations and Métis 

Relations suggest, with a straight face, that the member 

opposite is not travelling, has not been to the communities that 

he is speaking of. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that if you took an 

unlabelled map, only the communities were identified of the 

two northern constituencies in the province — this isn’t a 

challenge in a pin-the-tail-on-the-donkey sort of way — but I 

would expect the member opposite, the Minister of First 

Nations and Métis Relations, would have a hard time 

identifying many of those communities on the unlabelled map. 

So to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of First Nations 

and Métis Relations, to suggest that of the member from 

Cumberland, to me demonstrates the lack of credibility the 

member opposite has when it comes to doing proper and true 

consultation with the people in the northern constituencies, 

when it comes to doing proper consultation with Aboriginal 

people, whether that be First Nations or Métis communities. 

 

So what I’ve attempted to do, Mr. Speaker, is outline the 

approach the Sask Party government has taken on the issue of 

consultation across the ministries, across the ministries. 

Whether it’s cultural issues like the SCN by the Minister of 

Parks and Tourism and Culture, whether it’s the issues of the 

environment to do with Dutch elm disease, environmental 

programs offered in co-operation with the FSIN, whether it is 

labour legislation like Bills 5, 6, 43, or Bill 80, a complete 

absence of consultation with individuals — the men and women 

working in the province. When we’ve seen by the Minister of 

Education, the complete absence of consultation on the issue of 

reducing the number of EAs in the province and how that will 

negatively affect many Saskatchewan children. 

 

The issue of breaking the promise on the PST, Mr. Speaker, 

because the Minister of Finance was so short on cash, because 

the Minister of Energy and Resources’ projections were so 

wildly off, so amazingly off in a horrible way, Mr. Speaker, we 

have seen the breaking of that promise. Whether it’s a complete 

absence of consultation with the people of Big River in 

restarting activity in the forestry sector in their area, once again, 

failed consultation. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the general issue of duty to consult by the 

Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations with the people 

directly affected by his ministry, instead of having a proper 

consultation with the people throughout the North in a variety 

of communities, he makes outrageous claims, unbelievable 

claims about the member from Cumberland not knowing the 

communities in his constituency. 

 

So when you have those types of responses, when you see this 

pattern of an absence of consultation, an absence of listening to 

Saskatchewan people, and when we see this pattern, Mr. 

Speaker, of acting first, asking questions later; acting first, 

listening to people later; acting first and then pretending, 

feigning some type of consultation with individuals completely 

after the fact, to me, Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder we see their 

decision to kill the Labour Market Commission when shown 

how they are so regularly and they so happily chose not to 

consult with the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, so with this proposed Bill, Bill No. 106, an 

Act to repeal the Labour Market Commission, if they’re 

repealing it, Mr. Speaker, they need to replace it with 

something, one would think. And so the approach that they 

have taken in this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, was 

introduced by the Minister of Enterprise Saskatchewan, if that’s 



April 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4907 

the right title, the member from Silver Springs. 

 

And the piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, suggests that the 

work that was traditionally done through the Labour Market 

Commission, the work that had brought results, the work that 

was appreciated by members on both sides of the fences, the 

organization that was doing a lot of good work and bringing 

results to and for Saskatchewan people, it’s the minister’s 

suggestion that this work would be replaced by the many boards 

of Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Enterprise Saskatchewan 

and the entire apparatus that is Enterprise Saskatchewan, for all 

the talk that the members opposite give about their four-by-four 

plan to reduce the civil service, to lay off many people, to not 

fill vacancies, for all their talk about wanting smaller, leaner 

government time and time again, Mr. Speaker, we see the 

complete opposite. And based on many discussions I have had 

with people involved in Enterprise Saskatchewan, we’ve seen 

the construction of a large apparatus of bureaucracy, but we 

have not seen many results. 

 

We’ve seen, I know in my office, Mr. Speaker, the Minister 

Responsible for Enterprise Saskatchewan has sent out many 

brochures touting the achievements of Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. But so far as I could tell, Mr. Speaker, these 

brochures that are provided, they have a very fetching photo of 

the minister with a football on Taylor field or some other 

football field in Saskatchewan — they have a glossy photo of 

the minister pretending that he’s in the play, in the action — but 

when you listen to the people involved with Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, when you see the action that government has 

taken based on Enterprise Saskatchewan’s recommendations, I 

think the output, the product of Enterprise Saskatchewan can 

seriously be called into question. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is no criticism in any way whatsoever to 

the people involved in Enterprise Saskatchewan by 

participating, providing their expertise, and speaking from their 

perspective. Many people that sit on these enterprise 

committees and these subcommittees and these 

sub-sub-subcommittees and these sub-sub-sub-subcommittees 

and this huge apparatus that had been made, many of them are 

great people who have done a tremendous amount of work in 

Saskatchewan in their various fields, whether that is in business 

or whether that’s in the educational sector or whatever the topic 

may be. I’m not discrediting, Mr. Speaker, the work that those 

specific individuals are doing. 

 

But my problem, Mr. Speaker, is that the apparatus and the 

approach that has been put in place by this government I don’t 

think really allows these individuals who are well-intentioned, 

who have expertise, who are doing good work, I don’t think it 

sets them up for success in the way that true consultation, true 

listening to people occurs. 

 

And what we’ve seen time and time again, Mr. Speaker, on a 

variety of Enterprise Saskatchewan issues, we’ve seen 

recommendations being made by Enterprise Saskatchewan on 

these committees and we’ve seen no action on these 

recommendations. So the rhetoric, the political spin was from 

the Sask Party government when they came into government. 

They said, you can trust us because we’re taking the politics out 

of decision making. You can trust us, Mr. Speaker, because 

we’re setting up this apparatus. We’re setting up this thing 

called Enterprise Saskatchewan and these non-partisan 

individuals coming together and talking about a variety of 

issues, they will take the politics out of decision making. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, those specific individuals, those specific 

individuals might take the politics out of the decision-making 

process. They might — and I have every reason to assume they 

are doing this — providing the best expertise, the best advice 

that they have based on their life experience and their 

knowledge. That is reasonable. That is a good thing to do. 

 

But remember the changes that occurred with this Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. One time, if I recall correctly, the talk was, oh 

the minister’s not going be involved in Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. Well sure enough, one minister ends up being 

placed on Enterprise Saskatchewan. Not only one minister 

according to my recollection, Mr. Speaker, a second minister 

was put on Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

So this whole process, this whole façade of nonpartisan 

decision making, Mr. Speaker, there’s politicians at the table, 

there’s politicians calling the shot. So time and time again we 

see examples where they’re saying one thing, they’re saying 

trust us, please just trust us on this issue because we’re setting 

up Enterprise Saskatchewan; this is our silver bullet that will 

make the world a better place, to make Saskatchewan continue 

to prosper and do well. But, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing time and 

time again the advice given by the government, given to the 

government on issues is . . . either there’s politicians at the table 

giving the advice or the decisions are ignored by politicians. 

 

So some of the examples that are given, there’s a 

recommendation about school closures, that school closures not 

occur. Well, Mr. Speaker, despite the Sask Party government 

saying, oh you can trust us on the issue of rural school closures 

and other school closures in the province; you can trust us on 

this one. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the opposite. We’ve 

seen actions that don’t demonstrate that they’re listening to 

Enterprise Saskatchewan on this issue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on another issue that recommendations . . . 

Information being sought on flat tax, information being sought 

on tax harmonization, well, Mr. Speaker, instead of listening to 

the recommendations on tax harmonization, on the HST 

[harmonized sales tax], we have the Minister of Finance in a 

very public, in a very well covered event suggesting to 

individuals that the HST should be considered, that it is part of 

the solution. And that, Mr. Speaker, that was before suggesting 

the user fees in the health care system are also part of the 

solution for fixing health care. 

 

The member from . . . the Government House Leader asked me 

what the suggestions by the Minister of Finance that user fees in 

the health care system and that the HST, bringing that into 

Saskatchewan is a good thing, what that has to do about these 

Bills. Well, Mr. Speaker, it ties directly, it ties centrally to the 

issue of trust. If you have members opposite, if you have the 

senior cabinet ministers in that government opening the door to 

user fees in health care even though they said that wasn’t part of 

the discussion, if you have senior members of the government, 

the Minister of Finance suggesting that the HST is a good thing 



4908 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2010 

to do, if this is what they’re suggesting . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the Deputy House Leader on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Member may state his point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The member opposite . . . Mr. Speaker, 

we’ve been listening, listening patiently to the member opposite 

and waiting and waiting and waiting for that member to get to 

remarks with respect to The Labour Market Commission Repeal 

Act, which is the Act that’s under discussion right now. And I 

would encourage the member to actually make his comments 

with respect to that Act. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

member opposite is contending that the speech has no reflection 

upon the Bill in front of us, Mr. Speaker. I think if you carefully 

review the wording that there have been many references back 

to the Bill throughout his speech, and he’s using comparisons of 

activities of the government in comparison to the lack of 

consultation on this Bill as well. Now, Mr. Speaker, I would ask 

that you review the record and bring back your decision based 

on whether or not there’s been references back to the Bill 

throughout his speech. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’ve heard the member’s point of order 

and the response by the Opposition House Leader. And I will 

make this comment that over the period of time, debate in the 

Assembly on numerous occasions has allowed for a broader 

debate. But at the same time, there’s still the requirement to 

address the issue at hand. And so I’d ask the member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place to deal with Bill No. 106, the Labour 

Market Commission board. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps since . . . 

I’m happy the members opposite are listening to this speech. 

Simply because they do not like the content, Mr. Speaker, 

simply because the content has struck a nerve, it does not make 

the comments inappropriate. 

 

To recap, Mr. Speaker, the consultation, the type of consultation 

that occurred through the Labour Market Commission was a 

solid type of consultation. It was the type of consultation, Mr. 

Speaker, that listened to many groups. It was the type of 

consultation that brought people together from various 

backgrounds. People holding very different, differing views 

come together, talk about the issues at hand, talk about possible 

solutions to develop a plan, and then to implement a plan, Mr. 

Speaker. Through the Labour Market Commission, that was the 

type of consultation that was occurring. 

 

My concern, Mr. Speaker, from members opposite, time and 

time again, Mr. Speaker, we have seen failed consultation. 

We’ve seen this pattern of failed consultation that all supports, 

Mr. Speaker, my belief that the type, the approach that the 

members opposite are taking to the labour market, the approach 

that they’re taking through repealing Bill 106, because of the 

horrible track record we’ve seen in the areas of culture, in the 

areas of the environment, in the areas of municipal affairs, in 

the areas of finance, in the areas of health, Mr. Speaker, based 

on the horrible track record we’ve seen by members opposite 

from a variety of ministers on a variety of fields, why is it any 

surprise, Mr. Speaker, that the minister responsible for this 

piece of legislation, 106, the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise Saskatchewan, why should we expect him to get it 

right? 

 

Why should we expect him to get it right, Mr. Speaker, when 

par for the course, when the expectation by the Premier to every 

minister is one of failed consultation? When the bar is set so 

low for consultation by all ministers in cabinet, why should we 

expect the minister to get it right on Bill No. 106? When the 

track record of every minister, Mr. Speaker, suggests that 

consultation has been absent, consultation has been inadequate, 

consultation has occurred after a fact, after an issue has been 

decided, after an issue has been shared with the public, to me, 

Mr. Speaker, when we see that track record across ministries 

. . . 

 

In one ministry, Mr. Speaker, on the issue of SCN, we saw it 

not across ministries but we saw it across ministers. Not even 

multiple ministers could get it right, Mr. Speaker. So when the 

bar is set so low on the issue of consultation, when the rhetoric 

that we hear from members opposite is simply, trust me on this, 

I think we’ve set up a system, the Premier would suggest, 

through Enterprise Saskatchewan that listens to Saskatchewan 

people — well, Mr. Speaker, why should people in 

Saskatchewan believe that statement when the track record, 

when the evidence suggests across ministries, including the 

Minister of Enterprise who is responsible for Bill No. 106, why 

should we think that that claim could hold water? In my 

opinion, evidence would suggest the opposite. 

 

So not only is there the great concern about the failed and 

inadequate and late consultation that so regularly occurs like 

clockwork with members opposite, but we also see a failure for 

them to actually say what they’re going to do. And we’ve seen 

that with Enterprise Saskatchewan. This is another reason why, 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think members opposite can be trusted in 

their approach to the Labour Market Commission and their 

approach to Bill 106 and their approach to Enterprise 

Saskatchewan because the evidence that we’ve seen in the 

province is very different from what they’ve actually said. 

 

They said they were taking politics out of the decision-making 

process. Well lo and behold, Mr. Speaker, two ministers end up 

on Enterprise Saskatchewan. They said they were going to 

listen to these sector committees, on these sub-sector 

committees, and these sub- sub- sub-sector committees, Mr. 

Speaker, but time and time again we see members opposite 

ignoring the recommendations that come from Enterprise 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Another example that can be given is, a recommendation was 

given by Enterprise Saskatchewan to expand the grad retention 

program to master’s and Ph.D. graduates. Recommendation is 

given, and what do we see, Mr. Speaker? Nothing. For time and 

time again, day after day in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 

members on this side present a petition calling on the Sask 

Party government to expand the grad retention program to 

provide benefits to master’s and Ph.D. graduates, but time and 

time again, Mr. Speaker, that petition, a petition of the 



April 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4909 

Saskatchewan people, a petition of the Saskatchewan students, 

falls on deaf ears. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So when members opposite say, well just trust me on this; 

we’re setting up a system that allows good consultation, well I 

think time and time again across ministries we’ve seen failed 

consultation, we’ve seen inadequate consultation, we’ve seen 

flawed consultation, we’ve seen late consultation. When 

members opposite say, well just trust us; we’re setting up a 

system, Mr. Speaker, that will ensure that we’re taking the 

politics out of the decision-making process, well, Mr. Speaker, 

once again their actions don’t match what they’re saying. 

 

We can’t take them at their word when they say, just trust us on 

the Labour Market Commission; just trust us on Enterprise 

Saskatchewan; just trust us on our approach to employment 

here in the province. Because we see time and time again them 

saying one thing and then doing another. There’s no 

consistency in the words that they put forward, the rhetoric they 

put forward, and their actions. 

 

The example of the grad retention program, a very clear 

example where a recommendation is given, where individuals 

— grad students in the province, employers in the province, 

institutions, people involved in post-secondary education — 

recognize that master’s and Ph.D. graduates are a central part of 

the economy, that if we want to do well in the years to come it 

only makes sense that we should be considering what role 

master’s and Ph.D. graduates have in the labour market. 

 

But instead, Mr. Speaker, and this is . . . And instead of 

listening to Enterprise Saskatchewan, the organization that is 

supposed to be replacing the Labour Market Commission, 

instead of listening to the advice — again by individuals that 

are talented, that are intelligent, that have a wealth of 

knowledge and experience, individuals that are providing good 

input, providing in many instances good advice to the minister 

— we see the Sask Party government choose to ignore that 

advice. 

 

So again it’s an approach of failed consultation. It’s an 

approach where they say one thing and do another with respect 

to how they set up the institution that replaces the Labour 

Market Commission. And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, as for a 

number of months, years now, that Enterprise Saskatchewan 

has existed, there was all the hype and the spin at the beginning 

about how this is a new way of doing business and so on, but 

we see, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government choosing to 

ignore those individuals. 

 

And I think anecdotally what I’ve heard from some people 

involved with these different committees and sub-sector 

committees and sub- sub- sub-sector committees and this huge 

apparatus that the Sask Party government has created, is that 

many of the individuals are losing interest in the process. Many 

of the individuals who are in good faith providing their time, 

providing their expertise, individuals that are involved in 

Enterprise Saskatchewan in the various subcommittees are 

starting to scratch their heads and say, why exactly do I want to 

be involved if the advice that I give, if the advice that I was 

asked to give, the advice that I think is best on a particular issue 

is simply being ignored by members opposite? If I’m here 

simply as a token representative of an organization, if I’m here 

to simply allow the Sask Party government to put up the guise 

of consultation and the facade of listening to people and doing 

what is best for the people of Saskatchewan, then there’s 

probably better ways I could spend my time. 

 

And I think that’s what I’ve heard from some individuals in the 

process, and I think, increasingly as the track record of poor 

consultation, the track record of ignoring recommendations 

becomes more and more evident to everyone involved, it would 

not surprise me if more individuals began to share that opinion 

that the Sask Party government on this issue of saying that 

they’ll listen to Enterprise Saskatchewan, saying that it is the 

new, great, amazing thing in the province, that it will allow 

everything to happen so well and smoothly, I think more and 

more people are just not simply trusting that kind of talk on this 

issue. They’re not trusting that kind of talk and rhetoric because 

the actions of government members have been so different than 

what . . . The actions have been so different than the talk and 

the rhetoric on a variety of issues. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that members opposite so closely 

listened to my speech even if they didn’t like it, Mr. Speaker. 

Just because they don’t like it doesn’t mean that it’s not talking 

to the points that are of concern to Saskatchewan people. And if 

the advice and some of the comments that I raised, Mr. Speaker, 

ruffled some of their feathers and perhaps — given the point of 

order that was raised by the Deputy House Leader — if it has 

ruffled their feathers, Mr. Speaker, instead of simply popping 

up on a point of order, Mr. Speaker, that is simply a result of 

not having the patience to hear an idea developed and to hear all 

the evidence on their shortcomings and their failings in this 

area; instead of popping up at the nearest opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, to suggest that the topics are not connected, when 

clearly they are so closely tied to the issue at hand, in the piece 

of legislation 106 because it talks about the issue of 

consultation and it talks about the issue of trust, I would 

encourage members opposite to do a bit of introspection. 

 

I would encourage members opposite to look back on the 

promises that they made to Saskatchewan people, look back on 

the pledges they made about Labour Market Commission and 

about Enterprise Saskatchewan, about being a trustworthy 

government, about being a government that acts in the best 

interest of Saskatchewan people, about being a government that 

listens to Saskatchewan people. 

 

And instead of, Mr. Speaker, simply lashing back through a 

point of order, when clearly the points are all related, pause for 

a second — pause for a second, I would ask them — and look at 

the areas, look at the rhetoric that has been spouted for so many 

months, for so many years now on this issue. And then look at 

the actions and look where they don’t match up, look where 

what they have said all along is not coming to pass. Look where 

in the past there was an organization that was working well, that 

had input, that was a type of consultation and involved a variety 

of people and a variety of issues, and then look at what is being 

recommended to replace it. Look at what is being suggested 

will fill that gap. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll see an organization 

that increasingly is ignored by the minister, ignored by 

members of the cabinet. 

 



4910 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2010 

And instead they’ve reverted back to their basic MO [modus 

operandi], which is simply to act according to whatever is 

convenient for the day, act whatever is convenient according to 

that second, and simply, Mr. Speaker, ignore the voices of 

concern, the voices of criticism. It’s a very short-sighted 

approach. And it’s the type of consultation, Mr. Speaker, that 

we have seen so regularly by members opposite. 

 

I gave the examples of all the ministries where failed 

consultation is the norm. It’s the expectation. You know, when 

the Premier, next time he revises his mandate letters that are 

given to ministers, he should almost state that . . . Well I think 

he needs to revise some of the expectations around consultation 

because based on the evidence we’ve seen, based on the actions 

that we’ve seen, it’s almost as though a direction has come from 

the Premier that there should be no consultation, the decisions 

should be made in isolation, the decisions should be made by 

only a few as opposed to listening to the many. 

 

So in wrapping up, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to this issue of 

consultation, when it comes to having a plan for the labour 

market, when it comes to having any type of plan in 

government, when it comes to acting responsibly, I don’t think 

the Sask Party government can be trusted on that issue of 

listening to Saskatchewan people and acting in their best 

interests because evidence has suggested otherwise. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to have been given the 

opportunity to speak to Bill 106. I know many of my colleagues 

share many of the same concerns on the issue of poor 

consultation and how this affects the various pieces of 

legislation that are put forward by ministers. So I know a good 

number of my colleagues will want to speak to Bill No. 106, An 

Act to repeal The Labour Market Commission Act and 

respecting certain matters associated with that repeal. I know 

they’ll want to talk about the repeal, and they’ll certainly want 

to talk about what is the minister’s and the Sask Party 

government’s prescription to fill that gap and hole. So at this 

time, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate on Bill 

No. 106. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 106, The Labour 

Market Commission Repeal Act. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 107 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 107 — The Weed 

Control Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 

again it is truly a pleasure and an honour and a privilege for me 

to have the opportunity of figuring into this debate on behalf of 

the fine people of Regina Northeast. Mr. Speaker, this is an 

interesting Bill at, I suppose, at the best of times. It’s an Act, 

Bill 107, An Act respecting Prohibited, Noxious and Nuisance 

Weeds and to make a consequential amendment to The 

Municipal Board Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this is an ongoing issue in rural 

Saskatchewan wherever you travel. I know that, talking to 

farmers and having been in the industry myself for 20-some 

years and still keeping in touch with what goes on in that 

industry, I can say that farmers across this great province of 

ours all strive to clean their land and make sure that the land is 

free of weeds as much as possible. And in more modern times 

certainly the chemical has helped them. In the older days when 

my grandfather and my father were farming, I think that they, 

you know, the good land husbandry, good control of the weeds 

was done through proper cultivation and management of the 

land. In today’s world, where we’ve moved more to a 

continuous cropping mode, there’s become a greater 

dependency upon chemical to control those same weeds. 

 

And I think for those of us who’ve been in the industry and 

have had some experience at this fully realize that the need to 

control those weeds is probably paramount because once they 

get away from you, it’s like anything else — once it gets away 

from you, it’s very hard to pull it back. It takes a lot more time, 

takes a lot more concentration, and a lot more effort, and of 

course a lot more money to be able to control those kind of 

weeds. So I think it’s fair to say that farmers are very much 

aware of the issue, and wherever you travel it’s probably one of 

the topics of conversation when you talk about land 

management and farming and agricultural husbandry. 

 

It’s also been an issue I suppose that’s caused often friction 

between neighbours. In some cases, what one will see as a bad 

weed and certainly not part of his farming operation may not be 

seen so negatively by a neighbour, and therefore it will create 

some problems. And I think that’s been the experience of the 

past we’ve seen, where the control of weeds has become an 

issue between neighbours, and perhaps even in some cases 

created some hard feelings. And I hope that, Mr. Speaker, that’s 

something that would not be first and foremost in the 

agriculture industry, but rather the desire to clean the land, the 

desire to ensure that we have a clean province and free of weeds 

that fall within the category of this Bill. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s safe to say that if you travel 

throughout Saskatchewan today and talk to farmers, you’ll find 

there’s a greater awareness and a greater desire by farmers to 

ensure that their own land and the land that they farm, whether 

it be the land they own or whether it be land perhaps that they 

rent, but to ensure that that land is kept clean and as free from 

weeds as absolutely possible and that they do so with a great 

deal of pride. And they do so with the ability to be able to talk 

to their friends and neighbours and look at their fields and say 

look, there’s a field that I’ve had a particular problem with this 

weed over the number of years, but I’ve been concentrating my 

efforts and concentrating my strategy on dealing with this 

particular field, and now I’m seeing the results. I’m seeing that 

this weed is certainly not as prominent as it once was. 

 

And to some degree there’s been assistance with the advent of 

chemicals and the science that goes into these chemicals and the 

time and efforts put into it by the chemical companies to 



April 19, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4911 

develop chemicals that are more specifically designed to control 

certain weeds and do so quite effectively. And we see that. 

 

And I can say for myself . . . And I wish I would have had the 

opportunity to approach this individual before I had the 

opportunity to rise here today and get his permission to use his 

name. Because one of my neighbours on the farm there, a 

gentleman I’ve known for many years, in fact we went to high 

school together, is I think a great farmer. He does a wonderful, 

wonderful job of looking after his land. He does a very good job 

of managing that land to maximize its potential, maximize its 

yields. But he does so in a way that ensures that that land is 

clean and free of weeds. 

 

And he’s very fussy and is very — and I give him credit for it 

— he’s very careful about ensuring that there’s no outbreak of 

weed that’s difficult to control or perhaps a weed that’s going to 

cause some problems into the future. He does a very good job 

of managing that land, managing the crop that he rotates 

throughout his farm. He’s into a continuous cropping rotation, 

and we need . . . Mr. Speaker, I’ll move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Northeast has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill 107, The Weed Control 

Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn for committees at 7 o’clock. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this Assembly do adjourn in order to allow for the 

proceedings of committee work at 7 o’clock. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This House stands adjourned 

until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



4912 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2010 

Corrigendum 

 

On page 4849 of Hansard, No. 45A, Thursday, April 15, 2010, 

right column, the seventh paragraph, references to “Alena 

Young” should read “Aleana Young.” 

 

We apologize for this error. 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4879 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4879 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4879 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4879 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4879 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4880 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4880 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4880 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4880 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4880 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4881 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4881 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4881 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4881 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4881 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4881 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4882 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4882 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4882 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 World Hemophilia Day 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4882 

 Local Students Win Battle of the Books 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4882 

 Innovative Emergency Room Unveiled 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4883 

 Organ Donor Awareness Month 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4883 

 Constituents Part of Huskies’ Victories 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4883 

 Exercising Judgment 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4884 

 New Television Series Coming to Saskatchewan 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4884 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Status of Member 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4884 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4884 

 Support for Film and Television Industry 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4886 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4886 

 911 Response 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4887 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4887 

 Health Care Issues 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4888 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4888 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4889 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 104 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2009 (No. 2) 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4889 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4892 

 Bill No. 114 — The Small Claims Amendment Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur les petites créances 
  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4892 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4896 



 

 Bill No. 125 — The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2009 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4896 

 Bill No. 105 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2009 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4899 

 Bill No. 106 — The Labour Market Commission Repeal Act 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4902 

  Harrison (point of order) ....................................................................................................................................................... 4908 

  Yates (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................. 4908 

  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 4908 

 Bill No. 107 — The Weed Control Act 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4910 

MOTIONS 

 Substitution on Committees 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4892 

Corrigendum .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4912 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 




