




















































Hansard: November 30, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 19A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 30, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6277 

 November 30, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Members, before I recognize the Premier, I’d 

ask members to allow me the opportunity of introducing a 

special guest who’s joined us from Nunavut territory, the 

Speaker of the Nunavut Legislative Assembly, Mr. Paul Okalik. 

And I’d like to invite members to welcome Mr. Okalik to our 

Assembly. 

 

I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, just before I request leave for 

an extended introduction, may I join with you in welcoming 

Speaker Paul to this Assembly today. Before he was the 

Speaker in Nunavut, he was the premier of that territory and a 

leader in the country. He still is obviously, Mr. Speaker, and I 

want to join with you in welcoming here. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, I would request leave of members to 

make an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave’s been granted. I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, it’s an 

honour for me to be able to stand in my place today and to you 

and through you make some introductions to all members and 

to those who have joined us. 

 

Today was an historic day in the Legislative Assembly, 

witnessed by the Métis sash, the traditional sash that is now on 

the Clerk’s table right beside the mace and adjacent to the First 

Nations mace runner that we are so proud to have in the 

Assembly since March of 2006. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members were able to gather this morning and 

receive a great gift from the Métis Nation, this sash that was 

designed by renowned sash maker, Mr. Adams, from the 

Rosthern area. And, Mr. Speaker, we want to introduce some 

who are still with us today as a result of that ceremony this 

morning. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we’ll begin with the president of the Métis 

Nation — president since 2004 — a leader of the Métis people 

in Saskatchewan as well as the Métis Nation proper, a friend of 

obviously the Métis, but of all of Saskatchewan, and a leader 

that sets a powerful example in terms of dedication to the 

people that he serves. And we welcome him, and maybe we’d 

make the exception, Mr. Speaker, in the introductions to be able 

to pause for Robert, individually, and give him a warm 

welcome to his Legislative Assembly today. 

Mr. Speaker, joining us as well in your gallery is the secretary 

for the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan. I believe Max Morin is 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, Max is not with us. Now 

he’s not with us. Thank you, Robert. Allan . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Also not here. 

 

But I see Senator Nora Cummings is here and the elder that 

brought the prayer and was so instrumental in today’s 

ceremony. Ms. Cummings, will you please stand and accept our 

welcome. 

 

I’m going to jump around in order now because I see Henry’s 

beside her — her husband, Henry Cummings, who danced his 

way into the Assembly leading the musicians as well. And we 

certainly welcome Henry to his Assembly. 

 

As well here today we’re joined by May Henderson, the 

provincial . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, we’re not. But we 

are joined by Julie Pitzel from Prince Albert who’s an elder 

with the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan. 

 

We’re also joined . . . I’m recognizing now Greg Lawrence 

from Moose Jaw who’s here for the ceremony as well. And we 

just want to welcome, to and through our guests today, all of the 

Métis Nation that they represent. They will forever be with us 

— the past, present, and future generations — through this sash 

and through the ceremony this morning. We welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 

Premier in welcoming the very important people from the Métis 

Nation. Robert Doucette, senator, welcome here today. And 

also to the Speaker and former premier, welcome to our 

Assembly as well. We’re very, very proud that you would join 

us today for this important presentation of the sash on behalf of 

the Métis Nation. 

 

I just want to say to the Premier, thank you to you and the 

government for bringing this forward and also to the members 

of the opposition for being part of the ceremony. It’s very, very 

important in building forward, first of all to recognize the 

history, recognize today, but most importantly to realize that 

tomorrow and the future depend on these kind of relationships 

being built. And it was a great honour to be there today. And 

the sash that the Premier’s wearing and I’m wearing, I know 

we’ll be wearing those proudly for many, many years to come. 

So thank you and welcome to our Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure to join with the Premier and join 

with the Leader of the Opposition to welcome the Métis leaders 

to their Assembly. 

 

It has been a pleasure to work with you through this year, 2010, 

the 125th anniversary, and it’s been enjoyable — everything 

from Back to Batoche and the many other celebrations that I 

had the honour to attend and represent the government. I want 



6278 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2010 

to thank you for all the work that you do, and I want to say how 

excited I am to continue to work with you for the betterment of 

Métis people and for the betterment of all people in 

Saskatchewan. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 

want to join with those who are welcoming President Robert 

Doucette and the leadership that is here today from the Métis 

Nation of Saskatchewan. 

 

Obviously this is a very significant day in the history of this 

province. The legislature should reflect the people, and it should 

reflect the things that are important to the people. And that the 

sash has taken its rightful place in the middle of this Assembly 

is obviously something that’s been long overdue — perhaps 125 

years overdue. But this is a good day and may there be many 

more good days to come. 

 

So I join with those who welcome those from the Métis Nation 

of Saskatchewan and in recognizing the importance of this day. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I want to 

welcome 28 great looking grade 10 students from my home 

town, Yorkton, Saskatchewan, centre of the third largest trading 

area in the province. They’re accompanied by Mr. Perry 

Ostapowich, Ms. Ashley Marchand, and Mr. Grant Bjornerud, I 

guess it’s pronounced. And we had a great conversation down 

in the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] lounge, 

dining room. We had a little bit of conversation there. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I actually put in a good word for you, so I just ask that 

you keep that in consideration in today’s proceedings and the 

rest of the session here. So I’d just ask all members to welcome 

them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 

want to join the Premier and our leader in recognizing our Métis 

leadership. And I want to recognize President Doucette and of 

course Senator Cummings and a dear friend, Julie Pitzel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as one of the very few members of the Assembly 

that are of Métis ancestry, it gives me great pride today to see 

the sash lay at the table along with the First Nations treasures. 

And I want to join in all the people in recognizing the 

contribution that the Métis people have made to the province 

and certainly commend the government and all the MLAs in 

laying this sash at our table. 

 

I also want to take a few moments just to recognize Speaker 

Okalik. I think it’s important that as an Aboriginal legislator for 

Saskatchewan we look at models and the different leaders 

throughout Canada that certainly can give us inspiration and 

hope as Aboriginal people. And I think Speaker Okalik, being 

the former premier, certainly brought forward a lot of young 

people throughout Canada in terms of getting involved with 

politics. And I just want to recognize him for his inspiration and 

his leadership and to also thank all the Métis people that are 

here today. So once again, thank them all, Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf of the opposition as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you I’d like to introduce two constituents of mine 

that are seated in your gallery. Bill and Fern Crouse are good 

friends of mine, and we’ve been friends for many, many years. 

We’ve had a lot of fun together, but they’ve, more importantly, 

Mr. Speaker, they’ve always been with me through the tough 

times, and that’s what true friendship is all about. 

 

Bill and Fern live in Estevan now, but they used to live on a 

farm about a mile from me. And I can always remember Bill 

coming before we did continuous cropping, and I used to do 

some summerfallow. Bill would get off his tractor and come 

over to me and he’d say, I didn’t know Vic wanted this field 

worked twice, because he said I was overlapping so much. So 

he always had a little bit of advice for me, but I look forward to 

spending this evening with them. And I ask all members to join 

me in welcoming them. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you, seated in your gallery, I’m very honoured to 

introduce two very special women in my life and in the lives of 

my family. Today it’s my pleasure to have my mother, Faye 

Wotherspoon, here today — if you can give us a wave, Mom — 

and my mother-in-law, Barb Willows, here today. Barb if you 

could give us a . . . 

 

So I didn’t know when they arrived at the legislature here 

today, Mr. Speaker, if maybe you were up to something as it 

relates to enforcement from your . . . through your Chair, Mr. 

Speaker. But it’s my pleasure to have these very special women 

in our lives who make us stronger as a family, who provide me 

exceptional support, who provide all of us exceptional support 

within our family, and wise political advice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think it’s fair to say that none of us arrived to this Assembly 

on our own, Mr. Speaker. It’s on the backs of our families and 

our communities and it’s those individuals that make us 

stronger. I welcome two of those here today. I ask all members 

to join with me in welcoming my mother and mother-in-law 

here today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to introduce to you someone in your gallery by the 

name of Greg Lawrence. Greg Lawrence is a constituent of 

Moose Jaw. He is one of the Métis leaders that was here this 

morning. He’s the president of the Southern Plains Métis Local 

160. He also works for one of our Crown corporations. Greg 

works for SaskTel. We’d like to welcome him here. 

 

Just as importantly, he is the nominated candidate for the 

constituency of Moose Jaw Wakamow for the Saskatchewan 



November 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6279 

Party. And he wanted to be here today especially to see where 

his seat might be located after the next election. So I’d ask 

everyone to welcome Greg Lawrence. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you I would like to join with my colleagues from 

across the floor in welcoming Greg Lawrence here to the 

legislature today. Greg’s very active in our community. And I 

know he’s got a great seat in the Speaker’s gallery and I look 

forward to seeing him there for many years, coming to visit the 

legislature. So please welcome Greg. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I’d 

like to join the members of the Assembly that have gone before 

me to introduce members of the Métis Nation, also our elder, 

Senator Nora Cummings, to all the Métis people that are here 

today and taking part in this ceremony. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, it truly is something to reflect on. We 

talk about the sash and what it symbolizes to many of us. My 

grandfather was a Métis vet, president of the Métis local. Our 

culture, our pride in what we accomplish, and sometimes, you 

know, our leaders . . . And I think all of my colleagues here will 

join me in saying, being leaders of a community is a pretty 

difficult job sometimes. You can’t please everybody. And 

sometimes there’s a hard word. 

 

But our ties in the Métis community with our families, like the 

sash, is woven very strong, very strong. Our ties, our family ties 

tie us together as a people, as a culture, and I’m very proud of 

that. I may not always agree with my family members and the 

members of the Métis Nation and the nation in itself, but at the 

end of the day, we work together for what’s best for our people. 

And we have to. We have to be proud of our culture. And I 

commend the leadership and the people of our province for 

continuing that fight. There’s more work to be done, but I know 

that will continue. 

 

And I just want to say, welcome to your legislature. And the 

work will continue, and thank you for the work you have done 

so far. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to today 

introduce somebody who’s been introduced a couple of times 

already, Julie Pitzel. Thanks so much to Julie for the work that 

she does in the community of Prince Albert, volunteering 

countless hours for many events and to help many people in our 

community. So I’d like to thank her for that today, and ask all 

members to join with me in welcoming here to her Assembly 

today. 

 

Additionally, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome a constituent 

from Shellbrook. Robin Langford is here today. Robin is an 

agricultural producer and been a cowhand for many years. We 

have a little bit in common in that we both trained horses at 

some point in our lives. I’m sure the members opposite would 

acknowledge that of the two of us that would be a horse 

whisperer, it’s more likely to be Robin than myself. But we 

appreciate the work that he does in the community of 

Shellbrook and as an agricultural producer in our province. 

He’s very proud of that fact, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like all 

members to join with me in welcoming him here today as well. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and joining my colleague from Prince Albert 

Northcote on this introduction of Julie Pitzel as well please to 

all the members of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Julie was instrumental when I was in the police force in Prince 

Albert and prior to me arriving me there, of building a bridge 

between the community and the Aboriginal people in the 

community and our Prince Albert Police Service. And she was a 

leader in so many different realms with the youth and with the 

elders in the community. And it’s because of her hard work that 

the relationship now in Prince Albert is strong between the 

service, the police service and the Aboriginal people. So thank 

you, Julie, for that and welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I call petitions, I just want to say how 

much we appreciate the visitors who’ve joined us in the gallery, 

but also to remind you of the protocol of the Assembly that we 

would ask that you not participate in the debate. Thank you so 

much. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 

of citizens of Saskatchewan who wish to bring to our attention 

that many seniors, Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed incomes 

and are victims of physical, emotional, and financial abuse; that 

Saskatchewan seniors have a right to social and economic 

security and a right to live free from poverty; and also that 

Saskatchewan seniors have a right to protection from abuse, 

neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights, which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

I so present on behalf of citizens from Saskatoon, Hanley, 

Melfort, and Lashburn. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 



6280 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2010 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations and all citizens 

are entitled to social and economic security. And we know 

citizens living in poverty have long identified affordable 

solutions. Recent national and provincial initiatives, including 

the Saskatoon health disparities report and the Canada Without 

Poverty, Dignity for All campaign, all call for a comprehensive 

poverty elimination strategy. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Government of Saskatchewan act as 

quickly as possible to develop an effective and sustainable 

poverty elimination strategy for the benefit of all 

Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the cities of Regina and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that calls for the expansion of the graduate 

retention program and a call for fairness for Saskatchewan 

post-secondary students. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present petitions from Furdale. The government ministry has 

directed SaskWater to cut off supplies of water for domestic use 

to Furdale customers. The same government ministry has 

directed that customers may no longer treat non-potable water 

using methods approved by Sask Health. 

 

The Furdale residents, dealing in good faith with SaskWater for 

over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their domestic 

systems and in-home treatment equipment as well as for 

livestock and irrigation lines. And the alternative water supply 

referred to by government ministry is a private operator offering 

treated, non-pressurized water at great cost with no guarantee of 

quality, quantity, or availability of water. And the prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Saskatoon and Furdale. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 

from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive deficit budgets, the billions of dollars of 

debt growth accruing underneath this government with $4.2 

billion projected to grow over the next four years alone, Mr. 

Speaker. Within this year alone, $448 million of debt growth, 

Mr. Speaker, and of course this all comes at a consequence to 

Saskatchewan people, whether that be your power bill, your 

health care, or your education system, Mr. Speaker. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal mismanagement that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens and good folks 

of Carievale and Carnduff. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Métis Sash an Emblem of Strength 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the Chamber 

today to recognize a special addition to this legislature. The 

architecture and furnishings of this building are rich in tradition 

and symbolism. The mace reminds us of centuries of British 

parliamentary tradition. The statues of MacDonald and 

LaFontaine remind us of the origin of our democratic 

confederation as a partnership between the French and English 

peoples. The beaver pillow and the gorgeous mace runner 

reflect the culture and traditions of the First Nations who first 

inhabited this land, Mr. Speaker. And today we add a Métis 

sash, which brings together in its colourful threads strands of 

Aboriginal and European traditions stretching back to the time 

of the fur trade and beyond. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the sash draws its strength from the many 

strands it weaves together, so Saskatchewan, as our provincial 

motto recognizes, draws its strength from the many peoples 

who together form its diverse and colourful fabric. 



November 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6281 

In this the Year of the Métis, Mr. Speaker, 125 years after the 

death of Louis Riel in this city, it is especially fitting that we 

should honour the special contribution of the Métis people to 

Saskatchewan’s strength. 

 

For the sash, Mr. Speaker, it is traditionally no mere colourful 

decoration, but a tool whose strength on which those who used 

it in times past relied upon for their survival in challenging 

circumstances. It remains, Mr. Speaker, a symbol of the Métis 

people whose strength as a people we are so thankful for the 

opportunity to honour today. Marcicho.  

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Métis Sash Ceremony  

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 

an important day for this Assembly and especially for Métis 

citizens in our province. Earlier today this Chamber was alive 

with the sound of music and celebration. A ceremony took 

place in which a beautiful Métis sash was presented to this 

Legislative Assembly. The sash was created by Mr. Pat Adams, 

who is a renowned artist and a champion of Métis people. His 

sashes were featured at the Winter Olympics in Vancouver, and 

he certainly did the Métis people and this province proud. 

 

Speaking of champions for the Métis people, we had Métis 

Nation Saskatchewan President Robert Doucette here as an 

honoured guest today. He and Métis senator Nora Cummings 

presented this sash to the Assembly, and it was fitting to see 

these two individuals who’ve done so much to promote Métis 

rights and nurture a stronger nation. The Métis helped build 

Saskatchewan in its early days, and they continue to build a 

strong foundation for the future. 

 

To the Métis Saskatchewan and to the tens of thousands of 

Métis citizens across our province, I say thank you for this sash 

and congratulations on this well-deserved recognition. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

North West Regional College Practical Nursing Class 

Graduation 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Students, instructors, 

family, board members, community leaders, interested citizens 

gathered on Friday, November the 19th for the graduation 

ceremonies in honour of the practical nursing graduating class 

of North West Regional College in North Battleford. 

 

It was a proud a day for all as we witnessed the closing pages of 

this program for Jasmine Draude, Shellie Dutton, Danielle 

Fedler, Annette Kahpeaysewat, Jennifer Kosolofski, Randi 

Milnthorp, Anita Moosomin, Lori Pateman, Travis Schafer, 

Joanne Swiftwolfe, Dianne Weitzel, and Patrick Whelan. 

 

North West Regional College and other regional colleges across 

Saskatchewan provide extremely valuable and beneficial 

educational programs and experiences for students across 

Saskatchewan, and the nursing program is no exception. In fact 

this program virtually ensures that residents from rural 

Saskatchewan can be educated and ultimately gain employment 

as health professionals in rural Saskatchewan. Thanks to the 

college and its commitment to all our communities, more and 

more individuals can attain their personal goals and aspirations, 

and individuals in need will find program services and care 

much closer to home. 

 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 2010 

graduating class in the North West Regional College practical 

nursing program and thank the instructors, staff, and board 

members for the college for maintaining their high level of 

commitment to the overall betterment of our community at 

large. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains. 

 

2010 Communitas Award Winner 

 

Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Throughout history, a 

defining human attribute has been a sense of communitas, 

which means people helping people for the benefit of their 

community. Today communitas is thriving in businesses, 

organizations, and individuals dedicated to community service 

and social responsibility. Mr. Speaker, our very own 

Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation has been named the winner 

of the 2010 Communitas Award in the leadership in community 

service and corporate social responsibility category. 

 

The Communitas Award is an international competition that 

grew out of the Association of Marketing and Communication 

Professionals pro bono recognition program. The award 

recognizes the spirit of communitas and are given to 

exceptional businesses, organizations, and individuals for their 

efforts involving volunteerism, philanthropy, or ethical and 

sustainable business practices. 

 

One example of the corporation’s actions under the framework 

is its community giving program. Each year Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation donates a portion of its profits to local 

organizations that are working to enhance the quality of 

Saskatchewan people. Last year Saskatchewan Gaming gave 

over $670,000 to community organizations and events that 

contribute to community development, education, recruitment, 

health and medicine, social programs, and arts, culture, and 

sports. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s with great pride that I, on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, recognize Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation for winning this international award. I am 

proud that their important contributions throughout our 

province are recognized as a part of the spirit of communitas 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatoon Nutana Resident Receives 

Book of the Year Award  

 

Ms. Atkinson: — On Saturday, November 27th, some of our 

finest Saskatchewan writers and publishers were honoured with 

14 awards presented by the 18th annual Saskatchewan Book 

Awards. Each year these awards celebrate our deserving authors 



6282 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2010 

and publishers and focus attention on Saskatchewan’s literary 

community of more than 300 writers and 75 book publishers. 

Saskatchewan is nationally recognized as a particularly fertile 

incubator for excellence in the literary arts. 

 

The Saskatchewan Book Awards promotes literary artists at the 

annual gala and also at reading salons and book displays 

year-round. The book awards fosters lifelong learning, literacy, 

and a deep sense of ourselves as prairie people. 

 

Living in the Saskatoon Nutana constituency, David Carpenter 

is a professor, writer, editor, and mentor of other Saskatchewan 

writers. On Saturday, David received the Book of the Year 

award for his non-fiction work, A Hunter’s Confession, 

published by Greystone Books. The book focuses on the rise 

and fall of hunting as a pastime in North America and is 

informed by the author’s own experiences as a hunter until a 

life-threatening predicament while hunting grouse caused him 

to strike a bargain. Today David remains an avid fisherman, 

especially in our northern boreal forests. 

 

David Carpenter’s body of works includes books, poetry, 

literature reviews, and articles in such publications as The 

Globe and Mail. He’s been interviewed by Peter Gzowski, 

Shelagh Rogers, and Eleanor Wachtel. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all 

of my colleagues to join me in congratulating David Carpenter, 

along with all of the other winners of the 2010 Saskatchewan 

Book Awards. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Muslim Festival at Huda School  

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to mention a very special event that took place on Saturday 

at the Regina Huda School. The event was organized by the 

Islamic Association of Saskatchewan, Regina Huda School, 

Muslims for Peace and Justice, and Muslim Students 

Association, University of Regina in honour of Eid-al-Adha, a 
Muslim festival that occurs after the pilgrimage to Mecca and 

commemorates the sacrifice offered to God by Abraham. 

 

Dr. Ayman Aboguddah, President of the Huda School, and 

other members of Regina’s growing Muslim community 

welcomed several representatives of government, universities, 

and cultural organizations to the celebration which featured 

informative presentations and wonderful food. 

 

Last week, Saskatchewan celebrated Multicultural Week, Mr. 

Speaker, so it was all the more appropriate to learn a little more 

about the traditions of the Muslim people who now number 

about 10,000 throughout Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan’s proud 

of its multicultural population, so this event provides us with 

great opportunities to learn about other customs, increase our 

respect for diversity, and to become more understanding of each 

other. 

 

Understanding the experiences of different communities make 

us stronger and helps our province move forward. This 

province’s proud history of multiculturalism is enshrined in the 

provincial motto: Multis e gentibus vires, which translates from 

the Latin to “from many peoples, strength.” Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Water Supplies 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the Wall government is failing 

rural residents of Furdale and Birchwood Heights by promising 

to terminate their water supplies with SaskWater that have 

existed for nearly 30 years and, in doing so, forcing residents to 

sign up with a private water utility or simply go without water. 

 

Since 2008 a private water utility began advertising in this 

small-farm and acreage community south of Saskatoon, saying 

that joining the system was voluntary, that is, until the Wall 

government decided that those . . . sorry, that the Sask Party 

government decided that those who did not sign up would lose 

their SaskWater services by December 31st of this year. 

 

Despite well over 300 signatures on petitions calling for the 

Sask Party government to stop its unnecessary push for water 

privatization in this rural area and no public vote on the matter, 

residents continue to face the threat of paying out anywhere 

from $13,500 to $25,000 each to alter their individual water 

lines or face water cut-offs by their long-time public water 

supplier, SaskWater. 

 

As one resident writes, “It’s a sad time, especially for those who 

cannot afford any kind of new water system and are forced with 

the prospect of putting their property on the market. It’s 

sobering to think that the stroke of a ministerial pen can damage 

a community so much.” Mr. Speaker, another resident writes, 

“Maybe this issue will have to be resolved in the courts or 

through the ballot box next November.” Mr. Speaker, I think 

that says it all. 

 

The Speaker: — I’m not positive, but I think I heard the 

member referring to an individual by the member’s name rather 

than by the member’s responsibility. And I’d remind members 

in the future to be mindful of that, whether in member’s 

statements, to remember the rules of the Assembly. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Contract Negotiations and Supply of Physicians 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier, and it deals with the ongoing shortage of doctors in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Yesterday we raised the issue that the vacancy number in the 

province now stands at 120 vacancies. That’s up 40 per cent 

since the Sask Party government was elected three years ago. 

And today the situation gets worse where doctors are now 

withdrawing their service in a number of communities in 

southwest Saskatchewan, namely in the Cypress Hills Health 

Region, in the Premier’s own area and hometown. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this: in light of the 



November 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6283 

fact that the doctors have been now negotiating for 19 months 

and are still without a contract and when we already have long 

waiting lists and shortages for doctors, how does it stand that 

we don’t have contracts for doctors in this province when we 

have shortages that will get longer if this disrespect for our 

doctors and their community continues and isn’t resolved by the 

Premier and his government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what 

we’ve seen over the last three years is a number of major 

contracts settled. In fact of course all contracts settled, whether 

they were for health care providers or for nurses in the province, 

Mr. Speaker, the SGEU [Saskatchewan Government and 

General Employees’ Union] contract, Mr. Speaker. We’ve gone 

through this collective bargaining process, have government 

managers or third-party representatives. They’ve entered into 

free collective bargaining, Mr. Speaker, and agreements have 

been concluded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have every confidence that that is exactly what 

will be the case with respect to the province’s doctors. We 

know how important doctors are for the province. That’s why 

we’ve made investments in new training seats for doctors. 

That’s why we’ve made massive investments in new residency 

positions — the first time in the history of the province of 

Saskatchewan that we’re going to get north of 100 on both 

counts, Mr. Speaker. It’s why we’re taking the residency 

programs to places like Swift Current, Mr. Speaker. It’s why 

we’re investing in a health care recruitment plan specifically 

focused on doctors. With respect to the contract, we’ll have a 

settlement soon. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this. I think people in the 

province understand there’s work to be done, but there is 

significant progress being made by this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the doctors certainly don’t 

agree with the Premier’s statement that this issue is being dealt 

with. In fact they’ve become so frustrated in the province of 

Saskatchewan, along with resident physicians who were here 

yesterday and said they felt disrespect from the government, 

and many of them are considering leaving the province because 

they haven’t had a contract for over two years. We now have 

doctors withdrawing their service for the first time in decades in 

the Premier’s own hometown in order to make a point. 

 

Can the Premier guarantee that he will take seriously this matter 

of doctors leaving the province, in large part because they feel 

disrespected and unwanted by this government? Will he now 

deal with this important issue? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very confident that 

negotiations will conclude. There will be a settlement, Mr. 

Speaker, and we will resolve these issues as we’ve been able to 

resolve, together, all the collective bargaining process the 

government has proceeded with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would also say this. I think the people of the province 

understand that after a decade and a half of neglect from 

members opposite on this particular file, where we were only 

training 60 doctors a year, Manitoba was training 100 doctors a 

year, while we were only training 60 residents a year . . . Mr. 

Speaker, they see in our platform a commitment to double the 

residency positions. That promise is being kept to increase the 

number of doctors being trained to 100. That promise is being 

kept, Mr. Speaker, to finally have a comprehensive plan to 

recruit and retain doctors in our province for rural and urban 

Saskatchewan. It’s why there are 6 per cent more doctors today 

in the province than there were under the NDP [New 

Democratic Party]. There’s work to be done and we’re getting it 

done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that 

the number of people being trained in medicine in the province 

has little or nothing to do with how many stay. The residents 

yesterday, and the interns told us, they told us that they 

wouldn’t stay because this Sask Party government doesn’t 

respect them and won’t give them a contract. How can they stay 

in the province of Saskatchewan if they have no contract? That 

is why 225 of the residents have signed a petition saying that 

they’ve been treated unfairly by the Sask Party government. 

 

In light of the fact that the SMA [Saskatchewan Medical 

Association] today issued a press release, it says, and I quote, 

“The longer negotiations go on, the more physicians we are 

likely to lose in Saskatchewan, and this threatens 

patient-centred care throughout the province”. That’s what the 

doctors are saying. My question again to the Premier is, when 

are you going to take this issue seriously and get a contract for 

the doctors and patient service improves in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, no one is a bigger 

authority on out-migration from this province to other places in 

Canada than the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while he was the deputy premier, while he was the 

minister of Economic Development, that is the time in our 

history where more people — health care workers, business 

women and men, workers from almost any part of the economy 

— left the province in droves because of the economic policies 

and the lack of vision from the member opposite when he was a 

deputy premier and when he was the Economic Development 

minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here is the record. 2006 to 2010, the number of 

rural doctors in Saskatchewan has gone up 228 to 241. That’s 

up 6 per cent. For the same time period, Mr. Speaker, the 

number of doctors overall in the province, it was 944. It is 

today, under this government, 1,017. They don’t like the 

information, Mr. Speaker, but it doesn’t stop there. The number 

of health care workers working in the province, delivering 

health care to the people of Saskatchewan, 27,322 under them, 

30,500 under this government — an increase of 11 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



6284 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2010 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, those words are cold 

comfort for the people in those communities who can’t see their 

doctor today. The Premier can obviously make all sorts of wild 

statements about the lack of inflow from Alberta during the 

years that Lorne Calvert was premier. But the fact of the matter 

is more people moved from Alberta in 2007 than any time 

under his management of this province. That’s a fact. Get your 

facts straight. 

 

My question to the Premier, my question to the Premier is based 

on a statement from the SMA. And I quote from their press 

release: “Unfortunately, [this] government seems much more 

reluctant to create the working conditions for physicians that 

would give them good reasons to stay and good reasons [for 

others] to come from other provinces.” The doctors are saying 

that not only can’t they stay, but we can’t attract other doctors 

because they don’t have a contract. That’s a fact that the doctors 

are saying. 

 

My question to the Premier is, when are you going to take the 

doctors and the residents of this province seriously about the 

health care they need? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the significant investment in 

our post-secondary ministry of this government, budget after 

budget, to increase the number of seats training doctors in the 

province, to increase the number of residents’ training seats in 

the province, to double those numbers respectively almost, Mr. 

Speaker, to take the residency program outside of the major 

tertiary centres into places like Swift Current, Mr. Speaker, 

where now four residents are being trained in that community 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, and our resolve to see the 

contract is settled, Mr. Speaker — those are all evidence of this 

government’s commitment to this particular issue. 

 

And I will happily debate the record of this government with 

the record of members opposite, the record of that member 

who’s originally from southwest Saskatchewan and was happy 

to sit in a cabinet that closed five, six, seven hospitals right in 

the Southwest. Those days are over. We’re working and fixing 

the problems in health care we’re hearing from the members 

opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Crown Land 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In December of 2009, 

Robin Langford purchased two quarters of land from the 

Ministry of Agriculture, land branch. In the spring of 2010, the 

land branch contacted Mr. Langford and told him that they had 

made a terrible mistake and had not surveyed out 10 acres that 

were leased to another person. The Minister of Agriculture is 

now telling Mr. Langford that they’re going to survey out the 

10 acres of land with the access road to his property. In short 

the minister’s Department of Agriculture is taking away his 

access road. 

 

To the minister: why is Mr. Langford forced to pay for 

Saskatchewan Party government incompetence? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, to the member, in the case of Mr. Langford where 

we have sold Crown land, there was a mistake made by the 

lands branch in the Ministry of Agriculture, and we’re working 

to rectify that with the two people that are involved in this. 

There was a subdivision on that title that was missed by lands 

branch, and we will work with the two people involved — Mr. 

Langford and the people that had the subdivision on that case. It 

was an honest mistake by lands branch, and we’re working 

through it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he says that they’re 

working through it, but Mr. Langford’s yet to be contacted in 

writing by the Ministry of Agriculture itself except to say, “Will 

they prefer to have the title revert to the Crown?” And so, what 

they’re doing in effect is, without an agreement from Mr. 

Langford, they’re threatening to take his land. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

unacceptable in Saskatchewan today. So why is this their way 

of dealing with their own mistake — to expropriate, bully Mr. 

Langford, and take his land when he doesn’t agree to what they 

want? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think possibly the member has not got the facts quite right. We 

are not taking the land on Mr. Langford. The mistake was made 

when there was a subdivision with 10 acres that was owned by 

someone else and, as I have said, a mistake was made. It was 

missed by the lands branch and the Ministry of Agriculture and 

the total acreages were sold to the member . . . or to Mr. 

Langford. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are working to rectify the problem. I don’t 

know what more the member would want us to do. We’re 

working with Mr. Langford. We are also working with the 

people that were involved with the 10-acre subdivision, 

working with land titles to settle this problem. And any cost 

will be the Ministry of Agriculture’s cost. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

know what more we can do until we have the opportunity to 

work through this. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, that they’re 

working with Mr. Langford will be news to him because he 

doesn’t agree. Additionally it says right in the letter from 

Crown counsel to Mr. Langford’s lawyer, “Will they prefer to 



November 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6285 

have the title revert to the Crown?” So when he says that 

they’re not taking their land, that’s exactly what the letter from 

his ministry says they’re going to do. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Langford came to the legislature today in 

a last-ditch attempt to have this problem resolved. He’s 

attempted for months, Mr. Langford has, to have this issue 

resolved, only to be ignored. So, Mr. Speaker, the lack of 

consultation by the Saskatchewan Party government continues. 

Instead of consulting with Mr. Langford, as the minister says 

they have, they bully and threaten to take his land. So to the 

minister: why is it always this government’s knee-jerk reaction 

to bully and intimidate, and will he agree today to do something 

to resolve this issue? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is the same 

lands branch that was under the NDP government. No changes 

have been made there, Mr. Speaker. It was an honest mistake. It 

was nothing that they did on purpose to totally exclude the 

10-acre subdivision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the department and the ministry staff has worked 

with Mr. Langford’s lawyer. I don’t know how else we can do 

this. They’ve been in contact, working with the lawyer for Mr. 

Langford. They’ve been working with the people that had been 

excluded from the title when the land transaction was made. 

Mr. Speaker, we’re working as fast . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. The member was 

allowed to place a question. I’d ask the members now to allow 

the minister to respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, we’re working with 

both parties — the lawyer for Mr. Langford and the people that 

had the subdivision on that quarter. I don’t know what more we 

can do. We’re going as fast as we can to rectify a mistake that 

was made, as I admitted, by the people in lands branch. I don’t 

know how much more I can tell the member opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Northern Roads 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Every 

day the lives of northern people are being put at risk by this 

government’s inaction on dealing with dangerous northern 

roads. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a section on Highway 915 nicknamed 

suicide curve. Last year a teacher died taking a winter access 

road to Wollaston Lake because the main all-weather road is 

being slow-walked to death towards completion. Mr. Speaker, 

Highway 135 paving through Pelican Narrows has been 

cancelled or, as they like to say, postponed. And on Highway 

155, the main route to northwestern Saskatchewan, no action. 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: when can northerners expect to 

see action on addressing these dangerous roads that many 

northern people travel on? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

when our government was elected three years ago, we inherited 

a massive infrastructure deficit right across the board, Mr. 

Speaker. In Education it was schools, schools that needed to 

built, schools that needed to be repaired. Mr. Speaker, in health 

care it was hospitals and long-term care facilities. But I think 

probably the most noticeable part of that infrastructure deficit 

was the deplorable state of many of our highways, Mr. Speaker, 

especially in the North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the facts of the matter are the NDP, when they 

were in government for 16 years, did very little for northern 

roads. Mr. Speaker, here’s the facts for this year — $41 million 

in the budget for northern roads. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a 7 

per cent increase over last year’s budget. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, northern people, frankly all 

Saskatchewan people, are sick and tired of Sask Party cabinet 

members reciting talking points about 16 years. They are sick 

and tired of it, Mr. Speaker. This government has spent 

approximately $30 billion in just three years, $30 billion 

dollars. But families in northern Saskatchewan still travel 

dangerous roads. The fact is they’ve been in government for 

three years. They’ve had $30 billion at their disposal. They had 

more than enough time and money to get the job done. 

 

Northerners continue driving on dangerous, crumbling roads. 

They take their lives and their children’s lives in their hands 

every time they get behind the wheel. And yet this government 

and this minister gives insulting, meaningless answers. Mr. 

Speaker, why is this government risking the safety of northern 

families, of Métis families, of First Nations families through its 

failure to act in finally providing decent, safe roads for northern 

Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 

opposite says that we’ve had more than enough time to fix all 

the roads in the North in three years, yet they did nothing in 16 

years. So we’re not supposed to talk about that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

He’s calling those numbers meaningless? He says $41 million 

in this year’s budget is meaningless? Mr. Speaker, that’s 7 per 

cent increase over last year. And if he doesn’t like my speaking 

points, Mr. Speaker, here’s one for him. He was a former 

minister of Highways, Mr. Speaker. He was a former minister 

of Highways, and what did he do while he was there? Virtually 

nothing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll put my record as a former 

minister of Highways against his record any day of the week, 

Mr. Speaker. Talk about doing things for northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we need to do more 

to improve the lives and the safety . . . [inaudible] . . . to 

northern people, First Nations people, and Métis peoples than 

attend ceremonies. 



6286 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2010 

We can back up, we can back up our words, Mr. Speaker. All 

we see from this minister and this Premier and this party is 

pretty words with no meaningful actions, Mr. Speaker. This 

government say they have done a lot to improve the roads, but 

we’re certainly not seeing any of it in northern Saskatchewan. 

We continue seeing crumbling roads, cancelled projects, and yet 

another broken promise. We’re seeing families burying loved 

ones because of unsafe roads. 

 

To the minister: if he really thinks that he can defend his 

government’s record on northern roads, will he agree to a public 

debate? And, Mr. Speaker, he can name the date, the time, and 

the location in northern Saskatchewan so I can finally put an 

end, an end to his empty rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: —I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this may come as a big surprise to that member opposite, but 

this is a public debate. And, Mr. Speaker, I will put the record 

of this government on highways and in every other area against 

the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. I recognize the Minister 

of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, there are several days of 

session left. We can debate this every day for the next two 

weeks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when our government came to office, part of our 

platform commitment was $1.7 billion in highway spending 

over the next four years, Mr. Speaker, $1.8 billion in highway 

spending over the four-year term. Mr. Speaker, with this year’s 

budget, we’re already at 1.7 billion; we will far exceed our 

campaign commitment. Mr. Speaker, over $40 million for the 

North — 7 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. I will indeed debate 

that member in the legislature every day for the next two weeks 

if he wishes. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to talk about a health care contract the government did sign and 

that’s Amicus, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the government was 

asked about apparent conflicts of interest involving members of 

this government and Amicus. And they meet the definition of a 

pecuniary conflict of interest, Mr. Speaker, which is whether a 

person or someone in their family has a controlling interest in or 

is a director or senior officer of a corporation that could 

financially profit or be adversely affected by a decision. That’s 

the definition Saskatchewan municipalities follow. 

 

This is a question to the Premier. Would he not agree that, by 

this definition, the Minister of Justice may well be in a conflict 

of interest? And can the Premier advise the Assembly if the 

minister has recused himself from any decisions with respect to 

the Amicus affair? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the mistress of conspiracy 

theories on the other side of the House, Mr. Speaker, day in and 

day out, casting aspersions on the Catholic Health Ministry, the 

Catholic Health Ministry that has provided health care in this 

province for decades, Mr. Speaker, for decades — the mistress 

of health care conspiracies, Mr. Speaker, would now have us 

believe that a brother of an MLA that won a tender tendered by 

a third party, a third party that interviewed contractors and then 

based on the fact that they could get a price guarantee, chose 

that contractor. That contractor goes out, tenders publicly, and 

someone who’s related in this Assembly wins the tender by 

$140,000. 

 

Only in that member’s world would that be a conflict of 

interest, Mr. Speaker. The people of this province are getting 

tired of this I think, Mr. Speaker. There’s only one Donlevy 

brother they’ve missed, Mr. Speaker. He’s a Catholic priest. So 

I’m sure he’s at the top of this entire pyramid, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier seems to know an 

awful lot about this, and I just want to say this to the Premier. 

What I want to say to the Premier is that the tender that went 

out to Bridge City went out in early February, Mr. Speaker, and 

the government didn’t sign an MOU [memorandum of 

understanding] with Amicus until March, Mr. Speaker, over a 

month and a half later. That’s point number one. 

 

Point number two, Mr. Speaker, is that it was that Premier’s 

government that chose to redact close to 1,800 pages of 

information, Mr. Speaker, and you know, we really want to 

know why they’re so nervous about that that they had to do a 

total blackout, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, leading members of the government are in 

what most Saskatchewan people would agree is a clear conflict 

of interest when it comes to Amicus. Two brothers — two out 

of four brothers actually — of the Premier’s chief of staff have 

profited. So has the Minister of Justice’s brother. And their 

situation is what would clearly be considered to be in a conflict 

of interest under municipal legislation, if not The Members’ 

Conflict of Interest Act. So I have another question to the 

Premier. Will the government agree to changes to The 

Members’ Conflict of Interest Act to ensure that conflicts like 

these don’t occur in the future? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, today as we got near the 

end of question period and there had been no questions on 

Amicus, I was a little afraid. Now I’m certainly reassured 

because, after five weeks, I feel a little bit like Yogi Berra when 

he said déjà vu all over again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Day in and day out, she tries to smear families, well-standing 

families, Mr. Speaker, in this province. 

 

[Interjections] 

 



November 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6287 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. I recognize the 

Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — She stands in this House, Mr. 

Speaker, and tries to smear well-standing families, be it the 

Donlevys, the Stensruds, Mr. Speaker, absolutely unacceptable. 

 

From the Catholic Health Ministry, Paul Ellis, when he talks 

about this agreement between the Catholic Health Ministry and 

the Saskatoon Health Region, he goes on to say, “Any 

allegations that there is outside influence on our board to select 

Miners Construction or any other firm associated with this 

project is completely false,” Mr. Speaker. She’s been on a 

fishing trip for an awful long time, and she hasn’t caught a 

thing. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 161, 

The Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now introduced and read 

a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 161, The Election Amendment Act, 2010. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 162, 

The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister of Municipal Government has 

moved that Bill No. 162, The Local Government Election 

Amendment Act, 2010 be now read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Municipal 

Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of House Services. 

 

Standing Committee on House Services 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on House Services to report that it has considered 

certain estimates and to present its 11th report to the Assembly. 

I move: 

 

That the 11th report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services now be concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — The Chair of the House Services committee 

has moved: 

 

That the 11th report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the 

Assembly to make a special motion today to honour the events 

of earlier this day. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to present a 

special motion to recognize the day’s events. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. I recognize the Premier. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Recognition of Métis Contributions in the Creation 

of Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 

me to be able to move: 

 

That this Assembly recognize and celebrate the historical 

significance of this day; and further 

 

That this Assembly recognize the importance of the 



6288 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2010 

contributions of the Métis people in the creation of 

Saskatchewan as a province by the acceptance of the gift 

of a Métis sash created by Mr. Pat Adams, a renowned 

artist from the community of Fish Creek near Rosthern. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 

 

That this Assembly recognize and celebrate the historical 

significance of this day; and further 

 

That this Assembly recognize the importance of the 

contributions of the Métis people in the creation of 

Saskatchewan as a province by the acceptance of the gift 

of a Métis sash created by Mr. Pat Adams, a renowned 

artist from the community of Fish Creek near Rosthern. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 450 through 469. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers tabled to questions 450 through 469. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 159 — The University of Regina 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister responsible for 

advanced education and labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The University of Regina Amendment 

Act, 2010. Last week, Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to announce 

that the government is moving to update the University of 

Regina legislation, which will allow the university to improve 

its governance process and enhance its efficiencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to building a 

stronger Saskatchewan through investments in and 

enhancements to post-secondary education, its associated 

research, and related innovations. And, Mr. Speaker, our 

government recognizes that the University of Regina, like other 

post-secondary institutions across the province, is an important 

partner in building a stronger, new Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the University of Regina approached our ministry 

to request some much-needed updates to the legislation 

regulating the university. The changes that are reflected in Bill 

159 balance the public interest with the needs of a modern, 

dynamic university. These amendments provide for both 

continuity and change, aspects that will help to strengthen the 

University of Regina in its academic endeavours. 

 

The government is proposing amendments to The University of 

Regina Act as follows: (1) repealing the visitor section; (2) 

increasing the number of members required to call an 

extraordinary meeting of convocation from 25 to 50; (3) 

refining the methodology associated with the election of the 

chancellor where as proposed the chancellor would be elected 

by the university senate rather than all of convocation. This has 

proven to be an expensive process with minimal if not sporadic 

participation and input. 

 

Next, enabling the senate to appoint an interim chancellor in the 

case of a vacancy. Following this, enabling professional 

organizations with membership on the senate to now choose 

their own representatives rather than being directed by the 

senate. Further, requiring senate district representatives to be 

elected only by members of convocation living in that specific 

district, rather than by all members of convocation. 

 

As well, requiring the board of governors to now report to the 

senate when requested, and enabling the senate to make bylaws 

governing the administrative functions for its elections and the 

election of the chancellor rather than these functions being 

outlined explicitly in the Act, thereby streamlining the 

administration of the election process. 

 

If I may, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go into some detail on each of 

the proposed amendments to better explain the nature of these 

changes. 

 

Regarding the repeal of the visitor clause, Mr. Speaker, this will 

make The University of Regina Act consistent with The 

University of Saskatchewan Act where the visitor clause was 

removed earlier during our term. The University of Regina 

remains one of the only universities in the country still with this 

clause in its legislation. 

 

The avenues of appeal will not change in actual practice or on 

de facto basis, Mr. Speaker. An appeal to the visitor is in fact an 

appeal to the Lieutenant Governor, who currently simply refers 

these appeals to the courts. This, Mr. Speaker, is just simply to 

ensure that this current practice is streamlined and that the 

courts become the source of appeal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been no appeals to the visitor at the 

University of Regina since its inception in 1974 and as such, on 

behalf of the University of Regina, the government proposes to 

remove the visitor clause from the legislation. 

 

Regarding extraordinary meetings, the second amendment 

proposes increasing the number of members required to call an 

extraordinary meeting of convocation from 25 to 50. 

Convocation grows each year, Mr. Speaker, making it much 

larger than it was when this provision was originally included in 

the Act. With approximately 56,000 members of convocation, it 

is a reasonable and realistic increase that is moving this 



November 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6289 

threshold modestly in order to call for an extraordinary meeting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, next regarding the chancellor and the appointment 

by the senate, as it would be, rather than the convocation. Mr. 

Speaker, the senate is representative of convocation by virtue of 

its wide representation of the university community in its 97 

members. The senate represents members of the convocation, 

the academic community, including students, and certainly 

numerous external stakeholders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this amendment will align with the University of 

Regina and ensure that this university is consistent with and can 

be compared to other universities across the country as the 

senate of the University of Alberta and Guelph university 

already elect the chancellor, and the University of 

Saskatchewan has made this similar shift as well. Mr. Speaker, 

this is a cost savings that we anticipate will benefit the 

University of Regina to the tune of about $50,000 regarding the 

mailing out of ballots to its 56,000 members of convocation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regarding the vacancy of the office of the 

chancellor, Mr. Speaker, the amendment enabling the senate to 

appoint an interim chancellor in the case of a vacancy is quite 

appropriate, especially if the chancellor vacates the office early 

in the term. The amendment allows the term of the chancellor to 

be fixed to three years and elections will be held on predictable 

dates. 

 

Regarding senate representatives from professional bodies, Mr. 

Speaker, the amendment enabling professional organizations 

with membership on the senate to choose their own member is 

consistent with what is currently being done at the University of 

Saskatchewan. The senate will still determine which 

professional bodies are invited to sit on the senate, but the 

professional body will now be able to determine who is most 

qualified and most interested — that is, most engaged — in 

being a member of the senate. In practice, the senate currently 

accepts the recommendation of the professional body as to 

whom will be its representative on the senate body. 

 

Regarding the senate district elections, Mr. Speaker, the 

amendment requires the senate district representatives to be 

elected only by members of the convocation living in that 

district, and we know that this is common practice across a 

variety of elections. It’s more fair that members of convocation 

in a senate district vote for their own representative exclusively 

rather than having members from other districts also vote for 

their district representative. 

 

Regarding the board of governors and its report to the senate, 

requiring the board of governors to now report to the senate on 

certain matters, Mr. Speaker, will allow the senate to ask for a 

report from the board as it already can from the university 

council. It makes sense, Mr. Speaker, that the senate should be 

able to ask for the reports from both of these bodies. 

 

Regarding senate by-elections and bylaws, Mr. Speaker, the last 

proposed amendment is to enable the senate to make bylaws 

governing the administrative functions for its election and the 

election of the chancellor rather than these functions being 

included explicitly within the Act. The senate already has a 

series of bylaws in place which deal with the mechanics of its 

election process, and this amendment will now allow the senate 

more flexibility in future elections. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these legislative amendments will update The 

University of Regina Act and will help the university improve 

its governance processes and enhance its efficiencies. We 

consulted with university officials, faculty, and staff, including 

unions, student associations, the alumni society, and the general 

alumni and convocation of members. And in general, Mr. 

Speaker, we were met with support for these amendments, 

though I will certainly offer here, Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t want 

this to be categorized as having universal support. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to reiterate that this 

legislation will update The University of Regina Act as we have 

been requested by the University of Regina. And I am happy to 

speak to these amendments today, Mr. Speaker. I move second 

reading of The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration has moved second reading of 

Bill No. 159, The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010. 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to rise on Bill No. 159, The University of Regina 

Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve been going through the Act and looking at 

what was previously there and also the explanatory notes, and 

also listened carefully to the minister’s comments on Bill 159. 

And I don’t think any of us would disagree, Mr. Speaker, that 

it’s always important to review legislation, make sure that it’s 

updated and appropriate for the community that it addresses and 

make sure that it is keeping up, I think, with today’s world, 

which is changing rapidly. So we know that it is important to 

make adjustments from time to time and to make legislation 

more effective and organizations and operations more effective. 

 

According to the news release that was put out by the 

government on this Act . . . or 159, An Act to amend The 

University of Regina Act, according to the news release, these 

amendments are intended to update The University of Regina 

Act in order to allow the university to improve its governance 

processes and to become more efficient. 

 

The minister commented in a little bit of detail, Mr. Speaker, on 

the amendments, including repealing the visitor section and 

enabling the university to adopt new processes for the election 

of chancellor and senate representatives. And according to the 

minister’s comments, these amendments were initiated at the 

request of the University of Regina and they were met with 

general support from stakeholders during the consultation 

process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I took note of the different pieces that the minister 

highlighted in his comments. A repeal of the visitor section 

makes the University of Regina consistent with the University 

of Saskatchewan, brings them in line so it’s similar sections in 

each of their Acts, and also increasing the numbers that are 

needed to call extraordinary meetings. 

 



6290 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2010 

[14:45] 

 

The minister talked about, spoke about the size of the 

university, the campus, the cost of sending out ballots and . . . 

well on the election. But calling an extraordinary meeting that 

the numbers needed to match more appropriately, I think, the 

numbers that are associated with the university in this day and 

age. So I think on some sense it makes sense. But there’s also 

difficulties that you come across when you’re changing 

numbers and what’s required for extraordinary meetings. 

 

Electing the chancellor, the minister is looking at, and this is 

where we talk about saving the cost of sending out ballots 

because of the larger convocation that you would be sending . . . 

or convention that you would be sending it out to. The minister 

talked about saving up to $50,000 at each election, which is 

every three years, I think, by what the comments that the 

minister made. Mr. Speaker, I know that there’s always the urge 

to streamline processes, make them simpler, make them easier, 

but it may not always be the most engaging and in the long run 

the best for the organization. 

 

So that was a couple things that popped to mind when I first 

listened to the minister’s comments: senate district reps, the 

election process there. Also board of governors and reporting 

back to the senate, and senate establishing bylaws — 

administrative bylaws, I believe, is what the minister said. I’m 

going to have to go back and look at his comments in a little bit 

more detail. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know all of us here are committed to student 

success and to building world-class institutions here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And to that end, we are certainly 

interested in looking at any requests that are made by the 

University of Regina or the University of Saskatchewan. So if 

indeed these amendments were requested by the university and 

that they were met with general support, as the minister has 

commented on, from stakeholders during his consultation 

process, then that truly is a good thing. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t mean to be a doubting Thomas here, 

but we know that this government hasn’t had a great record 

when it comes to doing consultations. And we don’t have to 

look that far back. They’re in their third year of their mandate, 

but they still, up until even the last session that we were in in 

this legislature, there was numerous concerns raised by 

organizations around the province that consultations hadn’t 

been conducted appropriately with stakeholders and partners in 

a variety of sectors. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to be a naysayer, but I know that 

my colleagues and I will need to take some time to further 

scrutinize the legislation and actually make some contacts and 

talk to stakeholders directly to make sure that appropriate 

consultations have been held and to see what the feedback is. 

Because the minister noted that there was general acceptance, 

but not universal acceptance, I think was his . . . or support of 

the changes that are being proposed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as the minister was speaking and I was 

looking at the legislation, a number of people that I know came 

to mind quite quickly in a couple of sections, that they would be 

quite opposed to them for a number of reasons. Now are those 

reasons still valid? I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, but that’s one 

thing that the opposition needs to undertake, is having a 

discussion with stakeholders. And they can be pretty 

wide-ranging when it comes to the universities. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I know that all of us are very dedicated to the 

idea of building world-class institutions. In fact we have some 

very good institutions here in the province of Saskatchewan, 

and anything that will enhance their operation and their 

academic standing and ability to be more active, not only in 

Saskatchewan but in Canada and beyond, I know the opposition 

will be supportive of. 

 

So I know many of my colleagues would like to make some 

comments, and we have a fair bit of work to do on this piece of 

legislation. So, Mr. Speaker, at this point in time I would 

adjourn debate on Bill 159. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw Wakamow has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 159. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 160 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of Bill No. 160, The Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010. Mr. Speaker, earlier 

this session we introduced a Bill dealing with the Provincial 

Court. The members opposite during their comments on that 

made significant reference to the fact that the second reading 

speech was short and was going to require them to do some 

additional work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I thought at the time that the information 

was provided was more than adequate — and I still believe that 

— I have today provided some significant additional 

information with regard to this Bill, so I will be somewhat 

lengthier in time than we were on the earlier Bill. But that is 

directly in response to the members opposite inquiries as to the 

things that should be included in a second reading speech, so 

we will provide some more significant detail. 

 

Mr. Speaker, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code promotes 

and protects individual dignity and equal rights. The Code 

prohibits discrimination based on grounds set out within the 

Code and includes a bill of rights that makes it illegal to violate 

another person’s fundamental rights and freedoms. 

 

The Code establishes the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission and a procedure for filing and investigating 

complaints. The Code also considers the resolution of 

complaints or the hearing of complaints if not resolved. The 

commission has general responsibility for the Code and for 

reducing discrimination through research and public education. 

The commission receives, investigates, and attempts to settle 

complaints. 



November 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6291 

Currently complaints that are not dismissed or resolved by the 

commission are forwarded to the Human Rights Tribunal panel 

where commission lawyers appear on behalf of the 

complainant. The tribunal was established in 2001 to hold 

inquiries into complaints. Since 2001, tribunal members have 

held numerous inquiries and played an important role in the 

complaint process. 

 

However the tribunal has not been seen by some as independent 

or at arm’s length from the commission. This may be because 

tribunal members do not have security of tenure, financial 

security, or administrative independence. Also there has been 

some confusion that the tribunal and the commission are the 

same body. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear that the members of the 

tribunal, who are lawyers in private practice, have provided 

excellent service to the public. However we have considered the 

comments we have received about the tribunal process and 

searched for ways to improve the public’s confidence in that 

process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will amend the Code to transfer the 

powers and duties of the tribunal to the Court of Queen’s Bench 

and to eliminate the tribunal. The amendments will provide that 

where the Chief Commissioner determines that a complaint has 

merit and settlement efforts are unsuccessful, an application 

may be made to the Court of Queen’s Bench for a hearing. 

 

The Court of Queen’s Bench has the capacity to handle the 

additional workload. If the last two years are any indication, 

there will be fewer than 10 human rights hearings a year. For 

example between April 2008 and March 2009, the tribunal 

conducted 11 inquiries. There was a substantial decrease in the 

following year. Between April 2009 and March 2010, the Chief 

Commissioner forwarded just five complaints to the tribunal for 

inquiry. To date, since April 2010, just three complaints have 

been referred to the tribunal by the commission. 

 

Judges of the Court of Queen’s Bench also have expertise and 

experience in the area of human rights as they currently hear 

complaints on appeal from decisions of the tribunal and 

regularly deal with Charter issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments include transitional 

provisions to allow the tribunal to continue and complete any 

inquiry or review that is under way in accordance with the 

current provisions. The tribunal will also be able to exercise any 

of its powers in relation to these matters until they are complete. 

Also the proposed provisions will come into force on 

proclamation to provide ample time to both the tribunal and the 

court. 

 

Moving the duties of the tribunal to the court should not impact 

the accessibility of hearings to members of the public, given the 

Queen’s Bench courthouse locations across the province. Also 

the commission will continue to have carriage of all matters that 

are referred to the court for a hearing, and complainants will be 

represented by the commission’s legal counsel for all court 

matters up to and including, if necessary, the Supreme Court of 

Canada. 

 

The Bill also includes a provision that provide for costs that 

may be awarded by the Court of Queen’s Bench at a hearing or 

by the Court of Appeal on an appeal. Currently costs associated 

with inquiry are considered in The Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Code Regulations and may be awarded against any party to the 

proceeding. The commission rarely seeks costs. Since 2006, at 

the tribunal level, costs have been awarded in favour of the 

commission only twice, and a respondent has been awarded 

costs against a complainant only once. 

 

The Bill moves the cost provisions to the Code and places a 

limit on costs that may be awarded to situations where there has 

been a vexatious, frivolous, or abusive conduct on the part of 

any party to the proceeding, including if appropriate, the 

commission itself. Limiting costs will preserve accessibility to 

human rights hearings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our effort to make the human rights complaint 

process more effective and efficient, we reviewed the 

legislation in other Canadian jurisdictions. We found that where 

a complaint is dismissed by the commission, only four other 

provinces establish a right to request a review of that decision, 

to allow review by the commission itself and, secondly, by a 

third party. Given the new tools that are being established for 

the commission to effectively investigate, resolve, or pursue 

complaints, these amendments will remove the review step. 

 

As a result of moving the duties of the tribunal to court, the Bill 

will also consequentially amend The Labour Standards Act to 

remove references in that Act to the tribunal. Since 2001, the 

tribunal has had the jurisdiction to hear any equal pay 

complaints that arise in situations where men and women are 

paid differently in a workplace even though they essentially do 

the same job. Before the 2001 amendments, equal pay 

complaints were heard by the commission with the last 

complaint being heard in 1995. Since the Code was amended in 

2001, no equal pay complaints have been referred to the 

tribunal. The Bill will amend The Labour Standards Act to 

provide for the appointment of an adjudicator to hear inquiries 

into equal pay complaints. 

 

In March 2010, the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission 

revealed its four pillar strategic business plan through which it 

intends to position itself as a best practice model for other 

jurisdictions. The commission has already begun internal 

reviews in support of the four pillars, namely, gatekeeping and 

investigation, directed mediation, systemic advocacy, and civics 

education. But some amendments to the Code are required. 

 

The Bill is a crucial part of the four pillars process. The 

government drafted it as a result of the recommendations by 

Chief Commissioner, Judge David Arnot. Judge Arnot 

consulted a wide range of organizations before making his 

recommendations.  

 

Members will recall the many diverse groups that were here 

yesterday to see this Bill introduced. These groups included: the 

Treaty Commissioner’s office, B’nai Brith, the Islamic 

Association of Saskatchewan, the Mennonite Central 

Committee, the Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan, the 

International Women of Saskatoon, Saskatchewan 

African-Canadian history museum, the Canadian Mental Health 

Association, the Saskatchewan association of rehabilitative 

centres, Learning Disabilities Association of Saskatchewan, the 



6292 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2010 

Saskatchewan Abilities Council, the South Saskatchewan 

Independent Living Centre, the Avenue Community Centre for 

Gender and Sexual Diversity, the University of Saskatchewan’s 

Students’ Union Pride Centre, the Canadian Bar Association, 

the Saskatoon and Regina chambers of commerce, the 

Saskatchewan Educational Leadership Unit, and also Regina 

Catholic Schools. I think that speaks to the breadth of 

consultation and of support concerning this Bill. 

 

Judge Arnot was consulted on the drafting of this Bill and has 

stated his approval for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the commission’s four pillars is directed 

mediation. The commission has started being more assertive in 

seeking non-litigation resolution of complaints. But an 

amendment to the Code is necessary to assist the commission in 

promoting this pillar. 

 

The Bill creates a new provision that allows the Chief 

Commissioner to direct the parties to mediation prior to 

referring a matter to the hearing stage. It also allows the Chief 

Commissioner to dismiss a complaint where a reasonable offer 

of settlement is made by the respondent and the complainant 

simply refuses to settle. This new provision will allow the Chief 

Commissioner to dismiss a complaint where it is unlikely that 

the complainant will receive a better result at a hearing or that, 

given the proposed settlement, proceeding with the hearing 

would be unfair to the respondent and costly for all parties. 

 

[15:00] 

 

At the recommendation of the commission, the Bill also repeals 

and replaces section 48, the exemption provision, with a new 

provision that will allow any person to adopt or implement 

reasonable and justifiable measures designed to prevent, reduce, 

or eliminate disadvantages without the prior approval of the 

Chief Commissioner. 

 

No other Canadian province establishes an approval process for 

measures that contravene the Code. Instead the same effect is 

accomplished by excluding from the operation of the Code 

measures that are reasonable and justifiable given the 

circumstances. Under the new provision, measures may be 

adopted without prior approval and will only come to the 

commission’s attention in the form of a complaint if the 

requirements in a new section are not met. 

 

The new section 48 will have the effect of freeing up resources 

currently used by the commission to process exemption 

applications to focus elsewhere to promote the objectives of the 

Code towards not requiring these measures in the future. It will 

also address many of the concerns raised with respect to 

processing exemption applications. 

 

The Bill will expand the Chief Commissioner’s powers of 

dismissal. Currently the Chief Commissioner may dismiss a 

complaint where he or she is of the opinion that the best 

interests of the complainant will not be served by continuing, 

that the complaint is without merit or raises no significant issue 

of discrimination, that the substance of the complaint has been 

dealt with through another proceeding, that the complaint was 

made in bad faith, or that there is no reasonable likelihood that 

an investigation will reveal evidence of contravention. 

The Bill will expand the powers of dismissal to allow the Chief 

Commissioner to dismiss a complaint where in his or her 

opinion there is no likelihood that a further investigation will 

reveal evidence of a contravention of the Code or where a 

hearing into the complaint is not warranted given all the 

circumstances. 

 

The Bill strengthens the threshold requirement for the filing of a 

complaint by moving from a subjective to an objective 

standard. The Code currently requires the person who files the 

complaint must have reasonable grounds for believing that a 

contravention of the Code occurred. The amendment will 

require the complainant to provide enough information to show 

that, objectively, reasonable grounds exist for believing that 

there has been a contravention of the Code. This amendment 

will allow the commission to ask a complainant for more 

information to ensure that the complaint is completed before 

proceeding with a review and investigation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Code currently allows the Chief 

Commissioner to designate an individual to act on his or her 

behalf with respect to the dismissal of or inquiry into a 

complaint. The amendments will expand the delegation powers 

to allow the Chief Commissioner to delegate any of his or her 

powers under the Code to any employee of the commission or 

another commissioner. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, to kindly ask for leave to 

introduce a guest. And I apologize to the minister for 

interrupting him, but if I could ask for leave to introduce a 

guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has asked for 

leave to introduce a guest. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In your 

gallery we’re joined by a very special guest, none other than 

Vice-chief Lyle Whitefish of the FSIN, the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations. And just to point out that we had 

Mr. Whitefish up in Ile-a-la-Crosse this summer. It is always an 

excellent opportunity to sit down and chat with him about a 

bunch of northern issues. And Mr. Whitefish was very helpful, 

very supportive, and some of the information that he shared 

with me was very, very helpful. And I want to point out that he 

is indeed one of the strong First Nations leaders of 

Saskatchewan, a great Canadian, and a great First Nations man. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members of the Assembly to please 

welcome Vice-chief Lyle Whitefish. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — For leave to introduce guests. 

 



November 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6293 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Social Services has asked for 

leave to introduce a guest. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minster of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible] 

. . . This is a very important group we have with us today in the 

gallery. The Education portfolio is crucial when it comes to 

making a difference in the growth of our province and ensuring 

that our First Nations are involved in the economy. The work 

that the vice-chief has done with our government and with the 

people of the province is so important and we can’t thank him 

enough for all of his work and dedication. So on behalf of all 

the members on the government side and my colleagues, I’d 

like everyone to welcome the vice-chief to our Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with both the member opposite and with the Minister of Social 

Services in welcoming Vice-chief Whitefish to the Assembly 

today. We appreciate the continuing good work that is being 

done by him and by his staff and thank him very much for being 

here. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 160 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

Amendment Act, 2010 

(continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my 

remarks by going back to the . . . speaking to the amendments 

on The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. 

 

The amendments will expand the delegation powers to allow 

the Chief Commissioner to delegate any of his or her powers 

under the Code to an employee of the commission or another 

commissioner. The new provision will also specifically permit 

the Chief Commissioner to delegate his or her powers to a 

person outside of the commission. This extension of the 

delegation power is important where the commission may be in 

a conflict. 

 

This Bill clarifies the commission’s administrative 

independence and powers by adding new provisions that will 

allow the commission to be responsible for the allocation of 

resources dedicated to the commission, but still be accountable 

for any expenditures to the Minister of Justice and Attorney 

General. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Bill will reduce the limitation period 

in the Code from two years to one year. Reducing the limitation 

period will increase efficiency and fairness for all parties. It will 

make investigations easier and more timely and will bring the 

Code in line with most other jurisdictions in Canada. Only 

Quebec, the Northwest Territories, and Nunavut have a 

limitation period of two years. Each of British Columbia, 

Manitoba, and the Yukon have a six-month limitation period for 

human rights complaints. In each of Alberta, Ontario, New 

Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, and 

Newfoundland, a one-year limitation period is established for 

the filing of human rights complaints. Federal legislation also 

creates a one-year limitation for human rights complaints. 

 

Reducing the limitation period will not change an individual’s 

ability to file a complaint, as a new provision will also be added 

to allow the Chief Commissioner to extend the limitation period 

if appropriate given all of the circumstances. This extension 

will ensure that where there’s good reason for the delay in 

making a complaint or the complaint alleges particularly 

egregious discrimination, it will be accepted and investigated by 

the commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to move second reading of Bill 

No. 160, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment 

Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 160, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure this 

afternoon to rise to speak to this particular legislation. I 

appreciate the fact that the minister heard my words a couple 

weeks ago about The Provincial Court Act, where there was not 

sufficient information provided for the public to understand 

what the changes that were being done there were about. He’s 

provided much more information on this particular legislation, 

but I still will have a number of questions and a number of 

concerns as we move forward with this particular piece of 

legislation. 

 

Now the Human Rights Code amendment Act, related to 

tribunals, speaks to this specific issue of the tribunal process 

under the . . . involved within the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission. The tribunal conducts public hearings of 

complaints that have been referred to it by the commission, and 

it also reviews dismissed complaints at the request of a 

complainant. So in other words if a person makes a complaint 

to the commission, the commission decides that it’s not 

sufficient to have it be referred to a tribunal, then that person 

has a right to make an appeal. 

 

Discrimination complaints may be based on race, colour, age, 

sex, sexual orientation, physical or mental disability, religion, 

marital status, family status, place of origin, or ancestry. And 

the Human Rights Code itself covers discrimination in a variety 

of contexts including tenancy, employment, employment 

advertisements, publications, public services and facilities, 

purchase of property, and discrimination by unions or other 

associations. 

 

The tribunal under the Human Rights Code was originally 

created as a replacement for boards of inquiry which were 

appointed by the minister to review individual cases where the 

commission decided they had merit or where the complainant 

was appealing a decision referred to it by the commission. 

Sometimes it would take months for a board of inquiry to be 

appointed, particularly if the minister’s office was having 

difficulty identifying a member of the bar that did not have a 

conflict of interest with one of the parties in the dispute. And 

this of course delayed justice for the complainant. 



6294 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2010 

The tribunal was originally created in part to address those 

concerns. And, Mr. Speaker, I recall this original process 

where, as the minister of Justice, I had the role of selecting the 

people who would hear these cases. And I do agree that there 

were times when it was quite difficult because of sometimes the 

rather broad nature of some of the issues being involved, and 

other times just to find the person who had the skills that were 

necessary to handle some of these things. So the tribunal 

process was put in place which is what is being used now. And 

it’s now that process which is going to be changed by this 

legislation. 

 

Now when people complained about how long tribunals would 

take to refer or to deal with decisions that are sent to it or to the 

people involved in the tribunal, I think those were quite 

legitimate concerns, as people do have a right to have a timely 

resolution of their complaints. And especially when many of the 

complaints that come under the Human Rights Code are so 

personal, emotional, very connected to relationships, and it 

often goes right to the core of who people are as human beings. 

 

So these cases are not very simple cases to deal with and they 

can become even more difficult as we go through the process of 

sorting them out. Now we know, as members of opposition, that 

the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission and in particular 

the Chief Commissioner, David Arnot, have endorsed making 

changes. And in their words: 

 

The Commission anticipates that a move of the tribunal 

function to the courts would elevate the stature of human 

rights issues within the justice system and improve the 

current decision timelines. Dedicated . . . judges would 

handle hearings and provide decisions. 

 

The commission and the Chief Commissioner, Judge Arnot, has 

also spoken about his desire for: 

 

. . . a decision making process which is informal and 

accessible to all, provides for review of decisions, and is 

handled by experts who reflect our diverse society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we support that view. We want a decision-making 

process where people without a legal background can be heard, 

and we want people who make decisions to have the necessary 

expertise and to reflect the diverse nature of our society. 

Further, Mr. Speaker, the commissioner and the commission 

have also stated: 

 

Under the court system parties to a complaint would see 

no change to current processes. The Commission’s 

complaint intake, mediation and investigation processes 

would not change. In addition the Commission’s lawyers 

would continue to represent the complainant at the hearing 

at no cost whatsoever, including any subsequent levels of 

appeal right up to the Supreme Court of Canada if 

necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this last point is extremely important because we 

want to make sure that this process is set up in a way that any 

individual who has suffered discrimination will get assistance in 

their quest for justice without being forced to pay for a lawyer. 

Vulnerable and marginalized people, people who have already 

suffered discrimination, should not be forced to pay for the 

government’s financial mismanagement. So we want to make 

sure, Mr. Speaker, that in these changes that are being proposed 

there is not a way for the government to squirm away from their 

responsibility of providing appropriate counsel, appropriate 

advice as these matters move forward. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Now the government’s also spoken of a desire to attempt to 

resolve more disputes through mediation and we’re supportive 

of this move. And we also see that every human rights 

complaint has in it an opportunity for education and for the 

ability to restore things back to right relationships. Mediation 

often provides a better opportunity for the kind of dialogue that 

can bring about that rather than taking the conflict to court. And 

so, Mr. Speaker, there are provisions in here about mediation. I 

will speak to them in a little while, but first I have some other 

concerns. 

 

One of the questions that I have with this particular piece of 

legislation is its timing. Why is it being brought by this 

government at this time? We know that there’ve been some 

very strong views stated by individuals who have served in the 

Sask Party caucus, especially the former member from 

Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

And so we need to examine carefully what are the motives that 

the government has for bringing forward these changes at this 

time. Are these changes really the methods of providing 

improvements to human rights protection, or is there something 

else going on here? 

 

We know that in 2009 the Human Rights Tribunal, which we’re 

talking about eliminating in this particular legislation, we know 

that this tribunal was the body that ruled that marriage 

commissioners were obliged to uphold the law and perform 

their duty to provide civil marriage to all Saskatchewan citizens 

regardless of their personal belief. The government’s response 

was to refer two pieces of legislation to the Court of Appeal that 

would allow marriage commissioners to continue to 

discriminate against some Saskatchewan citizens based on their 

personal belief. Now that was the government’s response to a 

ruling of the Saskatchewan Human Rights Tribunal that it 

didn’t like. 

 

So I think we need to be very careful and ask questions around 

the government’s motives that are here because we know that 

the response to some of the things that happened last year may 

be legislation this year that actually eliminates the tribunal that 

they questioned. 

 

Just last week, Mr. Speaker, the Ontario Superior Court of 

Justice made a ruling on November 18th. And in that ruling, 

Giacomo Vigna, a lawyer for the Canadian Human Rights 

Commission, was held by the judge to have been defamed by a 

blogger, Ezra Levant. And according to the court — and this is 

the Superior Court of Justice in Ontario — Mr. Levant was on a 

campaign to discredit human rights commissions. I mean it’s 

kind of interesting, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Levant was in our 

province yesterday on a number of issues, but it’s clear that just 

last week, some of this push and attack against human rights 

commissions were in the courts of Ontario. 

 



November 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6295 

Now we know that there have been some fairly strong attacks 

on our Human Rights Code. Any person who was in this 

legislature in the early ’90s knows what kind of upheaval and 

discussion changes to the Human Rights Code caused to all of 

the people that were here. And so, Mr. Speaker, we need to be 

especially careful as we look at this particular legislation and 

see what it is that the government is actually trying to do here. 

 

Now when we talk about the accommodations that can be made 

— and I know that the minister, in his detailed description of 

the legislation, talked about a method whereby there could be 

variations that are contrary to the Code and that they could be 

dealt with in a different manner — we need to find out from the 

minister, from the officials involved whether what they’re 

talking about is a way of sidestepping the Human Rights Code 

as it relates to the marriage commissioners case. If that’s in fact 

what they’re talking about with some of the changes that 

they’ve made, or that’s what they’re attempting to allow in this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, I think we have many, many 

questions. 

 

So this process of changing the Human Rights Tribunal at this 

time raises many red flags. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve only seen 

this legislation since yesterday. I think there will be others who 

will help us identify other issues that are here. 

 

Now let me go on to some of the other concerns that I have. The 

current process that we have, this existing law right now allows 

people to appeal the decision by the Human Rights Commission 

that their complaint has no merit by referring it to the Human 

Rights Tribunal. The new system that’s being proposed in this 

legislation would involve the use of lawyers appointed by the 

Human Rights Commission to represent these complainants in a 

court. How would this work in cases where the Human Rights 

Commission itself had decided that a complaint had no merit, 

and the complainant wanted to appeal? 

 

So the person gets a lawyer to help them go to the Court of 

Queen’s Bench on the appeal, but the lawyer is the person who 

works for the Human Rights Commission. And that Human 

Rights Commission had already said, well you’ve got no case. 

So is there going to be a mechanism that would allow for 

somebody else to represent the complainant? 

 

If a complainant has to find their own lawyer, will they have to 

pay for that lawyer themselves? And even if they don’t have to 

pay for that lawyer, do they have to go and find this lawyer or 

will there be a panel of lawyers who are experts in these kinds 

of cases who will assist? Will they be able to hire a fully 

experienced lawyer, or will they end up with somebody who 

doesn’t have quite the same experience? And will this end up 

being another barrier for people who’ve already been 

marginalized and are trying to seek justice? 

 

I think at this point, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to remember 

that the Human Rights Code and all of the processes under the 

Human Rights Commission were set up to allow for individuals 

who have been especially hurt or marginalized to have access to 

justice, to the law, to the rule of law without having to go 

through the formal court structure. And so some of the reasons 

back in those days maybe aren’t as valid now, but there still is 

the fundamental question of making sure that a person who is 

marginalized or pushed to the edge isn’t further abused by the 

system itself. And so I think that we need to ask a lot of 

questions as we move forward. 

 

Now, this changed and removal of the Human Rights Tribunal 

process also seems to be based on the fact that courts may be 

faster. And it’s true that some of the delays were as a 

consequence of how the Human Rights Tribunal members were 

appointed. They were often lawyers in, mostly lawyers in 

private legal practice. And they were very busy individuals, so 

they had to fit these cases into the other work that they did. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, and speaking as a member of the Bar, we also 

know that there are situations where judges of the Court of 

Queen’s Bench or other courts also take a long time to resolve 

issues. And one of the circumstances where this often happens 

is where there are complex legal matters, which in many cases 

most of these human rights issues fall into that category of 

complex legal cases. And so it’ll be interesting to observe 

whether that process will be faster or not. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, another area where I have some concerns 

relates to the fact that the government wants to change 

limitation periods. I mean there are some good reasons for 

limitation periods of one year, or I think in some other 

provinces it’s six months. One of the factors is that you can 

gather the evidence much more quickly and find out more fully 

what has happened in certain situations. But we need to ask 

who will be affected in Saskatchewan if there’s a reduction of 

limitation period from two years to one year. So we’re going to 

have to look at this. 

 

We know that the commissioner will have the power to use 

discretion to extend that limitation period, and that’s a laudable 

thing to do. But it’s much like what we do too often in this 

legislature. We set out the law and then we actually put the 

substance of the law in regulations or in the discretion of a 

minister or senior official. And so the law isn’t as clear as it 

could be as to what exactly will happen. So we have some 

questions there about the limitation period change. 

 

Now we know that these cases will be somewhat different than 

cases that have normally gone to the Court of Queen’s Bench. 

And so we know it may take some time for the expertise to be 

developed in that court as this goes forward. We’ll also have to 

be looking at that. 

 

It may be that there’ll be an opportunity for the federal 

government to appoint judges who will have special expertise in 

human rights law, which will assist the courts. But I have a 

fundamental faith in the quality of the people that are appointed 

to our courts in Saskatchewan that they will be able to handle 

some of these cases, but they won’t be fully up to speed on 

many of these issues to the same extent that the lawyers 

involved on the tribunals are right now. But that’s something 

obviously that can be remedied with time. 

 

Now the minister has indicated that there have been substantial 

rounds of consultation with the community as it relates to this 

legislation. He obviously introduced quite a number of people 

in the House yesterday, and he read off a list of quite a few of 

the organizations today. Mr. Speaker, we have had experience 

with that consultation over the last few years, and we make a 

special point of checking it out because often the ultimate 



6296 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2010 

intentions of the government have not been fully understood by 

the people who have been consulted as it relates to new 

legislation. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Now one other area of concern for me in this particular Bill 

relates to the whole issue of the use of mediation. And once 

again this becomes an issue of discretion for the commissioner 

who will be handling these cases, and it provides a lot of 

discretion for this commissioner. The commissioner has the 

ability to dismiss complaints if there aren’t sufficient amounts 

of information. And I thought it was quite interesting when you 

actually looked at the legislation because it ended up setting out 

the fact that there was going to be a change to the ability of a 

person to start this process. 

 

I think the original intention when the legislation was created 

was that it would be flexible and would give a lot of leeway to a 

complainant to get a matter before the court because often they 

were not professionals. They were not people who could 

articulate what had gone wrong. They just knew something was 

wrong, something didn’t look good, something didn’t smell 

good, and they wanted it to be dealt with. 

 

Now this particular legislation allows for the commissioner to 

dismiss a complaint if they think that it’s not properly framed or 

that the facts aren’t there. But once again it’s in the discretion of 

the commissioner. 

 

Now one of the other areas of discretion for the commissioner is 

for directed mediation, I think is the term that the Minister of 

Justice used. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a substantial power that 

is given to the Chief Commissioner to direct parties to be using 

mediation and if, in his or her opinion, they haven’t been 

appropriately involved in a mediation process, then their case 

can be dismissed. And it appears that then they have to go 

through even a bigger process. But it gives substantial power to 

the commissioner to dismiss complaints if a person doesn’t 

want to use the mediation as defined by the commissioner and 

the commission. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, for many years I’ve been a mediator. I guess 

it’s been twenty-five and a half years I’ve been a lawyer, 

mediator in Saskatchewan. The last number of years, most all of 

my mediation has taken place within the confines of the 

legislature and the caucus, but I still remain connected with a 

number of professional organizations, including the American 

Bar Association’s section of dispute resolution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I received today the latest copy of the Dispute 

Resolution Magazine for fall 2010, and the whole article is 

about mediation ethics. And one of the points made in this 

particular magazine on page 14 is that when dispute resolution, 

mediation, is required and there’s a rule that’s developed that 

says that this should happen, these rules are effective and 

powerful policy tools “but they are also blunt instruments that 

may not be effective in motivating people to perform complex 

tasks that are hard for others to monitor.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the questions that I have in this 

particular legislation is that there’s a lot of power given to the 

commissioner to effectively force the use of mediation in 

situations where the Chief Commissioner may not actually 

know all of the circumstances and all of the things that are 

happening in that particular situation. So, Mr. Speaker, these are 

just some of the questions that I have come up with in looking 

at this over the last 24 hours. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that 

with the assistance of other people in our community who are 

more involved in this area, that there will be other concerns that 

are raised. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to conclude, I would say the timing of this Bill 

raises many questions, so that’s the first thing. The discretion 

and the extra powers given to the commissioners, that raises 

some questions. Eliminating the tribunal process may be the 

right thing to do, but it also changes the balance. And we want 

to make sure that those marginalized, those people who are in a 

very difficult place in their life, we want to make sure that 

they’re not in any way left out of what’s happening here. 

 

The whole goal for the original legislation — and it’s my hope 

it’s the goal for this legislation — is to make sure that human 

rights in Saskatchewan are enhanced and not diminished and 

that the protections for Saskatchewan people will continue to 

operate under the rule of law in an important and appropriate 

way. 

 

So on that ground, on the basis that many of my colleagues will 

want to comment on this and that we have quite a few questions 

to be answered, I will move adjournment of debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 160. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 157 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 157 — The Oil and 

Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join in discussion and debate here today on as it 

relates to Bill 157, the Act to amend The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Act, henceforth known as The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

This legislation is done in concert with the amendments to the 

companion legislation, The Freehold Oil and Gas Production 

Tax Act, 2010. I guess I’m being heckled by the other side of 

the Assembly by simply introducing the Bill. That’d be the 

member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton, the one that 

promised to open the Bill, Mr. Speaker, open the mill. It was 



November 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6297 

what he put on his literature, Mr. Speaker, and then he ripped 

up the promise right afterwards, Mr. Speaker. But if the 

member would sit quietly and join in the discussion, that would 

be maybe from his feet, it’d be more productive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Bill that’s before us here today is fully and wholly 

connected to our very important resource, Mr. Speaker, our 

very important industry, the oil and gas industry, Mr. Speaker. 

And when we’re talking about the oil and gas industry here in 

Saskatchewan — something that we take great pride in and of 

course it’s of great importance to Saskatchewan people now, 

and certainly well into the future, Mr. Speaker — and the 

management of this resource, the Bills and legislation, 

regulations associated with this resource are so vital, Mr. 

Speaker, for the longevity of that prosperity as well for the 

economic activity that is fundamental to driving the well-being 

and quality of life that Saskatchewan people depend on, Mr. 

Speaker, and the kind of progress that they’re expecting to see, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’re talking about an industry that in many ways is a 

multi-billion-dollar industry, Mr. Speaker, that has all sorts of 

positive impacts for Saskatchewan as it relates to jobs, Mr. 

Speaker, and small- and medium-size business within our 

province, Mr. Speaker, but also a fundamental impact on the 

treasury of Saskatchewan, the finances of Saskatchewan as it 

relates to resource revenues, Mr. Speaker, something that’s 

incredibly significant. 

 

And we talk about a multi-billion-dollar industry. In fact the 

resource revenues themselves are multi-billions of dollars, Mr. 

Speaker, and something that when we’re making changes, we 

need to make sure that these coordinated changes in fact are in 

the best interests of the industry, the economy, and the people 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And that’s sort of the review 

that we’ll be taking here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we see in fact is quite a complex Bill, Mr. Speaker. And 

as I say, this Bill is done with concert with The Freehold Oil 

and Gas Production Tax Act, 2010, so there’s the connection 

between these two and it’s very important that we analyze and 

understand both the connectiveness there as well, but the 

objectives that are trying to be achieved, Mr. Speaker, through 

this legislation, but as well making sure we’re aware of any 

unintended consequences, Mr. Speaker, as we make these 

changes. 

 

It speaks to the importance that any one of these times that 

consultation is vital, Mr. Speaker, and certainly no more vital 

than now when we’re dealing with our multi-billion-dollar 

industry, when we’re dealing with those industries that are so 

vital to our economy both now and into the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s very important that we continue our consultation that 

we’ve engaged in as the opposition on this Bill, and I know our 

critic’s taken a fantastic lead on this front to make sure that 

industry, to make sure that stakeholders, landowners, 

environmental stakeholders have been consulted, understand the 

impact of this, and that their voices are heard. Because what we 

see all too often, Mr. Speaker, with this Sask Party government, 

is the pursuit of legislation that serves one or two individuals, 

Mr. Speaker, that are close to the Premier, Mr. Speaker, but in 

fact the questions aren’t asked as to how it impacts the many, 

Mr. Speaker, and those specific individuals and stakeholders 

that are impacted. 

 

We saw this, Mr. Speaker, with the irresponsible actions and the 

devastating piece of legislation that was the sell-off of the 

environmentally sensitive habitat lands last spring, Mr. Speaker. 

And those lands of course, Mr. Speaker, had been put into trust 

and protection by Saskatchewan people and organizations and 

public dollars and by projects that had been fundraised, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we saw a ministry and a minister, Mr. Speaker, actually 

say in the second reading, just as this minister has said, that at 

that point that she had consulted with the stakeholders, Mr. 

Speaker. When we got into that debate, Mr. Speaker, we 

realized that nothing could be further from the truth. And even 

though she said she had consulted, Mr. Speaker, with the 

stakeholders — whether that be First Nations and Métis within 

our fine province, the important environmental groups, Mr. 

Speaker, hunters and fishers across this province, landowners 

— what we realized as we started to delve into our 

consultations and our meetings is that nothing could have been 

further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. And not only that, that this 

legislation was hugely offside, hugely offside, Mr. Speaker, 

with Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now I’m getting heckled by the minister opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

for raising the fact that First Nations and Métis people weren’t 

consulted in the sell-off of environmental lands, Mr. Speaker 

. . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the Bill under 

debate right now is Bill 157, The Oil and Gas Conservation 

Amendment Act, 2010. The member chose to rise to speak on 

this Bill. And I would encourage him, and I think other 

members of the House as well, to make his comments relevant 

to the Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize . . . Why is the member 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — To reply to the point of order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, on many occasions in 

the Chamber we’ve allowed some latitude, the member simply 

going on to make the point. I believe the Opposition Deputy 

House Leader has attempted to preclude proper debate on this 

issue, and I think we should have a ruling that the member 

continue. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — As I think I ruled on this yesterday, 

on when it comes to second reading debates, we do allow a bit 

of latitude, but we do also want the members to be discussing 

the Bill and be tying any argument they have to the existing Bill 



6298 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2010 

that is before the legislature. So I’ll remind the member that the 

Bill we’re discussing today is Bill 157, The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Amendment Act, 2010, and to mark his remarks 

all around that particular Bill. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 

appreciate your ruling and understand it and certainly still have 

the concern as I was expressing and was interrupted, Mr. 

Speaker. But with the consultation under this government, what 

we’re dealing with is a multi-billion-dollar industry, Mr. 

Speaker — oil and gas sector — billions of dollars of revenues 

that flow into coffers now and into the future, Mr. Speaker, the 

kind of prosperity that certainly impacts jobs but certainly goes 

well beyond that as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to make sure that the consultation with 

the stakeholders, that rightful consultation has gone on, Mr. 

Speaker. In our initial conversations with some of those 

stakeholders, we’ve received varying information, some of 

which is certainly supportive of aspects of this Bill. But when 

we’re looking at these stakeholders and we’re looking at 

industry and we’re looking at the petroleum producers of 

Canada and the small explorers association, Mr. Speaker, and 

the landowners and the environmental groups, we need to make 

sure we get this right, Mr. Speaker — something that we didn’t 

get right in past pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker, that under 

this government that ended up impacting so many in this 

province to their detriment, Mr. Speaker. We need to make sure 

that we get that right, right now. 

 

This is a complex Bill. We need to make sure that we 

understand the breadth and depth of these changes, Mr. 

Speaker, and we need to look at this sector that we’re dealing 

with, oil and gas sector, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We look to it with great pride as New Democrats, Mr. Speaker, 

and province-wide, we look to it with great pride. Certainly I 

look back to the exciting changes, Mr. Speaker, around the 

regulatory side, Mr. Speaker, and the royalty structure side, Mr. 

Speaker, all driven to build an economy that thrives, Mr. 

Speaker. Strategic decisions set out by New Democrats and 

through their government, Mr. Speaker, that set Saskatchewan 

in such positive economic direction, Mr. Speaker. A regulatory 

structure that’s stable and consistent, that’s respected and 

understood by industry and the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we need to make sure that the kinds of changes that we’re 

making in fact support making sure that this sector is as strong 

and vital to the well-being of our province, the well-being of 

our provincial coffers, and that it’s respectful of the varying 

interests and needs of the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

And this is where we need to make sure when we’re seeing this 

significant consolidation, Mr. Speaker, of legislation that that 

consultation has gone on. 

 

When we do talk about the pride of building that economy, Mr. 

Speaker, out of those changes working with, and this is what’s 

very important, working with the stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, to 

build that economy that was at its peak in 2007, Mr. Speaker. 

When we’re looking specifically at the oil and gas sector and 

when we look to the numbers, Mr. Speaker, at that point in time 

— whether it be drilling or production, of course at all-time 

highs, Mr. Speaker — and something that the Calvert 

administration can be incredibly proud of, Mr. Speaker, 

building that lasting legacy for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now some of this is vulnerable, Mr. Speaker, and good 

economic policy needs to be managed. And legislation certainly 

has an impact on these factors as well as does financial 

stewardship, Mr. Speaker. Financial stewardship that I might 

say, Mr. Speaker, has gone by the wayside under this Sask 

Party government. 

 

And when we’re looking at those economic numbers and the 

drilling and production of ’07 that was built, built this sector to 

a peak, Mr. Speaker, we need to be looking to where we’re 

going next, Mr. Speaker, and organizing this industry to make 

sure that it’s as strong as it can be and making sure that 

legislation isn’t there to impede or to challenge the interests of 

Saskatchewan people. And we’ve seen quite the opposite from 

an economic perspective of course, Mr. Speaker, under the Sask 

Party. And it’s well-known across this province that in fact the 

economic growth has been lacklustre and less than stellar, Mr. 

Speaker, underneath the Sask Party. 

 

And I know it frustrates members opposite because I know 

there’s a couple of them, Mr. Speaker, who would like nothing 

more than to see that economy grow and develop the way that 

New Democrats had set, in fact set that economy into full stride. 

And I believe they’d like to have that as their legacy as well, 

Mr. Speaker. I know they’d like to have that record to be able to 

point to and provide to speeches, Mr. Speaker, and say, well 

these are the kinds of growth we had in our GDP [gross 

domestic product], Mr. Speaker. This is the kind of growth we 

had in our revenues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But of course their record is something that contradicts the 

empty rhetoric that they are left with, Mr. Speaker. Because 

when we look at the economy, Mr. Speaker, what is of great 

concern is what Sask Trends Monitor, Mr. Speaker, an 

independent, objective economic analysis in Saskatchewan has 

pointed out. And that is in fact, Mr. Speaker, that under this 

Sask Party government that in fact our economy is really no 

further ahead than it was back many years ago, Mr. Speaker. 

That we’ve in fact shrunk last year and corrected now to 3.9 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker. And we have to go back a few years, Mr. 

Speaker, to get to the trade volume, Mr. Speaker, that we’re at 

now. Certainly that doesn’t match or doesn’t square with the 

rhetoric of some of the members. 

 

And I know that a couple of those members over there would 

really like to see some economic development under their 

leadership. I suspect they’re frustrated by the fact that they 

shrunk the economy in the way that they have, Mr. Speaker, 

and the fact that when in 2008 it’s been pointed out that many 

of the gains that were pointed out were all in fact primarily due 

to inflation, Mr. Speaker. So not a whole bunch more service 

and goods being produced in this province, Mr. Speaker, but in 

fact simply Saskatchewan people paying more for those 

products, goods, and services, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Something that we are always proud of as New Democrats, Mr. 

Speaker, is our record with the oil and gas industry, Mr. 



November 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6299 

Speaker, our record with the economy here in Saskatchewan. 

And in fact the two go hand in hand when you’re looking about 

the importance of that sector to our province. And as we talk 

about it ourselves, and we do so with rightful pride — our 

resource-rich province that we have bestowed to be the 

stewards of, Mr. Speaker, and that we have responsibility to be 

good stewards of, Mr. Speaker — we see challenge in the 

policies of the Sask Party. 

 

Now this legislation and these changes, Mr. Speaker, has 

apparently been impacted by the New West Partnership, Mr. 

Speaker. We want to know more about what specifically has 

driven those changes out of that partnership. What we do know 

about this New West Partnership, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s a 

partnership and an agreement that was signed with two other 

provinces, Mr. Speaker, but without consultation with 

Saskatchewan people. And we still don’t know many of the 

impacts of this agreement, Mr. Speaker, but it’s again sort of 

been one of those decisions that’s been blacked out from 

Saskatchewan people to be involved with. Public consultation 

simply didn’t occur. 

 

And now we have legislative changes that are resulting from 

that piece of legislation. We don’t quite know what that means 

yet, Mr. Speaker, but we need to make sure we continue to do 

the consultation that allows us to make sure that this is in the 

best interests of Saskatchewan people in our oil and gas sector, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Certainly it suggests that we’re going to be more comparable or 

compatible with Alberta from an oil and gas regulatory 

structure. Certainly there can be some merits in this, Mr. 

Speaker, but these are the kinds of questions that we need to 

make sure that industry has fully contemplated and supports, 

Mr. Speaker. We need to make sure that this is in the best 

interests of Saskatchewan people. We need to make sure it’s in 

the best interests of the coffers of Saskatchewan. And I speak of 

the coffers, the many billions of revenues that Saskatchewan 

people benefit from from this vital industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s an industry for which I think we take a lot of pride. I 

see a couple members opposite who represent ridings, Mr. 

Speaker, where . . . And of course we have oil and gas 

production across many parts of our province, but some areas 

that it predominates, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it’s been so exciting to go back and see the decisions and 

changes that came out of the New Democrat administration, Mr. 

Speaker, and then the impact on the region, Mr. Speaker. And I 

speak specifically down to the southeast, whether that be 

Cannington or down into Estevan, Mr. Speaker, or Weyburn- 

Big Muddy. And we see that exciting boom, Mr. Speaker, that 

took off back in 2005 and ’06 and ’07, Mr. Speaker, many of 

which were resulted from legislative changes, Mr. Speaker — 

changes to regulation, changes to royalty regimes, Mr. Speaker, 

that incented all sorts of development in jobs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we see that activity, and I see it regularly, Mr. Speaker, in 

through that region. And we see many local business people, 

whether that be individuals from a maintenance perspective or a 

service perspective, that are prospering from this. But we need 

to make sure we get it right on all perspectives, Mr. Speaker. 

Not always sure that we have it right, have it completely right 

yet to make sure that landowners are completely benefiting in 

all circumstances, Mr. Speaker. And we want to make sure the 

changes that we do make are in the best interests of all, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s what we’re going to endeavour to do. 

 

Basically any time, Mr. Speaker, that you have a significant 

consolidation or amalgamations of rules of an industry, whether 

that be to amalgamate with a jurisdiction such as Alberta or any 

other jurisdiction for that matter, Mr. Speaker, it’s incredibly 

important that we do a thoughtful analysis and a consultation 

with all stakeholders to make sure that the impact of that is in 

fact positive, and it is in fact moving us forward in the direction 

that we desire to be, Mr. Speaker, the direction that we need to 

be going and that it serves Saskatchewan people well, Mr. 

Speaker. So we’re going to continue to study these changes, to 

consult with industry, to consult with landowners, to consult 

with those that understand public finance, to consult with those 

that understand the impacts on our environment, Mr. Speaker. 

And we’ll work through this Bill. 

 

But it’s important to say, Mr. Speaker, that when you put such 

significant changes or so many different changes that could 

have objectives . . . This is the important part to understand, Mr. 

Speaker, is that there may be well-purposed objectives within a 

piece of legislation, but there may be unintended consequences 

that hadn’t yet been deliberated or understood by a minister or a 

premier, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we’ve seen that all too often to be the result of the reckless 

legislative environment that we see out of this Sask Party 

government, that in fact sometimes they’ve maybe even got a 

purpose in mind that could be supported, but the unintended 

consequences from their legislation as a result of poor 

consultation and a poor analysis, Mr. Speaker, that hasn’t been 

contemplated is to the detriment of Saskatchewan people. 

 

So we’re going to spend time in committee with this Bill. We’re 

going to spend time certainly meeting with stakeholders as we 

have, as our critic has, as many other critics have as well, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re going to continue to do that. Making sure it’s in 

the best interests of Saskatchewan people — that’s our job. 

That’s our responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re certainly worried to see production down in this vital 

industry under the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, to see drilling and 

production both down significantly in their first few years of 

office, Mr. Speaker, because this is so fundamental to the 

well-being of Saskatchewan in an economic sense but as well in 

a social sense, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to make sure that 

we’re going to ensure that to Saskatchewan people. 

 

At this point in time, Mr. Speaker, keeping all of that in mind, I 

think it’s fair to say that there are many questions, many 

discussions, a lot of dialogue that we’ll continue to have with 

our respective stakeholders, those for whom it impacts, Mr. 

Speaker. We’re going to learn from the lessons that we’ve seen 

in this Sask Party’s short tenure, Mr. Speaker, where it brings 

forward legislation, hasn’t consulted, doesn’t understand the 

impact. Sometimes even says they’ve consulted, Mr. Speaker, 

but when the case could be nothing further from the truth, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we need to make sure that we go through that thoughtful 



6300 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2010 

analysis and consultation and make sure that we serve 

Saskatchewan people in the role that we’re required to, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So looking at this piece of legislation at this point in time, I 

think in fairness to its complexity, in fairness to the number of 

stakeholders that are going to continue to be engaged with the 

opposition to provide analysis on this front, with thought to the 

breadth and depth of the changes that are going on with the 

significant consolidation of rules and regulations, Mr. Speaker, 

we’re going to at this point in time move ahead with our 

meetings and dialogue and consultation. 

 

And at this point in time I will adjourn debate of Bill No. 157, 

An Act to amend The Oil and Gas Conservation Act, henceforth 

known as The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act. And, 

Mr. Speaker, thank you for allowing me to provide some 

comments here today. We look forward to further discussion on 

this important Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 157, The Oil and Gas 

Conservation Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 158 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert that Bill No. 158 — The 

Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to rise today. I am speaking today at 

second reading of Bill No. 158, The Correctional Services 

Amendment Act, 2010. Mr. Speaker, earlier in the week the 

Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing introduced 

the legislation, Mr. Speaker, and had a number of things to say 

about the legislation. And I want to thank the minister for 

taking a little extra time to explain and outline the properties of 

this legislation, 158, because I think it’s very helpful in 

understanding the legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were a number of things that the minister in 

his second reading speech alluded to but did not go into much 

depth about. And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to address a few of 

those matters in my remarks today. I will be talking about a 

couple of things in my remarks here, Mr. Speaker. First I will 

talk about the nature of the legislation itself. Secondly I will 

talk about some of the issues that are important to the 

legislation but have not been addressed by the government. And 

lastly, Mr. Speaker, I will talk about the effects of this 

legislation on Saskatchewan citizens that are also not 

completely addressed in the comments and remarks by the 

minister or members of government to date, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Just a few moments ago the member from Regina Rosemont, 

just a few minutes ago the member from Regina Rosemont, 

speaking on an oil and gas Bill, Mr. Speaker, talked about 

unintended consequences. And that’s a critical word or a critical 

phrase, Mr. Speaker — unintended consequences — that I want 

to use to also close my remarks later, Mr. Speaker, with regards 

to this legislation. 

 

When I am speaking about these things, these matters, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ll address the content of the Bill, as I said. We’re 

going to talk about the privatization of telecommunications 

systems and the effect on SaskTel that this legislation has. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ll talk about the impact or the cost for families, 

in particular perhaps grandparents across the province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But first, for those who are watching or for those who will be 

reading this later, Mr. Speaker, let me just outline a little bit 

about what the Bill is all about. And, Mr. Speaker, I will refer to 

the remarks of the minister in this regard. The minister talked 

about The Correctional Services Amendment Act, Bill 158, Mr. 

Speaker, as proposing: 

 

. . . amendments to the existing corrections services Act to 

enable corrections officials to listen to suspicious 

telephone calls made by inmates in its four secure 

correctional centres. 

 

That’s a quote from the opening remarks of the minister, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

If this was all that we were expecting from this government, 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation is completely supportable and 

could pass very quickly, Mr. Speaker. But that’s not really the 

whole picture that we need to look at. So let me just say, Mr. 

Speaker, that on the surface of it, of course we are very 

supportive of the correctional services, Mr. Speaker, being able 

to ensure that the environment that they are providing, both for 

inmates and for workers, Mr. Speaker, is a safe environment. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that the public 

receives protection from those who wish to do them harm, i.e., 

Mr. Speaker, the minister also talked about this legislation 

assisting and protecting victims and the public from unwanted 

and harassing phone calls from inmates. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is a simple proposition. The legislation 

allows the correctional service to monitor telephone calls of 

inmates. This ensures, Mr. Speaker, that if there’s gang activity 

within a correctional facility or drug activity within a 

correctional facility that is facilitated by the use of the 

telephone, Mr. Speaker, the administration and correctional 

workers are given the right to monitor, listen in on those 

telephone conversations, Mr. Speaker, and make that institution 

a safer place. 

 

Also, by listening in on those telephone conversations, Mr. 

Speaker, we ensure that someone who wishes to intimidate 

perhaps a witness in a court case, intimidate a family member 

of someone else that may be involved in gang or drug activity 

associated with an inmate, Mr. Speaker, that activity is allowed. 



November 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6301 

Mr. Speaker, we live in a society where we expect certain 

protections, certain security measures to be taken around us to 

help our communities to be a better place in which to live and to 

ensure that those who are put into our institutions, our 

correctional facilities, Mr. Speaker, are there for a very specific 

reason and are not there to harm themselves or others. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, one would on the surface of it want to applaud 

the government for taking steps to ensure that there was 

protection involved. Are there other ways of doing this, Mr. 

Speaker, than what the practice is around this legislation? And 

one would think that yes, there are different ways of doing this. 

The way that this government, the Sask Party government, is 

now going to do the work that allows this principle to be in 

place, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe is completely acceptable to 

the people of Saskatchewan. So on the one hand we want to 

applaud the principle, but on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, we 

want the public to fully understand the practical side of the 

legislation. 

 

Let’s back up just a little bit, Mr. Speaker, to last year. The 

minister indicated that last year the correctional system in the 

province laid out a plan. And that plan was to move towards an 

ability to monitor telephone calls. It is done in other provinces, 

Mr. Speaker. It is done in states south of the border, Mr. 

Speaker. This is not terribly innovative because it’s being done 

in other locations, and Saskatchewan is catching up. So, Mr. 

Speaker, the principle again is something that I think the public 

supports. 

 

But in practice, Mr. Speaker, a year ago this was identified. And 

I think the minister indicates that in June of this year, the 

government had contracted with a Texas-based company, a 

Texas-based company from San Antonio, Texas, called synergy 

inmate telephone solutions. Synergy inmate telephone 

solutions, obviously a company that’s got some experience in 

this field, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But they’ve contracted with a Texas-based company to put 

phone systems into our correctional facilities, a system that 

allows for monitoring to take place. The minister indicates there 

was an RFP on this, a request for proposals. So obviously, Mr. 

Speaker, the correctional system, the minister’s office decided, 

actively decided that in terms of putting new phone systems 

into our correctional facilities, they were going to go outside the 

province or outside the country even to find somebody who 

would do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, obviously there was a decision made that SaskTel 

should not do this. There was a conscious decision in order to 

set a request for proposals in place to indicate that SaskTel was 

not going to do this. Obviously SaskTel has been putting phone 

systems into our facilities, whether they’re health care, 

educational, correctional, or others, for years, Mr. Speaker. 

SaskTel puts phone systems into place. But no, this government 

decided that they were going to have somebody else do it. And 

it just so happened that the company that responded is from San 

Antonio, Texas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now this company says, according to the minister, we’re going 

to do this at no cost to the government. So the government 

seems to think this is a fine idea. The correctional system will 

not pay anything for a phone system, but in exchange for that, 

the minister says, this company from San Antonio, Texas will 

receive a commission of the gross revenue generated by a fee 

per call charged to inmates — a commission of the gross 

revenue generated by a fee per call charged to the inmates. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the correctional system . . . This government 

likes this idea that now they’re not going to have to pay for a 

telephone system. They’re not going to have to pay anything, 

but the company in San Antonio, Texas gets the commission, 

gets all of the money on these calls, Mr. Speaker. Not all — I’ll 

get back to that in a minute — gets a significant amount of 

money from this system to pay off their equipment costs, to pay 

off their contract, and of course, Mr. Speaker, to make a profit. 

They’re in the business of providing telephone systems, Mr. 

Speaker, so there’s a profit involved in this. 

 

What are these calls going to cost, Mr. Speaker? According to 

the minister, the inmates will pay $1.35 per local calls and 

$1.85 for long distance calls. And a portion of that money will 

come back, Mr. Speaker, to the facility, the institution. And the 

institution, the minister says, is going to buy board games and 

cards for the inmates. 

 

So in addition to San Antonio, Texas making money off this 

deal, Mr. Speaker, the inmates are going to be paying for 

buying board games and decks of cards for their own 

institution. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again if that was the only cost involved in 

all of this, that’s not too unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. The 

unacceptable part, of course, is throwing money outside the 

province, Mr. Speaker, for a phone system that we could have 

installed ourselves. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the unintended consequence that I had talked 

about earlier is the fact that inmates can phone collect to their 

family. Mr. Speaker, the minister had indicated again clearly, 

inmates make collect calls; the recipient is charged 30 cents a 

minute plus whatever additional charges the telephone service 

provider bills. So 30 cents a minute plus additional charges, Mr. 

Speaker, is what somebody who receives a collect call pays on 

this. Now, Mr. Speaker, for those who make very few calls, 

collect calls, don’t have any concerns, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I do know that there are a lot of young adults in our 

correctional facilities, young adults who have had a lot of 

family stress in their lives, a lot of young adults who have 

attached themselves to a grandfather or a grandmother who is 

the adviser in their life. They’re the strength part of their life. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we all know, for young adults in our 

correctional facilities, life can be very difficult, very 

challenging. And quite often these young adults reach out to a 

family member, a family member to help them get through their 

difficult days. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is a hugely important part of the 

rehabilitative process of the correctional facility as opposed to 

the punitive part of the correctional facility, Mr. Speaker. If 

there is someone that the inmate reaches out to for advice and 

guidance, that’s incredibly useful in the ability of the young 

person to get through their challenges. And more importantly, 

Mr. Speaker, it creates an environment in which, when one 

leaves that institution, that facility, Mr. Speaker, there’s a full 



6302 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2010 

understanding of respect that comes from that elder or that older 

person — in the example that I’m using here, grandfather or 

grandmother. 

 

So let’s just think about this for a second, Mr. Speaker. The 

charges on a collect call, money that’s going to San Antonio, 

Texas, to pay for this system, Mr. Speaker, from people who 

likely are not involved in drugs or violence or intimidation of 

witnesses but are simply reaching out to grandmother or 

grandfather. 

 

The case of a call every day, it’s not unusual. Inmates use the 

telephone system a lot, we’re told. Calling grandpa once a day, 

being on that phone for as little as . . . Well it wouldn’t be hard 

to imagine that with the charges on the lines — 30 cents a 

minute plus provider charges, Mr. Speaker — $10 a day 

showing up on grandpa or grandma’s phone bill in order to talk 

to a loved grandchild who is incarcerated, Mr. Speaker. Ten 

dollars a day, 30 days is $300 a month, $3,600 a year, Mr. 

Speaker, that grandpa or grandma is paying to help with the 

rehabilitation of their grandson or granddaughter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an unintended consequence of the practice 

of this legislation. This legislation allows the practice to 

happen. 

 

[16:15] 

 

I don’t believe, Mr. Speaker, when the government decided 

they were going to monitor individuals’ phone calls and 

privatize the system to San Antonio, Texas, that somebody’s 

grandmother or grandfather was going to be paying $3,000 a 

year to make that happen. I don’t think the government intended 

that to happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think as we review this legislation and review its practical 

application, we have to find a way to ensure that the protections 

remain in the system, but that grandma and grandpa are not the 

ones paying for it, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the public has to 

understand, and provide additional information. 

 

The other thing, Mr. Speaker, is that the legislation allows for 

monitoring to take place. The phone system was put in in June, 

several months ago, Mr. Speaker, and those charges have 

already been applied. There may have been no monitoring 

taking place, Mr. Speaker, because the legislation hasn’t passed 

yet. But the charges are showing up on grandma and grandpa’s 

phone bill. I’ve seen them, Mr. Speaker. The charges are now. 

They’re already on grandma and grandpa’s phone bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the legislation hasn’t passed. The system has 

been put in place. The company in San Antonio, Texas, is 

receiving funds already, but we haven’t passed the legislation. 

 

We’ve got to look at the practice. We’ve got to look at the 

principle. We’ve got some work to do yet, Mr. Speaker. So I 

wish to ensure that the government and the public understands 

that the principle of protecting inmates, correctional workers, 

and members of the public, Mr. Speaker, is an honourable 

principle and one that we certainly support on this side of the 

House. We join the government in agreeing to an acceptable 

principle. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to work through this practical 

aspect of it. It would appear we aren’t. We’ve lost the ability for 

SaskTel to put the system in place. This government has 

unilaterally made a decision to privatize the delivery system for 

this practice, Mr. Speaker. And now we’ve got a charge system 

in place that is penalizing grandma and grandpa trying to help 

their young adult grandson or granddaughter who find 

themselves in a very difficult and challenging situation. 

 

So that having been said, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to the 

legislature that we want to do some more work on this Bill. I 

think my colleagues also want to put some of their thoughts on 

record before this Bill is sent to committee for official study. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate 

on Bill No. 158, The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 

2010. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 158, The Correctional 

Services Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 144 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 144 — The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It’s with pleasure and some nostalgia that I rise to participate in 

the debate today concerning Bill No. 144, the Act to amend The 

Litter Control Act. Again this is clarifying certain matters as it 

relates to the control of litter, but particularly as it relates to the 

environmental handling charges and refundable deposits that 

are attached to beverage containers. 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say with some nostalgia off 

the top because one of the ways that I of course made some 

money as a child was collecting bottles. And I followed very 

closely the way that, you know, if it was a penny for the 

deposit, that was a penny that we got for those, taking those 

bottles back in. And when it went to 5 cents or to 10 cents, we 

in the McCall household were thrilled because of course it 

meant that we’d be getting more for those bottles that we take 

back in. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was interested to see this Bill 

come forward and interested to follow some of the debate that 

has taken place to date around it. The existing legislation allows 

the government to increase or decrease both environmental 

handling charges and refundable deposits. The proposed Bill 

lays out a new schedule of environmental handling charges for 

a variety of containers and takes away the government’s ability 

to set environmental handling charges outside of the legislature. 

 

It does, however, allow the government to continue to set the 



November 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6303 

refundable deposit by cabinet order. Again this is, you know, 

procedurally some changes that perhaps allow for ease of 

process, use of responsiveness, and again not anything hugely 

to write home about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But again we’ll see 

how the government pursues this process in the days ahead. 

 

It also introduces provisions which prevent anyone from suing 

the government to recover environment handling charges paid 

after April 1st, 1998. The minister has indicated that these 

changes are intended to address a current lawsuit and to prevent 

the province from being liable up to $1 million or more in other 

potential legal actions. 

 

Again part of this relates to what is rightly defined as a tax or 

what is rightly defined as an environmental handling charge or 

as a deposit and how this tends to mix around in the General 

Revenue Fund, how the government relates these, the collection 

of these different monies to the central mechanisms of 

government. So again we’ll be interested to see how that plays 

out. 

 

We’ll also be interested to see how this impacts the current 

situation with the lawsuit. Again these things, these matters 

arise from time to time and it’s . . . The government is charged 

with pursuing the best interests for the public as a whole, and 

from time to time that will arise, that will result in legal action 

where individuals don’t quite see it that way. We’ll be 

interested to see how this particular case plays out. 

 

It’s also been admitted by the government in the speech 

launching this particular phase of the debate that this was the 

result of the Supreme Court of Canada decision in the ’90s 

where it’s required to have service fees collected for specific 

purposes to not exceed the cost to government of delivering that 

service, otherwise they would be considered to be a tax. And 

again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is where it’s always sort of 

interesting to flense out or to delineate between the actions of 

the government and the actual . . . what is being purported to 

take place. 

 

And it is a fairly reasonable expectation that, if you’re going to 

provide something forward in the name of a service fee, that 

you not engage in some kind of backdoor taxation in the course 

of that. I know that one thing that we’ve had interesting 

discussions over the years, in terms of committee work, around 

the functioning of Crown Corporations and whether or not those 

are taxpayer dollars. And of course in the situation with the 

Crown Corporation and the dividend that they pay into the CIC 

[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] holding 

fund and the dividend that CIC in turn pays to the General 

Revenue Fund, obviously it has an impact on what is expected 

of taxpayers in terms of taxes levied. 

 

But those funds, purely speaking, are service fees and not 

taxation. But of course there’s a very indirect but strong 

relationship between what is charged from the Crowns and how 

that impacts the revenues available to government and how that, 

in turn, affects services and taxes that need to be levied, and the 

financial obligations of the government, so that some of the 

language in this legislation clarifies matters so that the 

distinction between service fees and not being able to have 

them construed as taxes, we think is fair enough. And again 

we’ll see how the government lives up to that. 

It’s the most serious aspect of this legislation, we think, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is the matter of retroactively changing the law 

and curtailing the ability of people to take legal action. And I 

guess we’ll carefully consider how that impacts those rights 

against the broader public interest as being pursued by this 

legislation. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with this legislation we’ll 

be looking to see how it impacts the broader regime of or the 

stated goal of the legislation of litter control. 

 

I know that in terms of past discussions around bottle returns or 

beverage containers where there is in fact a deposit on them, 

that has provided for a very good return rate for those 

containers and a return level that on those narrow items is 

something that I think Saskatchewan leads in. 

 

Some of the interesting implications of that though, is they have 

different regimes in other jurisdictions. I think of what’s in 

place in the province of Manitoba and the city of Winnipeg 

where beverage containers that would otherwise be subject to 

this legislation go to subsidizing the cost of the curbside 

recycling program, which is of course something that is a matter 

of great interest in the province of Saskatchewan. I know it 

certainly is an interest and a matter of interest in the city of 

Regina. I believe it just came up in the recent by-election in the 

city of Saskatoon where the successor for the current member 

for Saskatoon Northwest was elected. And in other 

jurisdictions, those monies have gone to subsidize the cost of 

that program offering. 

 

So has there been some consideration of, is that an amendment 

or a different approach that we’d want to take to recycling of 

beverage containers. It’s not for me to say, but certainly it 

would seem that the government is carrying on down the path 

which is in . . . And again this very specific context provided 

for a fairly good recycling return level on these items. 

 

I also, looking at this legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, think of 

a one-time physics teacher that I had at Thom Collegiate who 

thought if you wanted to have 100 per cent recycling, what you 

needed to do is make the deposit $1 for each beverage 

container. And I know you’re doing the calculations, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. You’re thinking, okay, that’d really make it 

worth my while to get those empties in to the Sarcan. And 

certainly I made some of the same calculations when I was a 

kid of that age. 

 

But then it gets into the whole sweep of interprovincial trade 

and whether or not you have people from other jurisdictions 

bringing cans to have them to get the deposit. I know that there 

are currently safeguards in place to guard against some of those 

attempts to subvert the system. But I can’t help but think of Mr. 

Mader and the great physics teacher he was, and on that one 

perhaps not as appropriate measure to be taken to help out with 

attaining the goal of 100 per cent recycling levels when it came 

to something like beverage containers. 

 

One thing else that I found interesting about the legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, was the distinction that is drawn or the clarification 

that is made in the legislation between the beverage and the 

container. And of course you’d think that that would be 

somewhat self-evident, but those legal counsel, they certainly 

are earning their keep and they are clarifying the matter so that 

we can be certain that this refers to the beverage container and 



6304 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2010 

not to the beverage contained inside. 

 

A can of Fresca that I just poured into my coffee cup, Mr. 

Speaker, this will make it certain that we know that it’s the can 

and not the Fresca that has been since transported into my glass 

that is the object in focus with these amendments. 

 

I don’t have much more to say than that, Mr. Speaker. But 

certainly we on the opposition side will be watching very 

closely in terms of how this impacts again people’s . . . the way 

that this government has moved to curtail legal liability 

questions. We’ll be watching that very closely. We’ll also be 

watching very closely to see how this matter plays out in 

implementation because of course again, with this government, 

it always pays to pay close attention to see how these things 

actually get implemented. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would adjourn debate on Bill No. 

144. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 144. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Bill No. 147 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 147 — The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to enter debate on Bill 147, An Act respecting the Protection of 

Public Servants who make Disclosures, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just start out to make some general 

observations regarding this Act. We have spent some time now 

looking at this, and a number of my colleagues have made 

comments, and I want to add mine to the record, Mr. Speaker. 

For my part in going over this Bill, I have found that the idea of 

The Public Interest Disclosure Act is something that we could 

support, Mr. Speaker, but again, as many times before, we have 

many questions because of the way this Sask Party government 

has approached this Bill. 

 

For that matter, we are somewhat disappointed. The Minister of 

Justice had put forward in his day as an opposition member, had 

put forward a Bill more attuned to whistle-blowers legislation, 

and again this particular Bill has fallen quite short of those 

days. And I wonder what occurred between that time and now 

where we have a Bill that is nowhere near offering the 

protection — and I’m sure that member would agree with me 

— that he had intended in his private member’s Bill at that 

time. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, the opposition supports the stated 

purpose of this Bill, but again there’s often a big difference 

between the stated purpose and the actual effect of this Bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we rely on our public 

servants to provide a number of critically important services to 

us, and again these are people on our front lines dealing with 

emergency situations and sometimes in situations where they 

place their own safety and health at risk. 

 

The public service here in Saskatchewan have an expertise upon 

which we rely upon. There’s a corporate memory that we often 

rely upon that these people have and that offers them to provide 

a service to all of us in Saskatchewan. And for the most part, 

Mr. Speaker, I think we would all agree here that they provide a 

good service to all of us. They provide an excellent service. We 

rely upon them. But again today we have seen over the last 

number of years, Mr. Speaker, that these servants, the public 

servants work in an atmosphere where they are afraid to speak 

out for fear of reprisal. And we have had some instances of that, 

and we were looking forward to a Bill of this sort to offer 

people the security of speaking out in the best interests of the 

residents of Saskatchewan, the best interests of us as legislators. 

 

And again, the things I spoke about which offer some concern 

to us . . . And what we have seen is the Sask Party government 

terminating employees who try to do their jobs and protect the 

public interest. We have seen, at the same time that this Sask 

Party government has gone and done and created this 

atmosphere, some of the things . . . They have spent 10 million 

in taxpayers’ dollars to pay severances for career public civic 

servants who, Mr. Speaker, got their jobs through a fair bidding 

process, fair competitions. And it was simply on the stated . . . 

As the Deputy Premier stated that this simply did not go with 

the philosophy of the Sask Party we had in here. I know 

personally asking questions on a fired occupational health and 

safety officer who was fired for nothing better than trying to 

better the working conditions of employees at the Saskatoon 

Correctional Centre. And what a sad day that was, Mr. Speaker, 

when we saw the minister attempting to defend that . . . was just 

simply, probably lack of understanding of the situation more so 

than trying to work under the occupational health and safety 

law in protecting the workers in this province. 

 

And again this was the same Sask Party government . . . to add 

to what I was talking about why people feel the inability to 

come forward and at the same time where we disclosed that 

there was an offender unlawfully at large . . . And we all 

remember that, Mr. Speaker, and where they never notified the 

public. I would . . . 

 

Not spending that many years here, Mr. Speaker, but enough to 

know and remember when those members were in opposition, 

the cry that would come out had we done something like this. 

And here it was the member from Wood River sitting on this 

and not speaking out was almost unbelievable to then say that 

he knew about this. And all the things of finding himself 

recorded in The Parliamentarian, I think it was the magazine, 

making it there on the cover. Sort of, The Parliamentarian may 

be akin to the cover of the Rolling Stone. So he is now famous 

for posterity for appearing in this magazine as a . . . Mr. 

Speaker, I would not say that that would be any way to make 

your mark in your political career. 



November 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6305 

But again the firing . . . And then there was the firing of the 

employee at the Corrections, Public Safety and Policing and 

believing . . . And to this day, I believe that they fired the wrong 

person. So this sends a chill through the public service. And Mr. 

Speaker, this is the kind of thing where we need good 

legislation, a good system where people would feel 

comfortable, would feel confident that when they brought 

forward issues of concern, to not only us as legislators but to the 

people of Saskatchewan, that these issues would be dealt with 

in a proper manner. 

 

And again as just some of my . . . in terms of having some 

opening comments, this Bill does not provide that sort of 

protection. It does not have the kind of transparency that we 

need for reporting. And it does not provide or encourage, I 

would say . . . and I use the word encourage because I think 

where people see wrongdoing they should be reported through a 

number of mechanisms that we have, be that within the 

department. But if this continues and they see this continuing 

that they should feel secure in reporting these things so that it’s 

for the betterment of not only us here but for all people in our 

province. 

 

Again there’s a number of things that the Bill that then . . . that 

we should have a reporting mechanism, how that should be 

reported and to who, to who that should be. Again this Bill is 

again public interest disclosure, and again that would be in the 

interest of the public. But again the Bill does not in fact allow 

for public disclosure. In fact what it does is clamp down and 

attempts to, Mr. Speaker, for lack of anything better . . . but to 

hide and deal in a manner that in fact would, I would say, create 

an atmosphere where people would be unwilling to come 

forward because knowing that in fact their issue might not make 

it, see the light of day. And at that time it would have impact on 

their career. 

 

And we can’t have a Bill which purports to deal with doing 

some positives in the area of public disclosure so that we all can 

have a better service but in fact at the end of the day, at the end 

of the day, Mr. Speaker, creates a situation where people are 

uncertain — because of actions of this government — are 

uncertain whether, if they bring forward an issue, that it will in 

fact be dealt with in a manner where it will not only see the 

light of day but that justice will be done. 

 

It’s important that, again, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, even if 

justice appears to be done . . . and when you lose sight of that 

and you attempt to deal with deal with it in a manner — and I’ll 

be getting to more detail in that in the Bill — in a manner that 

this Bill deals with it, this is not, I don’t think, what people saw 

as bringing forward issues and having protection for reprisals 

and other sorts of things or perhaps, perhaps, Mr. Speaker, 

prevent some career advancement for people because they 

brought forward issues that they felt were important. And even 

if the issues, Mr. Speaker, were not direct but a person assumed 

those issues were there, there should still be, if they were 

brought forward in good faith, that there should not be reprisals 

for actions of that. 

 

So the other thing that we have in here is it’s not very clear 

from the Act . . . And again here the members opposite are 

asking us to simply accept that there are some, in terms of under 

the definitions in the Act, who this would apply to, ministries 

. . . But it’s again not clear how far this extends. Does it extend 

to education workers, teachers? Is support staff in there? Does it 

include health care? Does it include highway workers? We 

would think, Mr. Speaker, that it would, but there’s nothing in 

here that indicates, at this point in time in reading the Act, that 

these people are included. And so we’re left again with a lot of 

vagueness here in terms, and we will have a lot of questions in 

terms of who this Act really applies to. 

 

We understand that the . . . Again the overall picture that is 

painted is that all things will be brought forward to, well, to 

different people. In some cases, I would say the head of the 

departments, that being the deputy minister. But again when the 

minister came out, we had the establishment of a commissioner, 

the Public Interest Disclosure Commissioner which would be 

appointed, and again here we’re not certain because of . . . That 

in fact that this could be the Ombudsman. 

 

As to what direction the government is taking, we’re not certain 

here as to how much money will be given for this. How much 

money will be provided? We know that they are in trouble over 

there because of the way they’ve handled the finances, and so 

we wonder even in terms of that that this Bill has shortfallings 

— whether in fact will see the light of day or when it will see 

the light of day where people feel comfortable to bring forward 

issues because in fact there are issues here in terms of funding 

and how and when this person will be put into place or whether 

they in fact will be put into place and what the Assembly will 

determine to do. 

 

And we know the problems we’ve experienced with the Chief 

Electoral Officer and how that works and so we need . . . In that 

area, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t leave us with a lot of confidence 

that we will see much come of this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those just are sort of some of the comments I would have. I 

think the other comments would simply be in terms of the 

reports of the commissioner, of who those would be done to, 

and the issue of, in reporting, that the reports would be done a 

year after some of the incidents or after the . . . So for example 

if we had somebody bring forward an issue and we had to do 

the investigation, the investigations would be done. Then there 

would be decisions made and reports. In fact it’s not clear. If all 

the reports have to be done, the reporting could be done a year 

later. Mr. Speaker, in some cases, this would push us for almost 

two years before we would find out what the problems were. 

And I don’t think that that really is something that would give a 

lot of people confidence that the problems are being dealt with. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I guess in going over these things, in fact 

it gets me . . . It’s a little more like cold comfort to know that an 

area so important as this, where we have attempted to deal with 

this issue, that this is what we have come out with. 

 

I would think that people might revert back to just simply going 

public with issues because they would have a lack of 

confidence at some point in time, that they would come to see 

that this issue, that they could not live with this, or that they 

could not continue in their employment and simply would go 

public with it anyways because they would not feel that, if they 

entered into this system that is being proposed, that the system 

would simply cover up and that they would not get a fair 

hearing. 



6306 Saskatchewan Hansard November 30, 2010 

Again there was just something probably a little bit more in 

detail but the section 13, what’s the, I guess, the interplay of 

this legislation with the Freedom of Information and Protection 

of Privacy Act? Mr. Speaker, that whole issue of how those two 

interplay . . . We have seen now where we are asking for 

information under the Amicus deal, and we’re finding that we 

have 900 pages of blacked out information being given to us 

and we wonder what that’s all about. I would think that the one 

way to resolve that very quickly, for those members across the 

way, would just simply be, as they say in question period, that 

you know there’s nothing here to hide. Then that would be one 

way of simply getting to the root of the issue and saying here’s 

the full report. There’s nothing blacked out here; we will be 

able to deal with this. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have some very serious questions that we 

need to ask regarding this Bill. Again, just questions of who it 

takes in, who will this all involve, what are the exact 

approaches, and will we actually have a commissioner — will 

we actually have a commissioner. So we have to wait for a lot 

of those things to happen. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the government institution, and again trying 

to, when I looked at this to try and determine who would be in 

the . . . It says, talks about the, means: 

 

the office of the Executive Council or any department, 

ministry, secretariat or other similar agency of the 

executive government . . . 

 

any prescribed board, commission, Crown corporation or 

other body . . . 

 

And in that, Mr. Speaker, I guess the question there is, who 

would actually this apply to? Would it apply to, as I mentioned, 

education employees, support staff? Would it be the same in the 

health care? All the commissions that we have set up, to what 

degree of staff would that be? 

 

The entire area where the Act talks about that this would now 

go to the deputy minister or the commissioner. And in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, in some of those things where the commissioner can 

actually send the issue back to the department head, it strikes 

me that in most cases, Mr. Speaker, concerns are raised on 

issues of wrongdoing in terms of, are we talking about here law 

or would we be talking also about policies, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Because I would think that in most cases where the deputy 

minister is involved, that these things would be driven 

downwards into the ministry. And then the employees, 

depending again as I mentioned, of how deep this would go and 

who it does include, how would the employee feel a sense of 

security that they wouldn’t know that it was the deputy minister 

that was in fact putting forward this policy when it could be the 

immediate manager or whoever else that they were thinking that 

is doing the wrongdoing? And they end up having to go to the 

deputy and deal with this issue. 

 

So I don’t think, you know, unless there’s some explanations 

here where in fact I’m not understanding what’s happening 

here, it strikes me that this is almost a cat-and-mouse game 

where this is all happening. In fact, what is happening here is 

it’s preventing some impartial eyes, some objective eyes to look 

at the situation to assess what it is that’s happening. So if you’re 

going to talk to the person or whatever it is, the policy that you 

disagree with that is in fact within that department, that the 

department supports and therefore I would say the deputy 

minister would be supporting, and if you have to go directly to 

the deputy minister, what sort of confidence does that bring 

forward if you are thinking that this is very wrong, that this is 

wrong for the public of Saskatchewan, that it’s wrong for us as 

legislators? 

 

And trying to bring this forward, I would think a lot of people 

would be considering whether or not this would be very good 

for their career, this move. Whether it would be the right thing 

to do or whether you would just simply, Mr. Speaker, look the 

other way and continue doing these things which you feel are 

not right. And again, Mr. Speaker, I think this lends itself to 

people going public, to saying, this has come to this point; I 

don’t feel any security in going to the deputy minister. 

 

Now again the issue comes up, well we have put in a . . . The 

Assembly has put forward a commissioner, an independent 

person. And you might be questioning that independent person 

as an officer of this Assembly. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly 

not that. But what we’re also saying is that the commissioner 

has a right to send the issue back again, send the issue back to 

the designated officer within government if that person so 

desires. 

 

So some of those things are rather confusing that you can be 

doing that. And I think we should be looking at those kinds of 

things very carefully. And I guess my questions would be, why 

would we have that sort of ability if . . . And I guess you could 

probably see some cases where it should go back to the deputy 

minister to do that. 

 

But there is a lot of things that are going on here sort of 

internally, Mr. Speaker. And that’s very bothersome for us, 

because there’s very little public disclosure. And again there’s a 

lot of internal handling of these issues. And I think that what we 

are talking about here again in this Act, we’re talking about 

public interest disclosure, Mr. Speaker. And in fact a good 

portion of this Act talks about how it will be handled internally. 

And so for people even to go forward and to say, to talk about, 

as it does here in some of the places where it talks about, that 

you can talk to somebody about . . . to see if, whether or not you 

have a case. 

 

Again I think the base, the underlying, the underlying premise 

here has to be that people have to feel confident. That they have 

to feel confident that when they talk to people that they will be 

taken seriously. That there will be no reprisals, and again . . . 

And that somebody — I would think that for us as legislators — 

always looking for a system, be it the justice system, to have a 

balance of people being able to go forward and feel that justice 

is done so that they’re impartial. 

 

People looking at this need to know and feel comfortable that 

this is important for them and that they would be able to 

discuss, whether it is just simply determining whether they have 

an issue or bringing things forward, that it will be dealt with in 

the appropriate manner. And this doesn’t really lead that in 

cases, as I said, that there seems to be a lot of keeping, trying to 

keep this internal, and even when you don’t go to the 



November 30, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6307 

commissioner, that this gets to go back, that this can be sent 

back to the, again to the deputy minister. 

 

Now I know that where people are finding that they have found 

something, Mr. Speaker, that they have found an issue, they 

would be thinking about all of these things. They would be 

thinking them through very clearly and wondering, if I go back, 

can I go to the commissioner? Can I feel secure that when I talk 

to the commissioner that in fact the people in my department, in 

that ministry will not find out about this? 

 

Can I feel certain that if I go to the commissioner that they will, 

that the commissioner will treat my issue and keep it private? 

That that information would be secure? That it would not be 

taken back, so that in fact at some future date when I’m 

applying for a job, all of a sudden I find that there’s a 

deficiency raised in my performance or something that I had 

had previously done, and it’s unrelated, Mr. Speaker, unrelated 

to my performance, but it’s related to this little discussion I had 

with perhaps the deputy, the deputy minister or with the 

commissioner. 

 

So I think if you’re going to build a system where people feel 

that they can bring forward issues, if you’re going to build a 

system where people feel confidence in this, I think you should 

have a lot more ability for people to feel that if I bring this 

forward, I need to know that it will see the light of day in the 

proper manner. 

 

Otherwise, Mr. Speaker, I think what you really are doing here 

is that you’re not fixing a problem. What you will have is 

people going outside and still saying that in fact that what we 

should do is just don’t take it to the public because if I’ve come 

to that point in my concerns for this issue . . . And again these 

are important issues. We should never . . . That where people 

will come to the point of saying, I have to raise this issue, these 

have to be very important issues. 

 

And I think the Act there recognizes that, but I wonder what 

that person will do, whether they might not just say, I’m at that 

point I can’t deal with this any more. I’m going to take it over 

to the press or I’m going to go somewhere where I can raise this 

issue in a manner that’ll see the light of day. I’ve now forgone 

my, you know, knowing that this is going to damage my career 

and I think the Act — if a person was to do that — I think the 

Act, I wonder how the Act would deal with that, Mr. Speaker. I 

wonder how that Act would deal with that and what they would, 

you know, I wonder what the people, what a person like that 

would think. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a lot more things that I would like to say 

about this and I see the time is coming near 5 o’clock, so with 

that I would adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 147. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Deputy 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To facilitate 

the work of committees, I move that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy House Leader has moved that in 

order to facilitate the work of committees, the Assembly stand 

adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:57.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6277 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6277 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6277 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6277 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6278 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6278 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 6278, 6292 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6278 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6278 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6278 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6279 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6279 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6279 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6279 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6293 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6293 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6279 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6279 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6280 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6280 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6280 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Métis Sash an Emblem of Strength 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6280 

 Métis Sash Ceremony 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6281 

 North West Regional College Practical Nursing Class Graduation 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6281 

 2010 Communitas Award Winner 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6281 

 Saskatoon Nutana Resident Receives Book of the Year Award  

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6281 

 Muslim Festival at Huda School 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6282 

 Water Supplies 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6282 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Contract Negotiations and Supply of Physicians 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6282 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6283 

 Crown Land 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6284 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6284 

 Northern Roads 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6285 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6285 

 Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6286 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6286 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6286 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 161 — The Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6287 

 Bill No. 162 — The Local Government Election Amendment Act, 2010 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6287 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on House Services 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6287 

 



 

MOTIONS 

 Recognition of Métis Contributions in the Creation of Saskatchewan 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6287 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6288 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 159 — The University of Regina Amendment Act, 2010 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6288 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6289 

 Bill No. 160 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6290 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6293 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6296 

  Harrison (point of order) ....................................................................................................................................................... 6297 

  Iwanchuk (point of order) ...................................................................................................................................................... 6297 

  The Deputy Speaker (point of order) .................................................................................................................................... 6297 

 Bill No. 158 — The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6300 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6302 

 Bill No. 147 — The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6304 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


