




















































Hansard: November 23, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 15A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 23, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6165 

 November 23, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to introduce to you and 

through you to all members of this honourable Assembly six 

accomplished individuals from Briercrest College and 

Seminary. Dr. Dwayne Uglem joined the staff of Briercrest 

College 24 years ago and has worked in a variety of positions, 

serving the last seven as president. Director of communications, 

Rob Shellenberg, comes to us by way of Alberta, but was born 

right here in Beechy, Saskatchewan. 

 

Briercrest is celebrating their 75th anniversary this year, and are 

especially grateful for the 21,000 alumni they have served since 

1935 and the 826 students enrolled on campus this fall. 

 

I would like to recognize Rob Bancroft from Minto, New 

Brunswick; Tamara Bowering from Millet, Alberta; Olivia 

Plouffe from Connecticut; and Oschean Ulmer from Stoney 

Plain, Alberta. All of these students from Briercrest College are 

studying in the B.A. [Bachelor of Arts] and applied linguistics 

TESOL [teaching of English to speakers of other languages] 

program. 

 

Rob spent the summer near Mazar-i-sharif in northern 

Afghanistan where he taught English to Afghani citizens at a 

language school. Tamara, Olivia, and Oschean spent the 

summer in Deyang in China’s Sichuan province, site of the 

horrific 2008 earthquake. Their teaching helped to improve the 

English of 160 Chinese English-language educators. 

 

Briercrest is an institution with a strong tradition of bringing 

talented, hard-working people to our province. For 75 years this 

great school has lured people to Saskatchewan because of their 

reputation for scholastic excellence but their students have often 

decided to stay in the province after their studies and make 

Saskatchewan their permanent home. 

 

On behalf of the government, I wish to welcome the entire 

Briercrest contingent to their Legislative Assembly and ask that 

all members of the legislature do the same. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I know that it’s my pleasure today 

to introduce a significant number of champions, champions in 

the east gallery and more champions in the west gallery. 

 

I’m going to start with the two coaches that came: Jason 

Duczek who was the coach of the 3A championship football 

team, provincial champs, from O’Neill High School, and 

Christine Barber who was the championship coach for the 

cross-country team at the same O’Neill High School. In 

addition we’ve got the city boys’ soccer championship team 

seated in the west gallery behind me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s close to 100 of these students from 

O’Neill, championship players all, many wearing the medal. 

And I’m delighted to see that you brought those with you today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I mentioned the 3A football champions that are 

league, city, and provincial 3A championship teams. They’re 

seated in the east gallery. The city boys’ soccer championship 

team is seated behind me and the provincial 3A championship 

cross-country team is also seated behind me. 

 

While I’m on my . . . Well let me do it this way. I’m going to 

ask all members to join me in welcoming these championship 

teams to their legislature, and I look forward to meeting them 

right as they leave here after question period. We’re going to 

have pictures and a brief opportunity to meet. I invite all 

members to join me in thanking these students and teachers for 

coming, and welcoming them to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina South. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we all 

know, this is Multicultural Week in Saskatchewan and I have 

the great honour of introducing two guests from the 

Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan. With us today in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker, are board member, Mary Chan, and 

executive director, Rhonda Rosenberg. Ms. Chan is also 

president of the Chinese Language School of Regina, one of the 

council’s member organizations. The Multicultural Council of 

Saskatchewan promotes and fosters multiculturalism for us all. 

It’s committed to working to achieve equality for everyone. 

 

Our province celebrates the diversity of its people, their distinct 

cultures, and their ethnic backgrounds. In fact, Saskatchewan’s 

support of multiculturalism is even reflected in our province’s 

motto, “from many peoples, strength.” Mr. Speaker, more and 

more we are becoming a province of many cultures. Ten 

thousand new immigrants made Saskatchewan their home this 

year. And at Regina’s George Lee elementary school, there are 

40 different countries with all of their cultures represented. 

 

In recognition of our diversity, the week of November 21 to 28 

has been declared Multicultural Week in Saskatchewan. 

Multicultural Week is a time for each of us to celebrate the 

many peoples that contribute to Saskatchewan’s cultural mosaic 

and to our economy. Mr. Speaker, Ms. Chan, Ms. Rosenberg, 

and the others involved in the Multicultural Council help 

Saskatchewan’s newest residents realize what a great place our 

province is in which to live, to work, invest, and raise a family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to help me thank Ms. Chan and 

Ms. Rosenberg for their very good work and welcome them to 

their Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to join in 

welcoming the members from the Multicultural Council of 

Saskatchewan. And as a long-standing master of ceremonies at 

the Scandinavian club, I work with many of these people. 



6166 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2010 

But I want to make a special welcome to Mrs. Mary Chan, as 

her son Felix and my daughter Ingrid started kindergarten 

together in French immersion. And so we’ve spent many years 

watching our children grow — Felix in his endeavours, and 

then Ingrid, my daughter, and her endeavours as an actor, in 

town this week actually at the Artesian in Jacques Brel. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are many, many treasures that come 

from our acknowledgement in Saskatchewan of the 

multicultural base, and we’re just seeing a new flowering of 

that. And I thank the members of the council very much for 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also have a class of high school students from 

Dr. Martin LeBoldus High School. There are eight students in 

Mr. Jesse Michaud’s class who are in the Speaker’s gallery. 

And I’m introducing these on behalf of the member from 

Regina Douglas Park. But I would have to say that when I was 

first elected, Dr. Martin LeBoldus High School was in my 

riding and so I always count that high school as part of Regina 

Lakeview as well. So I give you a strong welcome and I hope 

you enjoy your day here today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the members of the 

legislature I’d like to welcome and introduce today a group of 

men and women involved in the cattle industry. Some are 

Saskatchewan reps, but the remainder of the visitors up there 

today are from the US [United States] and we certainly want to 

welcome them too. They’re up here for Agribition, but also to 

have meetings that are important to both industries on both 

sides of the border. 

 

So I ask all members to welcome them to the legislature today. 

And enjoy your stay in Canada and Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of one of the alumni of 

O’Neill High School, that being the hon. member for Walsh 

Acres, and the rest of us, I would like to — while I’m on my 

feet — introduce two people seated in the east gallery. They are 

Jen Britton who’s been introduced previously. She’s part of the 

Save our Saskatchewan campaign. And it’s good to have Jen 

here with us. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, I want to introduce another O’Neill 

alumni, Mr. Speaker, who also has the honour of being a former 

football captain at O’Neill. The person I’m speaking about is 

Jaime García who happens also to be the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] candidate and next MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] for Regina Coronation Park. I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming these guests. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, I would like to join with the member from 

Thunder Creek in welcoming the delegation from Briercrest. 

 

Once upon a time, my father attended high school at Briercrest. 

And I did not have the benefit of doing so, but I tree planted 

over the years with many, many individuals who helped pay for 

their tuition by planting trees, and returned to Briercrest in the 

fall. So I’ve heard first-hand about the quality education and the 

great life memories that are obtained while studying there. So 

on behalf of the official opposition, I’d like to welcome the 

group from Briercrest here today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With us 

today in your gallery, seated in the east area is four very special 

visitors from northern Saskatchewan. These champions of 

change are here to propose a new strategy on dealing with youth 

suicide and youth justice. And they’ve travelled a long ways to 

be here. I’m particularly impressed with our elder, Marieanne 

Morin, who has worked diligently for many youth in northern 

Saskatchewan, in particular Beauval. And I want to say to 

Marieanne in Cree: 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

And what I said to her, Mr. Speaker, is I’m glad that she came 

here and that she has nothing to fear here, that this land is hers 

and as a Saskatchewan resident that she should have nothing at 

all that she should be worried about, visiting this great hall of 

democracy. 

 

Also joining Marieanne of course is her son Max. Max of 

course is wearing a nice jacket today. If Max would stand up. 

And see the jacket that his mother made? And Marieanne 

stitched every stitch there and worked diligently while making 

this jacket for her son. And all the while of course Marieanne 

has been struggling with cancer. 

 

The other person that’s of importance here is Leroy Laliberte. 

And Leroy is a youth development worker. And Leroy also 

worked very closely with our MP [Member of Parliament], Mr. 

Rob Clarke. And of course the last lady here is Ms. Mihalicz 

who’s also working very closely with this group. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re very blessed to have four of these 

quality people that have come all the way from Beauval in 

northwestern Saskatchewan to advocate for a new system of 

youth development and to certainly advocate for a new 

approach in justice and to stem the ever-growing suicide trends 

that many of our young people have suffered under. And I want 

to thank them for coming here today and, as my introduction, to 

tell them again, God bless you for your work. Our kids are 

dying and they need more champions like you to advocate for 

them. 

 

So please join me in welcoming these very special champions 

of change and thank them for their work. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 

member opposite in welcoming these individuals to the 

legislature today. The societal and economic challenges that 



November 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6167 

face the North are very substantial and impose some very 

significant challenges for young people. And I think it’s the 

work that people like this are doing that will be our road to the 

future. And I would like to not only welcome them, but 

encourage them to continue the good work that’s being done 

and to help other people become involved in that. And I would 

certainly like to encourage them to stay active and continue to 

do what they’re doing. 

 

I hear the member opposite usually speaks in their own 

language. I’m not able to do that. I’m always wary of what he’s 

saying without a translator. But I hope it’s positive, Mr. 

Speaker, and would like to ask all members welcome these 

people. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join with my colleagues in offering a warm welcome to Dr. 

Uglem and the delegation from Briercrest. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Briercrest does have a very solid reputation, not only on the 

academic side, but on the spiritual side and on the life 

experiences, as my colleague mentioned, that many will gain 

from being at the institution. I know you all . . . That solid 

reputation also spreads into the community. And I know Moose 

Jaw, as being one of your closest neighbours, we enjoy the 

relationship. I know it’s grown over the years and you do have 

an impact not only on Caronport and the institution, but on 

Moose Jaw as well. And that’s been since the very early days, 

and I’m sure even more so since the era of Dr. Hildebrand and 

how important that era was at Caronport. So, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to offer my congratulations on the 75th anniversary and a 

warm welcome. 

 

And also while I’m on my feet, on behalf of the official 

opposition I would like to welcome the international guests 

from Agribition that are here in the city of Regina for the week 

hopefully — maybe longer. I’m sure some of you are return 

visitors, but if this is your first visit to Regina and Agribition, 

I’m sure we’ll see you next year because the show has such a 

strong reputation and for the display of new, current, and very 

progressive ideas on the agricultural side. I know you’ll 

appreciate the week and enjoy it greatly. 

 

Anyway, a warm welcome. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

giving me a great deal of pleasure to rise on behalf of 

Saskatchewan people who are concerned about the safety 

conditions of our highways. And Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and the 

junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety for 

Saskatchewan’s motoring public. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition was signed by the good folks from 

Fort Qu’Appelle, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan renters that are 

facing a combination of rising rents and low vacancy rates in 

many communities across our province. Many renters have seen 

their rents increase by hundreds of dollars over the last year or 

more, and it’s becoming increasingly difficult to deal with. 

Many provinces, or the majority of provinces in Canada, now 

have some form of rent control guidelines, and that the 

argument of private market would deliver sufficient affordable 

housing in the absence of rent control has proven to be false. 

And the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to consider enacting some form of rent 

control with a view to protecting Saskatchewan renters 

from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I present on behalf of concerned citizens. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present petitions 

again on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan who support the 

Saskatchewan Seniors Association and their 180 seniors’ 

centres throughout the province, the vast majority of those in 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

People know these centres provide much-needed recreation and 

social activities as well as important health clinics, and these 

contribute to enhanced quality of life for the many seniors who 

use them. There’s a real concern that due to the skyrocketing 

cost of utilities, insurance, taxes, etc., as many as a quarter of 

these may close. And the closure of these centres will lead to 

the deteriorating mental and physical health of seniors, also 

leading to additional stress on long-term care facilities and 

hospitals: 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to provide the 

much-needed funding to assist seniors’ recreation centres 

to remain open and active within their communities. 

 

And this is around 100 signatures from people from Wilkie, 

Meota, North Battleford, Frenchman Butte, Meath Park, 

Battleford, Cochin, and Weirdale. I so present. 



6168 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of eliminating poverty in Saskatchewan. 

And we know in Saskatchewan the income gap between the 

rich and the poor continues to grow, and now one in five 

children in Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. We also 

know that when governments reduce spending, often supports 

for social programs are cut first. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

that the Government of Saskatchewan act as quickly as 

possible to develop an effective and sustainable poverty 

elimination strategy for the benefit of all Saskatchewan 

citizens. 

 

The people signing the petition today are from Regina and 

Saskatoon. I do so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that calls for the expansion of the graduate 

retention program, as it currently excludes master’s and Ph.D. 

[Doctor of Philosophy] graduates. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition from Furdale residents. A government 

ministry has directed SaskWater to cut off supplies of water for 

domestic use to Furdale customers. The same government 

ministry has directed that customers may no longer treat 

non-potable water using methods approved by Sask Health. 

 

Furdale residents, in dealing in good faith with SaskWater for 

over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their domestic 

systems and in-home treatment equipment, as well as for 

livestock irrigation lines. And that the alternative water supply 

referred to by the government ministry is a private operator 

offering treated, non-pressurized water at great cost with no 

guarantee of quality, quantity, or availability of water. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly be pleased to cause the 

government to withdraw its order to cut off non-potable 

water to the residents of the hamlet of Furdale, causing 

great hardship with no suitable alternatives; to exempt the 

hamlet of Furdale from further water service cut-offs by 

granting a grandfather clause under The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act, 2002 and The Water 

Regulations, 2002; and that this government fulfills its 

promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the residents of 

Saskatoon and North Battleford. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on this feet? 

 

Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce 

guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is granted. I recognize the member 

from Athabasca. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In my 

error, I just wanted to point out that I mentioned Ms. Mihalicz 

when I should have actually introduced her as Ms. Debbie 

Mihalicz, because Leroy actually put her mother’s name down 

here. And equally as beautiful, that’s not Marie. That’s Debbie 

Mihalicz and I want to welcome her to the Assembly and ask all 

members to join me in thanking her for coming here. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Gabriel Dumont Institute Celebrates 30th Anniversary 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, this past weekend, Gabriel 

Dumont Institute held their 30th anniversary and culture 

conference in Saskatoon. Over 400 Métis from across 

Saskatchewan gathered to participate in the many cultural 

workshops — workshops such as Métis clothing and art, 

traditional beading and weaving, modern Métis authors and 

artists, traditional Aboriginal medicine, Métis genealogy and 

research, and the Michif language. 

 

At the opening ceremonies on Thursday evening, Mr. Speaker, 

three individuals were awarded the Order of Gabriel Dumont 

silver medals and 18 students, six each from DTI [Dumont 

Technical Institute], SUNTEP [Saskatchewan urban native 

teacher education program], and GDI [Gabriel Dumont 

Institute] training and employment, were awarded bronze 

medals. I was pleased to witness Friday night’s gala ceremony 

where two individuals, Mr. Clarence Campeau and Mr. Guy 

Bouvier, were awarded the Order of Gabriel Dumont gold 

medals for their contributions to the Métis Nation. 

 

Earlier in the day, GDI signed a $47 million, five-year 

agreement with Aboriginal human resources and skills 

development to provide employment and training programs and 

services to Métis, to the Saskatchewan Métis communities so 

that there’s . . . There was so much to celebrate, Mr. Speaker. It 



November 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6169 

was stated that over the last 30 years the SUNTEP program has 

graduated nearly 1,000 Métis teachers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of addressing the delegates to 

the GDI annual general meeting on Saturday morning. The 

finances presented during the meeting demonstrate the amazing 

growth that GDI has experienced over the past 30 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Gabriel Dumont Institute board and staff for 30 years of 

successful operations. I truly believe that these graduating 

students are our future ambassadors and role models to their 

communities, Saskatchewan, and all of Canada. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Canadian Western Agribition 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Each November for 

the past 40 years, Canadian Western Agribition has opened its 

doors to the world. From November 22nd to 27th, Regina will 

be hosting the largest agricultural show and marketplace in 

Canada. Approximately 160,000 people from nine Canadian 

provinces and, generally, over 28 American states and more 

than 23 countries worldwide come to Regina each year. 

 

It all happens over six days and 22 acres of indoor facilities 

housing some of North America’s finest livestock breeders, 

equipment, agricultural services, and so on. There are over 500 

exhibits displaying the latest developments in agricultural 

technology and services, and around 2,000 exhibitors that 

display the best of the best in the livestock industry. Throughout 

the week of Agribition, the pro rodeo attracts top professional 

cowboys from across North America. There’s also the Agri-Ed 

Showcase which educates thousands of children from across 

our province on the business of agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, putting on a world-class event such as Agribition 

would not be possible without the support and commitment of 

hundreds of volunteers. It’s because of hard-working volunteers 

that the world has the opportunity to come to Saskatchewan to 

see the best livestock genetics and the latest innovations in the 

agricultural sector. 

 

Saskatchewan is moving forward in all aspects of agriculture, 

Mr. Speaker. I congratulate Agribition on 40 years of success 

and look forward to the next 40. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Celebrating Success at O’Neill High School 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In addition to the 

championship teams of this year — the provincial 3A 

championship cross-country team; the league, city, and 

provincial 3A championship football team; the city 

championship boys’ soccer — O’Neill High School also offers 

20, a total of 20 coached team programs. Principal Dale Reed is 

proud of everyone involved — teachers, coaches, and all of the 

students who participate. 

 

O’Neill also has a long-standing and outstanding fine arts 

program. This year one-third of all students are participating in 

the choral and vocal jazz program. The choral program even 

reaches Alberta by travelling and performing at a half dozen 

schools in Alberta over a three-day period. This year’s drama 

production, Legend of Sleepy Hollow, was very successful in 

every way. All this and more. O’Neill High School offers both 

English and French immersion programs, both with great 

success. For example in 2008, Mr. Speaker, O’Neill students 

were awarded more than $300,000 of scholarship money. 

 

I invite all members to join me in celebrating effort, 

inclusiveness, and success at Archbishop M.C. O’Neill High 

School located in the north end of Regina. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Moose Jaw Festival of Trees 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, last Saturday 

evening I had the pleasure of attending the 19th annual festival 

of trees held in Moose Jaw. 

 

The festival of trees has become the social event of the year, 

attracting some 500 residents to an elegant, festively decorated 

ballroom. This gala event of dining and dancing, along with a 

live auction and cash donation, demonstrates the community’s 

generosity as well as their commitment to the Moose Jaw 

Hospital. The event raised over a quarter of a million dollars 

that will be used toward the purchase of laparoscopic surgery 

equipment for the hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps the outstanding highlight of the evening 

was the auctioning of the signed jersey, number 34, of the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders. What made this so special was that 

the Saskatchewan Roughrider Hall of Famer George Reed 

himself was there to don the jersey and spark the auction. That 

jersey sold for an impressive $12,500. 

 

I want to thank the Moose Jaw business community for their 

support of decorated trees and Christmas displays. To the 

citizens who came out and enjoyed the evening, your 

participation is greatly appreciated. And to the committee who 

dedicated hundreds of hours in planning, organizing, and 

decorating for this event, congratulations on a tremendous 

successful event on behalf of the Moose Jaw Hospital 

Foundation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Community Leader Supports Youth 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Constable Max 

Morin was a dedicated RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police] officer who served his entire career in isolated areas. 

Max Morin served 27 years as an officer. The Minister of 

Justice National Youth Justice Policing Award for 2001 was 

awarded to the former Constable Morin to honour his success in 

building trusting and respectful relationships with young people 

in trouble with the law, that has helped them turn their lives 

around. 

 

Mr. Morin has shown imaginative leadership in starting and 



6170 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2010 

supporting a number of innovative projects involving Native 

youth. These have included educational field trips, careers in 

law enforcement, active participation in healing circles, and 

discussions involving young offenders, victims, and families. 

He has an excellent relationship with band councillors, elders, 

and hereditary chiefs. Their support is vital to his alternative 

justice projects. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Morin got into police work because, he 

simply puts it, “to keep people out of jail, not to put them in.” 

He has started Green Arrow Healing Inc., a program designed 

to teach life skills and to keep people out of correctional 

institutions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to support community champions like 

this. We need to expand and create alternative measures to 

match the cultural needs of First Nations and Métis people 

across this province. We cannot allow our people to get caught 

in a criminal justice system which works neither for these 

people specifically or our society in general. 

 

I ask all members to join me in honouring Max Morin, the 

strong community leader. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Salvation Army Red Kettles 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Christmas season 

brings upon many traditions for the people of Saskatchewan, 

whether it’s Christmas supper, carolling, or any other unique 

Christmas traditions. 

 

But one of the most important and charitable Christmas 

traditions is the Salvation Army red kettle. The traditional red 

kettle is an integral part of the Christmas scene with millions of 

dollars donated each year to aid needy families, seniors, and the 

homeless, in keeping with the spirit of the season. Red kettles 

can be found throughout the province. These donations then 

provide Christmas dinners, clothing, and toys for families in 

need. 

 

Red kettle tradition began in 1891 when Salvation Army 

Captain Joseph McFee was distraught because so many poor 

individuals in San Francisco were going hungry. During the 

Christmas season he resolved to provide a free Christmas dinner 

for the destitute and poverty stricken. The red kettle provided 

Mr. McFee with the means to deliver such a meal. To this day 

the red kettle continues to provide those in need with the 

provisions for a more enjoyable Christmas. The red kettle 

embodies the true spirit of Christmas as a season of giving and 

helping our fellow members of the province. 

 

As we go about the Christmas season, I ask everyone to give 

what they can when they see the red kettle. And on behalf of 

this House, I want to thank the Salvation Army for continuing 

their charitable work. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

Saskatchewan Waste Electronic Equipment Program 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On November 3rd, the 

members of Saskatoon Centre and Regina Walsh Acres and I 

attended a well-organized event at the Saskatchewan Science 

Centre where the Saskatchewan waste electronic equipment 

program, or SWEEP for short, announced that it has diverted 16 

million pounds of electronic waste from the environmental 

waste stream in the first six months of its expanded product 

collection. The positive impact SWEEP is making will benefit 

not only our generation but generations to come. 

 

On April 1st, five new product categories were added to the 

recycling system, which was introduced when I was minister of 

Environment. This brings the total to 10 categories of accepted 

items that can be recycled at 71 SARCAN depots across 

Saskatchewan. The five new categories of accepted electronic 

items include personal and portable audio and video systems, 

home theatre systems, vehicle audio and video systems, and 

non-cellular telephone and answering machines. 

 

SWEEP is a non-profit program funded by an environmental 

handling fee. The fees are regularly reviewed to ensure that they 

reflect the cost of recycling. So far SWEEP has collected 16 

million pounds of waste electronic equipment, which is, if you 

can imagine it, the weight of over 27 Boeing 747 airplanes. 

 

I ask all members to thank Joan Meyer, her staff, and all the 

people who make this program successful. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we know the Saskatoon Health 

Region approved the Amicus deal at its board meeting last May, 

and we also know that construction began several weeks earlier 

on April 1st. And we know that the Minister of Health was 

involved in discussions about Amicus in 2009. To the minister: 

when did the government first give the nod, or maybe it was the 

wink, to this insider Amicus deal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I would say probably in 

about November of 2007 when this party took power, Mr. 

Speaker, when this party took power, and we started to look at 

the long-term care facilities in this province. We started to look 

at the number of people living in acute-care settings in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. It didn’t take us long to know that the 

history of the NDP in this province was brutal, Mr. Speaker, 

when it comes to long-term care facilities in rural Saskatchewan 

or long-term care facilities in urban Saskatchewan. 

 

We started working right then, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that 

we have the proper facilities for our seniors in this province, 

Mr. Speaker. We knew that after 16 years of not a new bed 

produced in this province under the NDP, it was about time 

some beds were built, Mr. Speaker, to take off the load of the 

acute-care setting, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon. Our government 



November 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6171 

knew right after taking power from the NDP that long-term care 

facilities were in poor shape. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Is the minister telling us that he had to 

reward his friends as soon as the Sask Party was elected in 

November 2007? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the information that the minister provided to the 

Assembly yesterday makes it clear that Miners Construction, a 

company whose president has donated almost $19,000 to the 

Sask Party, was already finding subcontractors in January of 

2010. That’s a full three months before the Saskatoon Health 

Region voted to approve this insider deal. Miners Construction 

clearly knew that it had the untendered building contract for 

months before the Saskatoon Health Region approved the deal. 

 

So to the minister: why does he continue to deny that this deal 

originated right here in this building when the insiders involved 

knew that the deal was in the bag? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the accusations that 

member makes on a daily basis about some of the best, 

strongest families, Mr. Speaker, in this province, Mr. Speaker, 

be it in Saskatoon, whether it’s the Stensruds that have done 

nothing but work diligently to help . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the . . . There’s a 

handful of members who are interrupting the Minister of 

Health. I’d ask the opposition members to allow the Minister of 

Health . . . Order. Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the Stensrud family that 

have donated thousands of dollars to the Cosmos, to other 

charities, Mr. Speaker, in this province, they are a family that 

are above ill repute, Mr. Speaker, and I can’t believe that 

member on a daily basis is accusing them of insider deal and 

wrongdoings, Mr. Speaker. It’s absolutely unacceptable. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, ultimately it’s the Government 

of Saskatchewan, the Sask Party government that decided to go 

with this untendered Amicus deal. 

 

Yesterday the minister provided to the Assembly information 

on three commercial bids received by Miners Construction, who 

received the untendered $27 million deal. We’ll assume for a 

moment that the minister had permission from the two 

unsuccessful contractors to release this information to this 

Assembly. Yet at the same time, the minister’s government has 

censored literally hundreds of pages of material relating to 

Amicus and its response to my FOI [freedom of information] 

request, which is public, should be public information. 

 

To the minister: why was he willing to release information from 

private companies but hides behind taxpayers’ dollars when 

they’re being used to fund this insider deal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. Order. 

Order. Order, order. I’d ask the young people in the west 

gallery to not participate in any form in the debate. The 

Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s interesting when you look at so many of the 

different issues that the opposition raises, and you look at it 

from what they did when they were in government and then 

what they expect other governments to do . . . Well the 

members opposite are laughing. 

 

What tender was put out for the sound stage for phase no. 1? 

Was there a tender for the sound stage in phase no. 1? No, there 

wasn’t. Was there a tender for phase no. 2? No, there wasn’t. 

When there was a tender for phase no. 3 . . . Was it tendered? 

Absolutely it wasn’t, Mr. Speaker. Three opportunities to tender 

for the sound stage, they never did it. They sole sourced, Mr. 

Speaker. But it’s funny how it’s perfectly fine for the NDP, but 

it wouldn’t be okay for anybody else. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the sound stage is 

called the Canada-Saskatchewan Sound Stage and was a 

three-level-of-government project: Canada, Saskatchewan, and 

the city of Regina. So, Mr. Speaker, this project is not a Canada, 

Saskatchewan, local government project. This is an insider deal. 

 

I ask the minister this: why would he release private company 

information but not information that should be published? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I find it interesting how she’s trying 

to rationalize the sound stage wasn’t tendered, Mr. Speaker. 

She’s having a hard time doing that. What I do know, Mr. 

Speaker, is we entered into a partnership through the Saskatoon 

Health Region and the Catholic Health Ministry to ensure that 

seniors . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Minister of Health. Order. Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — We entered into a partnership with the 

Saskatoon Health Region and the Catholic Health Ministry to 

ensure that seniors have proper accommodation at the end of 

their life. Living in the city hospital is no place for a senior to 

spend the last number of months of their life. Unfortunately 

under the NDP, that was perfectly fine, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is a good deal for people. This is a good deal for 

Saskatchewan seniors, Mr. Speaker. The opposition can try all 

they want to try and discredit this deal, Mr. Speaker, but for 

Saskatchewan people, it’s a good deal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



6172 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2010 

Eastview. 

 

Budgeting for Health Services 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A letter from the 

Minister of Finance to the Board of Internal Economy states, 

“Ministries were directed to submit a budget equal to their 

2010-11 expense budget with zero growth.” Mr. Speaker, last 

year’s budget gave health regions a 3.1 per cent increase in 

spending when they were asking for a minimum of 7 per cent 

increase. Regions are now forced to run deficits and cut health 

services to people to make up for the Sask Party’s 

mismanagement. 

 

To the minister: what health care services for people will 

regions have to cut in 2011, and how are health regions going to 

function properly and provide the care people need with a zero 

per cent increase in 2011? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, under the guidance of the former minister of 

Finance, a letter was sent around to all of the ministries back in 

the springtime to ask for a call for estimates, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the process that has been followed in the past was 

a call for estimates to look at the submitting of information to 

Finance, Mr. Speaker. We are looking at all options. We are 

looking at being able to achieve, as I’ve indicated in a report 

yesterday that I did, that indicated that we are striving for a 1 

per cent growth in the next fiscal year. Mr. Speaker, some of the 

ministries, as in the case of Health last year I believe, came in 

just at around the 3 per cent growth, and others had a different 

level of growth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that is the process that we’re going to follow. We’re looking 

also at a strategy to ensure that we have the ability to determine 

what priorities do ministries have, and we’re going to follow 

that same pattern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party promised $152 

million to build 13 long-term care facilities. The minister has 

said construction will begin on some of the facilities by 

November of 2011. Interesting, Mr. Speaker, isn’t the 

provincial election in November of 2011? To the minister: he’s 

been directed to submit a zero-growth budget, so where is he 

getting the money to build 13 long-term care facilities in next 

year’s budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to 

correct for the general public. The opposition has been going 

around saying these projects were cancelled. Nothing could be 

further from the truth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Watrous is under way. Watrous is under way, and 

I would say five or six more will be going to tender, going to 

tender next spring, Mr. Speaker, because those facilities will be 

moving ahead because of the out-dated facilities left by the 

NDP, Mr. Speaker. Those facilities will be moving ahead, and 

communities are working diligently to make sure that their 

share of money is in place. Scoping is being done, Mr. Speaker, 

so that those facilities can move ahead, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I certainly think that when the groundbreaking this spring 

on many more facilities will be in place, hopefully the 

opposition will take back their words and quit spreading untrue 

information. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — Member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — [Inaudible] . . . truth, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 

has all these grand ideas about a carbon capture project, clean 

coal project, a domed stadium, but when it comes down to it, 

he’s all talk and no action. 

 

The Minister of Health is following the same path. He’s 

promised 13 long-term care facilities, a STARS [shock trauma 

air rescue service] ambulance program, but he has no money to 

settle contracts with doctors, interns, residents, the 3,000 

professionals represented by Health Sciences. To the minister: 

will he admit that, like the Premier, he’s all talk and no action, 

and these are just pre-election vote buying? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — What I can say is this government has 

made a commitment to 13 long-term care facilities. And when 

the money’s in place by the communities, those facilities will be 

going ahead. 

 

I will tell you that it is a far cry from what the NDP did year 

after year, and especially the member from Lakeview. The 

member from Lakeview would always go to the communities of 

Preeceville just before an election. And instead of inviting the 

MLA from that area, he would have the NDP candidate there at 

the announcement again. Seven years in a row they announced 

Preeceville, Mr. Speaker. When we make the announcement, 

we’ll be getting it done. They did it in Humboldt, Mr. Speaker. 

They did it in community after community — announce, 

announce, and announce. We’ve got it done. We’re building 

those facilities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Housing 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All across this 

province, the rising cost of rent is forcing people to make hard 

choices. Parents are having to choose between buying good 

food or paying rent. Students can’t afford textbooks or taking a 

full course load because they can’t afford to make ends meet. 

 

Now seniors in so-called affordable housing units owned by the 

government are being forced to choose between prescriptions 

they need or a roof over their head. Residents in senior 

buildings run by the Regina Housing Authority have now been 

hit by rent increases at least twice in the last year. To the 



November 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6173 

minister: why is her government making seniors suffer for this 

Premier’s mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, we all know that the 

seniors in this province are owed a great debt of gratitude for all 

the work that they have done. But we also know that with the 

growing economy that there are challenges. But I think the 

members opposite should acknowledge that we have right now, 

the average weekly earnings are up 6 per cent, and we have 

more people working in Saskatchewan than ever before. 

 

When we removed 80,000 people from the tax rolls last year, 

that meant that senior couples in Saskatchewan saved up to 

2,200 . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’d ask the . . . There’s a couple 

members on the opposition backbench that are not allowing the 

minister to really answer the question. I ask the minister to 

respond to her question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, last year or the year before, 

when we removed 80,000 low-income people from the tax rolls, 

that meant seniors in our province — a senior couple — saved 

up to $2,200 annually. Mr. Speaker, we are working to make 

sure that we have indexed the rental supplements. We have 

made sure that there are more affordable homes for our seniors. 

We’ve built 700 affordable units to add 1,250. More are on the 

way, Mr. Speaker. We are working with our seniors. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the stats the minister 

keeps coming up with are cold comfort. And she knows very 

well that many of the seniors are single women who are having 

to make these difficult choices. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a study by the Provincial Association of 

Transition Houses, PATHS, found that women living in smaller 

communities with little or no affordable housing were afraid 

that leaving an abusive partner might mean moving to another 

community, leaving behind their families, friends, and support 

systems. To the minister: what is this government doing to 

ensure that women don’t have to remain in abusive 

relationships because they can’t afford a roof over their heads? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, everything that we’re doing 

in this government is targeted toward making sure that everyone 

has a positive lifestyle in our province. We’ve talked about . . . 

We’ve increased the funding for housing programs in this 

province by 45 per cent since we took over as government. 

We’ve made sure that we partner with the federal government 

to use every dollar the federal government has to build more 

homes in our province. We’ve assisted 300 families to achieve 

home ownership. We’ve increased the income for our seniors 

who qualify for social housing. And, Mr. Speaker, in the last 

two years we’ve spent $2 million in Habitat for Humanity to 

create 40 new home ownerships. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s more things to be doing in this province. 

And one of the things that we have to make sure we do is 

ensure that women have an opportunity for working. And that’s 

one of the issues that we’re dealing with, with Advanced 

Education, is making sure that women have an opportunity to 

increase their education and therefore get a job, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, people just are not buying 

the minister’s rhetoric. The deepening housing crisis isn’t just 

affecting low-income families or people living in poverty. 

 

A mother named Krista told us about the impact of soaring rents 

on her middle-income family, and I’d like to quote from that 

letter: “Today we paid an extra $300 more on our rent for 

October 1st. That’s $300 that should have went to purchasing 

snowsuits, boots for our three children, or could’ve been 

saved.” She writes, “I’m asking that government step up and set 

a rate control on rent increases immediately. The government 

brags all it has done for Saskatchewan, but all we need to do is 

peel back a layer to see the destruction.” 

 

To the minister: will her government listen to the call of parents 

like Krista and institute some form of rent control? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I know that this is an issue. 

I actually had a meeting with some people this morning about 

rent controls and we discussed it. We know that rent control is 

not the answer to her question. But the answer is making sure 

that we have more affordable housing so that people have 

opportunities. 

 

I’ve had meetings with the Home Builders Association, with the 

Saskatchewan rental housing association. They’ve all expressed 

concerns about things like rent controls. Manitoba tried it. It 

does not work. We know that we built new housing units in 

Saskatoon, and there’s a significant increase in the vacancy 

rates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve had an opportunity to talk to other people 

about what happens when you have rent controls. We know that 

rent controls produce excess demand which further reduces the 

stock of rental housing. Rental controlled housings tend to 

come off the market and stay off the market forever. Renters 

don’t move. Rent controls create closed communities. Rent 

controls provide incentives for landlords to neglect property and 

tenants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there really isn’t a simple answer to this, except 

that we have to have people involved in the economy so we can 

build homes. We cannot have rent controls at the bottom for 

housing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 



6174 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2010 

Child Care 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, as the cost of living has 

skyrocketed, young Saskatchewan families have found it 

increasingly difficult to find quality, affordable child care 

spaces. At the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] alone, the 

two child care facilities each have a wait-list of 400 families. To 

the minister: what is the Sask Party government doing now to 

address this desperate need for child care spaces at the 

University of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for the 

opportunity to speak about some of the legacy from the NDP, 

Mr. Speaker. What we’re pleased to talk about, Mr. Speaker, is 

that child care spaces on campuses across this province have 

increased by more than 40 per cent in just three years. Mr. 

Speaker, we know that. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we’ve also undertaken some 

significant work on student housing because there’s a close 

connection. Mr. Speaker, that’s why we have new student 

housing in La Ronge, in Meadow Lake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have, Mr. Speaker, new student housing 

in Prince Albert. We also have new student housing in 

Saskatchewan, in Saskatoon. We know that this is closely 

connected, Mr. Speaker, and that is proximity to campus offers 

families better opportunities to access child care, Mr. Speaker. 

We know that from speaking to young people. Student housing 

has increased by more than 3,000 per cent. As far as actual child 

care, Mr. Speaker, it’s gone up by more than 40 per cent in 

three years. 

 

Is there more to do, Mr. Speaker? There certainly is, but that’s 

after years of neglect by the NDP. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government has 

been in power for three years and has had ample time to act. Yet 

their inaction has meant that wait times have grown longer and 

longer for child care spaces. But it’s not just the waiting that’s 

the problem. For families lucky enough to get a spot, the cost 

per child can be up to $800 per month. When you combine that 

expense with higher tuition, higher rent, it is entirely 

unaffordable for most students. To the minister: when will the 

Sask Party government increase the number of child care spaces 

on campus? And when will they ensure those spaces are 

actually affordable? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we are working with the 

campus to find an appropriate spot for child care spaces. But in 

the meantime, while that is being prepared, Mr. Speaker, we are 

making child care spaces all across our entire province. We 

have increased the child care spaces in this province by well 

over 30 per cent because of the neglect by the former 

government. 

You know what? It was the former member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow said . . . When she was bragging about the NDP’s 

’07-08 budget, do you know what she had to say, Mr. Speaker? 

She said that a 5.7 per cent increase in child care spaces was a 

very good increase. Well, Mr. Speaker, if she thinks 5.7 per 

cent is a very good increase, she must think that over 30 per 

cent is amazing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that the hundreds of 

families on the wait-list at the U of S are frustrated by the Sask 

Party’s willingness to just sit and wait for solutions down the 

road. You just heard it from the minister. It’s all fine and well if 

permanent child care spaces are provided in future 

developments, but they won’t likely be available for at least five 

years. The need is far more urgent than that. 

 

To the minister: given the current wait-list of up to 800 families 

at the U of S, will she work with partners to ensure affordable 

spaces are available in temporary facilities until permanent 

facilities are developed years down the road? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said in the 

previous answer, we are expanding in spaces in a number of 

places around the entire province including the city of 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. The university is looking at an 

appropriate space. They are working with the people on campus 

to see what that space may be, and hopefully they’ll have a 

proposal in the near future. And we’ll look at it when that 

proposal is prepared. 

 

In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, we have expanded spaces in 

Saskatoon, in other places across the entire city. Mr. Speaker, 

we inherited a government that grossly neglected this particular 

file. We are trying to do a catch-up. And we have added, each 

and every year, significant number of spaces until we have well 

over a 30 per cent increase. Mr. Speaker, it can’t all be done in 

one year, but we are definitely advancing far greater than was 

ever done before. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Again, Mr. Speaker, with up to 800 families 

waiting for child care at the U of S, we can’t afford to delay the 

solutions. One option for immediate child care spaces is 

locating modular classrooms at Brunskill School, close to the 

University of Saskatchewan campus. To the minister: will she 

or he commit today to work with partners to explore the options 

of modular classrooms at Brunskill School, and will they ensure 

that the necessary funding is in place? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is yes; we’ll 

be working with partners. Yes, we will explore possibilities. 

There are other places where we’re using portable classrooms 

for child care spaces. We will look at this, Mr. Speaker. The 

answer is absolutely yes. We have expanded a great deal over 



November 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6175 

the last three years. 

 

We’re going to continue to expand child care spaces in our 

province, unlike the NDP. What did they do in 1996? They 

decreased spaces by 46. What did they do in 1999? They 

decreased spaces by 182. What did they do in the year 2000? 

They decreased spaces by 17. Mr. Speaker, they let that file 

grossly fall behind. And now that we are trying to aggressively 

catch up, we have the member from Walsh Acres constantly 

saying, what are you going to do, Donna? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what we’re going to do is continue to stay 

on task. We’re going to continue to add spaces. We’re going to 

continue to work with partners, and we’re going to continue to 

try to address the gross neglect of the previous government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, in 1996 . . . a good year to 

graduate from high school because that was the year I graduated 

from Marion Graham Collegiate. For a Sask Party government 

that claims it is so focused on looking forward, they sure like to 

look backwards, Mr. Speaker, to make up for excuses for their 

own inaction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister . . . We know that 

there are desperate needs at SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology], at the U of R [University of 

Regina], at the U of S. Will the minister admit that she is 

content with waiting for many years down the road instead of 

taking immediate action and addressing the problem? 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the largest decrease 

under the NDP government was in 1999. I wonder if the 

member opposite was still in school then too or the year 2000 

perhaps. 

 

But we committed to this in our Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re going to continue to aggressively expand child care 

spaces across our province. We will be working with partners. 

We’ll be working with post-secondary institutions. We’ll be 

working with school divisions. We’re going to work with the 

partners within the communities, and we’re going to continue to 

expand child care spaces as money is available and as we can 

get the partners that have the space that’s appropriate, Mr. 

Speaker. We will continue to stay on task. We’ve increased 

spaces by over 30 per cent in three years, which is far more than 

the previous government did over a decade. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask the House to come to 

order so we can move to presenting reports. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Private Bills 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Private Bills to report private Bill No. 

905, The Sisters of the Presentation Act, 2010 without 

amendment and to present its ninth report. I move: 

 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Bills be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of Private 

Bills: 

 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on Private 

Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 

Melfort. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

905, The Sisters of the Presentation Act, 2010 and that the Bill 

be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Melfort has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 905, The Sisters of the Presentation Act, 2010 and that the 

Bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 905 — The Sisters of the Presentation Act, 2010 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 

Melfort that Bill No. 905, The Sisters of the Presentation Act, 

2010 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 



6176 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2010 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

to report Bill No. 152, The Commissioners for Oaths 

Amendment Act, 2010 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

this Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

152, The Commissioners for Oaths Amendment Act, 2010 

without amendment and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 152 — The Commissioners for Oaths 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 152, The Commissioners for Oaths Amendment 

Act, 2010 without amendment be passed, now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I have two items I 

would like to lay on the Table requested by the Assembly last 

spring. On May the 19th, 2010, the Assembly ordered an 

inquiry in accordance with section 32 of The Members’ Conflict 

of Interest Act by the Conflict of Interest Commissioner 

regarding the conduct of Serge LeClerc, Saskatoon Northwest. 

Pursuant to subsection 33(5) of The Members’ Conflict of 

Interest Act, I table the report ordered by the Assembly. 

 

As well on May the 13th, 2010, the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview made a request of the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner for an opinion pursuant to section 29 with 

respect to another member’s use of that member’s allowances, 

Serge LeClerc, Saskatoon Northwest. Pursuant to subsection 30 

and 5 of The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act, I table that 

report as well. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

question 375 through 411. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers to question 375 through 411 are 

tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 156 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 156 — The 

Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to speak to Bill No. 156, a Bill that the government 

intends to use to repeal The Freehold Oil and Gas Production 

Tax Act and replace it with The Freehold Oil and Gas 

Production Tax Act, 2010. This legislation is being amended 

along with other companion legislation we might be debating as 

well this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister’s stated motivations in the second reading speech 

as to the reasons for this legislation was as a deliverable — I 

think it was put — out of the, what the government calls the 

New West Partnership. 

 

And one of the motivations, at least as far as the minister was 

concerned, for this legislation, not the only motivation he 

mentioned, was to flatten out — maybe that’s the wrong term, 

but — to have regulations across the so-called New West 

Partnership that are equivalent, I suppose, so that business, and 

particularly oil and gas business in this particular case working 



November 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6177 

in either British Columbia or Alberta or Saskatchewan in which 

there are gas industries in all three of those provinces and 

substantial oil industries in two of them, Alberta and 

Saskatchewan, would expect to see the same regulatory regime 

in place across the far western provinces of Canada. 

 

The minister also states that the ministry has taken the 

opportunity when changing the legislation to ensure that the 

proposed new Act is better organized and easier to follow, 

which is always welcomed by everyone in society with the 

possible exception of corporate lawyers who, as long as they 

can follow it, I don’t think are concerned about whether the 

layperson can or not in some cases, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Consistency to the way taxes are being administered. And I’d 

be looking forward to any further information the government 

could provide as to any inconsistencies that were in place, in the 

view of the government. Efficiencies in the taxation system. 

And again if the government could be a bit more forthcoming, 

perhaps when we reach committee with this Bill, on the 

perceived inefficiencies of the current system, I think that 

would be useful for the public to know. And allowing for more 

timely payment of the industry’s payment of taxes, which I 

think if that is indeed the case, if that is indeed what happens, 

will benefit the people of Saskatchewan, the owners of the oil 

and gas. 

 

Towards that particular end, the minister proposes that in this 

Bill the specific due date for paying freehold production taxes 

will be removed from the Act and added to regulation-making 

power. So instead of being set out in legislation passed by this 

Assembly, it would be set out in legislation determined by 

cabinet. That, Mr. Speaker, may not be that unusual from 

what’s done in other energy and resources statutes. And if this 

is truly just an anachronism, that in itself would probably not 

cause the opposition any difficulty. 

 

The Act does change or purports to change, according to the 

minister’s comments, the taxation scheme around crude oil 

recovered from waste processing. The Bill purports to clarify 

audit provisions and make them similar to not only regulations 

in other provinces, Mr. Speaker, but also regulations within The 

Revenue and Financial Services Act — governs the collection of 

taxes overall by the Ministry of Finance. 

 

The opposition requires time to consult with those in industry to 

see whether or not these changes are being made are actually 

ones that we need to see made. In many cases, there are 

significant changes that the industry would like to see. Have 

these changes that the industry would bring forward to 

government, are they all reflected here? Have some been 

rejected by the government, or does the Bill that comes from a 

review of the current legislation encompass in large part what 

the industry would like to see in this particular area, Mr. 

Speaker? The opposition doesn’t know that yet and would 

certainly like to determine whether or not that is the case before 

this Bill moved on to committee for specific questions directed 

at the minister. 

 

In an industry as widely held as the oil industry is in 

Saskatchewan — and it might be different in a couple of other 

resource industries which only have two or three significant 

players; that’s not the case with oil and that’s not the case with 

gas to the same extent as it might be true with potash or 

uranium — there may very well be a difference of opinion even 

within the industry itself as to what would be the appropriate 

changes if any changes are appropriate. Rarely would one find a 

unanimous opinion, and the opposition wouldn’t necessarily say 

legislation shouldn’t proceed without a unanimous opinion. 

 

But again it does cry out for consultation on the part of 

members of the Assembly. I don’t expect government members 

to necessarily be wanting to do that. Mr. Speaker, they have 

been briefed by the minister. But the members of the opposition 

in their role will want to ensure that there’s certainly no 

controversy within the industry in respect to the proposed Bill. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, contrary to the spin that one hears 

from the Sask Party government, we’re actually seeing a 

reduction in oil production in the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker, a reduction in gas production in the province of 

Saskatchewan from 2007. We also have a reduction in the 

number of total wells being drilled each year from 2007. 

 

So the trend line is not good for exploration in the oil and gas 

industry, Mr. Speaker. It has been on a decline since the Sask 

Party took power. If it was on the ascent, I’m sure the 

Saskatchewan Party government would take credit for the 

increase in production and increase in number of wells being 

drilled. In all fairness then, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party 

government has to take responsibility for the decline that’s 

actually taken place. 

 

It becomes important, when there is a decline in exploration and 

a decline in production, to ask the question as to why there is 

such a decrease. Because from 2007 the reality is, oil 

production was greater than it is today. And the reality is that in 

2007 gas production was greater than it is today. And in 2007 

more wells were being drilled than they are in this year. 

 

So why is this the case, Mr. Speaker? Can it be in part attributed 

to issues that are being altered or changed in this legislation? 

Perhaps not, Mr. Speaker. The legislation that is being 

amended, or repealed and amended in this particular case, has 

been in place for a while. What has changed is the government, 

Mr. Speaker. The government has changed, and the decline has 

taken place. But that’s not to say that the government can’t 

make it worse, Mr. Speaker. They certainly can make it worse. 

It can always be worse. 

 

And the question that we have of a fairly complex Bill is, will 

this Bill assist in halting the decline in production and 

exploration that has taken place since this government came to 

power? Or will this Bill only make the situation worse or have 

no change, cause no effect on the decline of oil exploration, oil 

and gas production in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

What we need to see is perhaps this Bill, Mr. Speaker. That 

question is still unanswered for us. But what we need to see 

from this government is some honesty, some forthrightness 

about the situation as it currently exists. And it’s a situation that 

I don’t think any government could be proud of, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you. 

 

[14:45] 

 



6178 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2010 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the minister of Natural Resources that Bill 156, The 

Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act, 2010 now be read a 

second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Agreed. Second reading of this Bill. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — He didn’t adjourn debate. I didn’t see 

him. I waited. We’ve already started. Second reading of this 

Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Clerk: — Second reading of this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill 156, The Freehold 

Oil and Gas Production Tax Act, 2010 be referred to the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 157 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 157 — The Oil and 

Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak on 

Bill 157, An Act to amend The Oil and Gas Conservation Act, 

henceforth known as The Oil and Gas Conservation 

Amendment Act, 2010. This legislation is being done in concert 

with the amendments to the companion legislation, The 

Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act of 2010. 

 

The ministry, according to the minister, is modernizing its 

business and regulatory systems targeted at the energy and 

resource industries. We are doing so not just by what we are 

doing in this Act but in the other one as well, Mr. Speaker. The 

government wants to be able to interact with the industry in a 

more flexible way. While much of the ministry’s efforts are 

focused on oil and gas process and data system redevelopment, 

we require amendments to The Oil and Gas Conservation Act to 

provide the ministry with the legal authority to implement 

initiatives that come out of the so-called New West Partnership, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The first project, according to the minister, was announced 

November of last year after Saskatchewan became a partner in 

the Petroleum Registry of Alberta. And that registry’s a joint 

government and industry alliance that enables Canadian 

upstream oil and gas producers to carry out their complex 

business and regulatory activities in an efficient and seamless 

manner, according to the ministry, Mr. Speaker. Becoming a 

registry partner was one of the government’s early deliverables 

of the so-called New West Partnership. 

 

This is also a complex Bill, Mr. Speaker, with implications on a 

number of levels for both the industry and for industry players. 

It’ll take some time to review and consult with the various 

stakeholders across the province and the associations’ response 

to see whether or not they truly agree with the changes being 

made and if they help the industry to move forward. 

 

It is important, as I said in my previous remarks on the previous 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, to see the industry move forward because 

today we see a reduction in oil production from 2007, the same 

time as a change in government. We see a reduction in gas 

production from 2007 at a time of the change of government. 

And we actually see a reduction in the amount of wells being 

drilled in our province from 2007. 

 

We saw a general reduction or contraction of the economy last 

year in the range of 3.9 per cent, after being adjusted, when the 

final numbers came in. We saw a situation where the Sask 

Trends said that Saskatchewan really has had no economic 

growth since the change of government. The improvements in 

2008 were really as a result of the inflationary cost of items that 

consumers had to pay, and in fact since then we’ve seen a 

contraction in the economy. 

 

In the minister’s second reading speech, he said some of the 

changes are a result of the newest partnership, about moving 

our rules to those of Alberta, and moving our regulations to be 

compatible and comparable to those of Alberta. And that in 

itself may not be a negative, Mr. Speaker, but it does require 

some in-depth studying of the issues and talking to industry to 

make sure they are in favour of moving to the Alberta rules and 

regulations instead of a partnership . . . instead of having 

Alberta, say, move to ours. 

 

Any time that you’re moving to a consolidation or 

amalgamation of rules in an industry, whether they be with 

Alberta and Saskatchewan or with any other jurisdiction, it’s 

important to understand the impact because the impact can be 

both negative and positive. And we need to fully understand the 

impact on our province, on our producers, and the net result that 

comes about of those changes to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

With the complexity of this legislation, the breadth and depth of 

changes, it’s going to take us some time to do the required 

consultations, meetings with individuals and associations, and 

to be perfectly clear. Mr. Speaker, with that, I wish to adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 157, The Oil 

and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 



November 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6179 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 158 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert that Bill No. 158 — The 

Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to speak 

on this amendment to The Correctional Services Act. This 

particular amendment includes a few things, but the main focus 

relates to the communication system used within the 

correctional facilities in the province and the enhancement, if 

we can call it that, to allow for monitoring of all calls made by 

inmates. 

 

Now the stated reason for this — and I think a reason that we in 

the opposition accept — is to deal with the gang activity and the 

connections that some people continue while they are in our 

correctional system. They maintain contacts, and they maintain 

their involvement in criminal activity through the use of 

communication system that’s available in the jails. 

 

So the purpose, as stated by the minister, is that this new system 

will allow for better monitoring of the calls in the system itself. 

And it’ll go everything from recording the calls, intercepting 

the calls, monitoring them, censoring them, restricting them, 

and prohibiting, or even blocking any communication at all. So 

those are the tools that are there in this particular system. 

 

But clearly there are some positive reasons for doing this, but 

there are also many questions about what the effect of this is. 

And they arise in a whole number of areas that relate to both the 

person who is in the correctional centre and their family, their 

lawyer, others who will have contact with them. And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I think that there are quite a number of 

questions that will have to be asked as we look at this particular 

Bill and try to understand all of the implications of it. 

 

I also would not be surprised at all that these particular 

provisions will be the subject of litigation as the years move 

forward, whether it’s related to the content of the calls or one of 

these various activities that are taking place. 

 

Now one of the first questions that arises is, who actually will 

do the monitoring? I’m not sure if there will be extra staff hired 

within the correctional system to be monitoring all of the calls 

or if there will be some electronic system to do that. But there 

are a number of questions around how the process will actually 

take place. And so we’ll be interested in getting some answers 

to that. We’ll also be asking questions of some of the people 

that work within the system as to what kinds of review have 

taken place. 

 

We also understand that the authorization in this Act that’s 

being . . . the authorization that’s being asked for in this Act 

relates to getting a new telephone system from some other 

place. I think the place that I have heard is that we’re bringing 

in one from the state of Texas. We’d be quite interested in 

understanding what all of . . . the specifications of this and why 

a system like that would be obtained. We know that the state of 

Texas has some fairly extensive correctional systems and 

correctional services, so it’s very possible that they do have this 

kind of state-of-the-art monitoring and blocking kind of system. 

But I think it begs the question about whether this kind of a 

system is coming from a Saskatchewan supplier — our own 

Crown corporation — or whether it’s coming through some 

other system. So there are some questions there as to exactly 

what the system is. 

 

There’s also the question about whether people who are talking 

with a person in the correctional centre will know that their 

calls are being recorded or monitored and what kinds of 

notification will be given to family members or businesses or 

whoever else might be dealing with a person over the telephone. 

And so I think that we’ll be looking forward to getting better 

information about how every . . . you know, people will be 

notified of the fact that their calls are being monitored. 

 

Another aspect of this relates to the ability of people in the 

correctional system to have contact with their lawyers and with 

getting appropriate legal advice. We’ve received information to 

say that there will be a method of whereby that kind of a call 

will not be monitored in the same way. But it then begs the 

question: well who makes that decision as to when is a call a 

call with a lawyer or a legal advisor and when is it a call with a 

family member or some other person? So we need to end up 

having some better understanding of how that works. Because 

practically the whole system may end up being ruled as being 

flawed if there’s some problem as it relates to the rights of 

individuals for privacy, and especially the rights, the 

constitutional rights, of the inmates to get independent, legal 

advice. So there are some very interesting questions as it relates 

to that. 

 

Now the other questions that relate to this is, how long will this 

information be stored? Where will it be stored? Who will have 

access to it? Is it the kind of thing that it ends up that there will 

be full telephone records on each individual inmate, that they’re 

kept for a long time? And there may be some reasons for doing 

that, but very clearly that needs to be defined in a direct way 

within the legislation. Now what I see in this particular 

legislation is that all of these kinds of technical rules or the 

actually how it’s done are going to be all dealt with in the 

regulations. 

 

So here in this legislature, we will not have very much of a 

chance to actually see how this actually operates. And that 

raises concern on a whole number of levels because when you 

take away people’s rights — whether it’s the inmate’s rights or 

their family members or the rights around independent legal 

advice — that must be done in a very clear way that the whole 

of society understands. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that there are some questions 

in how this has been worded so far that will have to be 

answered as we move forward. And it may be that some of 

those rules will have to be moved from any kind of regulatory 

law right into the Act so that we know clearly what the 

protections are. 



6180 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2010 

Any time that you end up taking away a little piece of the rights 

of a person, whether they’re in jail or not, you’re chipping away 

at the kinds of protections that we have in our society under our 

constitution. And that’s the time for legislators, whether you’re 

in government or in opposition, to start asking questions, 

making sure that however those rights are taken away, you do it 

in a clearly justified and sustainable way. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are enough questions around this 

particular legislation, as it relates to that, that means that we’re 

going to have more time needed to speak to this. But also we’re 

going to need time when we get into committee to have the 

appropriate information provided by the minister and by the 

staff within the department. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with 

those comments, I will adjourn the debate on this particular 

Bill. 

 

[15:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 158, The Correctional 

Services Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 144 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 144 — The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to say that I am pleased to enter the debate on The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, Bill 144. And as I understand the 

legislation and also the explanatory notes, that this piece of 

legislation is basically being entered into the legislature because 

an outstanding court case, and the government is concerned that 

it’ll be liable for up to $1 million or more in terms of a potential 

legal action. And so the government has decided to introduce 

amendments to the legislation in order to save themselves from 

this court case. 

 

I think what I find most troubling about the legislation is that 

this legislation is being introduced into this Assembly 

retroactively, which means that, Mr. Speaker, any 

environmental handling charges paid after April 1st, 1998 won’t 

be recoverable by a court action that’s already been launched. 

And so what this legislation does is stops in its tracks a court 

action that has been making its way through the courts and 

prevents those people who are presently pursuing the lawsuit 

from recovering over $1 million. And that is troublesome. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that when you look at the contents of 

the Bill, other than the retroactivity, that I certainly don’t have 

difficulty with this legislation. We know that the existing 

legislation allows the government to increase or decrease 

environmental handling charges, and that there are refundable 

deposits. Now we know that this piece of legislation has been in 

existence since, I believe, 1973. And what the Bill does is it 

lays out a new schedule of environmental handling charges for 

a variety of containers, and it takes away the government’s 

ability to set environmental handling charges in regulation or 

outside of the legislation. It does allow the government, 

however, to continue to set the refundable deposit by cabinet 

order. 

 

Now I know why the government’s doing this. In the 1990s, the 

Supreme Court of Canada ruled that fees charged from 

government had to represent the actual cost of delivering that 

service. And obviously someone — and I’m not sure who’s 

pursuing the lawsuit but someone — has determined that 

environmental fees outstripped the actual cost of the handling of 

these particular containers and so the government’s in a position 

where it may have to pay out more than $1 million. 

 

I think it’s always a very serious matter and one that we 

shouldn’t take lightly, to introduce retroactive legislation. I can 

assure the public and the House that it was something that I 

certainly didn’t support when we were in government. The 

reality is that we have legislation. People make decisions to 

pursue lawsuits based upon existing legislation, and what really 

the government’s doing is putting in place a principle that if 

they don’t like an outcome that may occur, they can simply 

introduce retroactive legislation to prevent that outcome. 

 

We realize that there may be a legitimate goal here in that we 

want to stop any kind of future action, but we need to consider 

this very carefully, Mr. Speaker, because the government is 

setting itself a very significant precedent. And the significant 

precedent is that they are retroactively having this Bill go back 

to 1998, and that’s — by the time this legislation is passed — 

that’ll be a 13-year period. And a lot of water, as we know, goes 

under the bridge in a 13-year period. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to want to think about 

this legislation. We’re going to want to determine exactly what 

is going to happen if this legislation is passed retroactively and 

what are the consequences of that. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I 

would adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 144, The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 147 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 147 — The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It gives me great pleasure to rise today to talk about Bill 147. 



November 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6181 

And for those that may be viewing this, I often do a quick 

summary of the Bill for their information. I think it’s very 

valuable that I do that because people know exactly what these 

Bills are about. And it’s always good for education of the public 

in general and certainly for folks that might have an interest in 

the Bill. 

 

And of course the Bill deals with The Public Interest Disclosure 

Act, and certainly there is . . . Saskatchewan people know that 

when you have people work for the Government of 

Saskatchewan in general, in a wide variety of careers and 

professions and jobs, they sometimes see things that aren’t 

proper and a lot of times they want to bring it forward to talk 

about how they can correct it. And sometimes they see abuse. 

Sometimes they see problems within the system. Sometimes 

they see theft, and the kind of list goes on and on and on. 

 

So what the intent of the Bill was to do, Mr. Speaker, was to 

really give some credibility to those people that are coming 

forward with some of those claims — to make sure that they’re 

not frivolous, of course, that there’s some solid ground for 

bringing forward some of those problems that other people are 

creating for the government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what the purpose of Bill 147, 

The Public Interest Disclosure Act, is. It allows people to come 

forward that see abuse throughout government services, and 

that, if they come forward, they wouldn’t have any 

repercussions on them if the information of course is correct. 

And of course you don’t want a bunch of frivolous claims as 

well. There’s certainly a good balance that one has to achieve. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that when I listen to my 

leader speak about his vision of Saskatchewan, he often spoke 

about the four pillars. And of course one of the pillars being, 

make sure that the economy is moving and that things are 

moving along on all cylinders. And he certainly has the 

experience to achieve that. 

 

The second thing of course he talks about is to have a good 

partnership between business and government, to make sure 

that people understand each other’s roles and that they respect 

each other’s roles and they help build the economy. He spoke 

about respect for the environment, which I think is really, really 

key in this day and age, given global warming, given all the 

other challenges with the environment that have been well 

documented and certainly scientifically backed by many lead 

scientists and scholars throughout the world and from many, 

many countries. 

 

And the fourth point that he raised, Mr. Speaker, is that to be an 

effective government, you also have to have good civil servants. 

And he spoke about respect for the civil service and spoke 

highly about their role. And he was quite clear, our leader was, 

that in order to achieve good government that you’d have to 

have those pillars in place. And it is really, really assuring to a 

lot of people out there that he valued the civil servants and 

certainly pointed out that in their role, in their professional role 

that they do a lot for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, travelling back and forth from my home 

community of Ile-a-la-Crosse on a pretty regular basis, I can 

attest to some of the civil servants that are out there working 

very hard and diligently and certainly professionally. As I travel 

on the roads, of course, you see some of the roads being 

plowed. You see the equipment being out there. And certainly 

in the time of snowstorms that’s something that people, a lot of 

people certainly appreciate. And they’re out there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not just about highways workers, as important 

as they are. It’s also about the ambulance service and the health 

care professionals. It’s also about the emergency response 

teams we have throughout our province. And kind of the list 

goes on in terms of how much we ought to value the civil 

servants. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we can certainly speak at great lengths 

about the value of the civil service because they have time and 

time again proven their value. And often being said around our 

table — I know it may not happen around that table over there 

— but to respect the civil servants to a point where they’re 

properly paid and that they’re certainly assured of long-term 

employment and benefits, and the list goes on. That is 

something that we think is paramount to building the new, 

brave Saskatchewan. And certainly our leader has spoken of 

that at great lengths. And those pillars, and one of the solid 

pillars that he spoke about is of course respect for the civil 

service. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, under this Bill 147, The Public Interest 

Disclosure Act, we thought that if the civil servants came along 

and saw some abuse or saw something that they ought to report 

— and again you have to make sure that it’s not frivolous — is 

that there be some protection for them. Because obviously you 

don’t want to see a government working inefficiently. You 

don’t want to see a government losing money. You don’t want 

to see a government losing any assets or valuable time from 

workers. And in this whole notion of being professional, the 

vast, vast, vast majority of people in the civil service certainly 

do a tremendous job and are very honest, hard-working, 

dedicated people. But there are times and occasions when there 

is abuse out there. 

 

And there are checks and balances. And as much as we have 

managers and different levels of management and disclosure 

and certainly financial accountability, there are opportunities 

that one could probably take advantage of. And it’s there where 

we count on our civil servants to come forward and do the right 

thing and certainly — again not being frivolous, but — 

certainly bringing forward some of the concerns or abuse that 

they may think is happening. And upon investigation, if it is 

true, then they’re certainly doing their job. 

 

And so what this Bill is intended to do, is intended . . . And we 

don’t believe it’s going to fulfill that, partly because of the 

government that is proposing it. And what they claim the Bill is 

to do is to protect some of those workers. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

would say, you know, there’s no question in my mind that the 

working people, when it comes to working people in general, 

this government has no idea what the working people need. And 

they have, on time and time and time again, slapped the 

working people down. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s two different Bills — the essential 

services Bill and certainly Bill 80. And the list goes on as to all 

the things that they have done to really go to war with the 



6182 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2010 

working people. And now when they come along and say to the 

working folks out there, the civil servants, well look we have 

this Bill that will protect you guys from coming forth with any 

claims that people are defrauding the government of assets or 

money or not doing their job. And, Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t 

trust this government for one minute when it comes to the 

protection of working people because time and time again they 

have shown and they have proven that they are at war with the 

working people. 

 

And even though this Bill is intended to help them, what I don’t 

at all buy for one second, Mr. Speaker, is the party that is 

proposing it. Because I think what they’re trying to do is have 

the people and civil servants begin to mistrust each other, begin 

to bring forward frivolous claims, begin to create division 

amongst the members of the civil service. And that’s one of the 

reasons why we’re looking at this Bill and really saying, what 

exactly are these guys up to here? And I’m talking about the 

Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And from the working class and from working people, trust is 

something that they don’t afford this government at all. So 

when it comes to The Public Interest Disclosure Act, we want 

to say to the people out there, in theory — in theory — the 

importance of protecting Saskatchewan people from sometimes 

the very small minority of civil servants, they may from time to 

time make errors. And we’re allowing people to come along 

and bring that forward without any reprisals or lawsuits or loss 

of jobs for coming forward. And if this Act is intended to do 

that in its pure form, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can certainly 

support that notion. 

 

[15:15] 

 

But again I go back to the point I raised earlier. Like this is the 

same government that said it wouldn’t bring essential services 

to the Assembly, and the moment it was elected, bang, it did 

bring through essential services. Even though there was 

assurances and words out there used prior to the election, they 

basically betrayed the trust of the many working people that 

work for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the notion of some of the 

other Bills that they have brought forward . . . And it just 

doesn’t, to me, doesn’t encourage the civil servants to come 

forward under anything that they bring when they’ve so far 

slapped them around and slapped them in the face when it came 

to making commitments before the election and doing exactly 

opposite after they’re elected. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the opposition is concerned, for an example, 

that this Bill will only protect whistle-blowers who say the law 

has been broken, but not to those who allege that policy has 

been broken. And that’s something that’s really key, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of the weakness of this Bill. 

 

As I alluded to earlier, that in its pure form, the intent and the 

message of this particular Bill is good. But, Mr. Speaker, what 

we’re seeing again is that the Sask Party has morphed that good 

intention, and it’s something that is really meant to go to war 

with the working people. And that’s something that this 

opposition, certainly our party, does not support in any way, 

shape, or form. And we’re going to make a fight of it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The other point in terms of the weakness of the Bill is that the 

minister suggested that the commissioner would be part of the 

Provincial Ombudsman office. And this is the same government 

that won’t commit to implementing recommendations of the 

Provincial Ombudsman. So how can public servants have 

confidence that an officer working out of the Office of the 

Ombudsman will have any real teeth? So they’re saying that an 

officer of the Provincial Ombudsman office could be part and 

parcel of this process. Well, Mr. Speaker, they have decapitated 

the value and the importance and certainly the effectiveness of 

the Ombudsman office. So how can appointing an officer from 

an office that they have decimated really going to have any 

effect and have any power to support those that are about to 

come forward with some of these allegations? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not a promise kept by the Sask Party 

government. They called for a public integrity commissioner, 

and after three years of firing public servants at will, you know, 

who don’t agree with them, public integrity is not really the 

goal here, Mr. Speaker. So this whole notion of this public 

integrity commissioner that was proposed and promised prior to 

the election, Mr. Speaker, once again this party has proven that 

they can say and promise anything before the election. The 

main thing was to gain power. And, Mr. Speaker, a lot of 

people of Saskatchewan saw that particular part of what they 

are about. And, Mr. Speaker, they have basically woken up to 

that fact. 

 

I want to also point out, Mr. Speaker, that when people work in 

a confined space and they work with each other over the years, 

they generally have a lot of camaraderieship and they certainly 

work together well as a team. And you know, there’s always 

people that are very, very dedicated to working for their 

ministry or for their service or for their profession. And our 

civil servants, ever since Allan Blakeney was the premier, we 

have been blessed by public servants that have served the public 

very, very well. And, Mr. Speaker, in light of that fact, we 

know that there is . . . they hold each other to a high degree of 

professionalism. They hold each other very close in terms of 

being a family, sharing a common vision, and certainly 

contributing to their professions. 

 

So in saying that, I think there is a lot of merit in saying that a 

lot of the working people, the civil servants in Saskatchewan do 

have this great, high level of integrity. And they often have this 

high level of standards that they want each other to meet. And 

there’s nothing wrong with standards, Mr. Speaker, as those 

standards certainly would reflect on the value of the public 

service to many of our Saskatchewan people. 

 

So the teammanship, the values, workmanship, the standards — 

all those go to, quite frankly, making sure the people of 

Saskatchewan ought to know that their public servants are ones 

that we hold in very, very high regard and that they serve the 

people of Saskatchewan well. 

 

So I go back to our situation as an opposition. You know, we 

want to make sure that as part of our plank in developing this 

new Saskatchewan, that working men and women are just as 

important to Saskatchewan as investment from outside of the 

province and certainly investment from within. The working 



November 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6183 

men and women that get up each and every day to provide 

services to many of our families and to ourselves and to many 

other people, that they ought to be valued just as effective and 

just as meaningful as we do with the environment. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they’re also ought to be compared to the fact that they 

need good government like everybody else. And the civil 

servants ought to be compared to that particular plank that our 

leader spoke of — of building that brave, new Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that this Bill in its spirit and 

its intent is something that the opposition would certainly look 

at supporting. But the big problem is, is who is actually 

proposing the Bill? It’s the same party that has gone to war with 

working people. It’s the same party that said they wouldn’t be 

bringing Bills forward and Acts forward before the election. 

 

And what do they do, Mr. Speaker? They do exactly the 

opposite of what they said they wouldn’t do prior to the last 

election. And workers out there know this. The union 

movement, the civil servants, and all the different health care 

unions, they all know exactly what this government has been 

doing, and memories don’t die quickly, Mr. Speaker. They 

certainly will be sending a message here fairly soon. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I tell the working people out there of their 

value of course to the people of Saskatchewan. We certainly 

support their contribution. I would, however, also warn them 

that if this Bill proceeds — and again always take into account 

that there are frivolous threats and claims in any environment 

and Saskatchewan is not immune to that — that if this Bill 

proceeds, be wary of who is actually proposing the Bill. And 

that is where we see a severe weakness. 

 

It’s almost entrusting Colonel Sanders to take care of our 

chicken farms, Mr. Speaker. You know, he may say chickens 

have rights, but the fact of the matter is we know what his plans 

are for those chickens.  

 

And it’s much the same that I see from the Saskatchewan Party, 

that when it comes to working people — when working people 

out there are looking to the Sask Party for protection, for any, 

any protection for the working people — not for one second, 

not for one second, Mr. Speaker, do they actually believe this 

government is going to do anything to help protect working 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I worry about any Bills that this party brings 

forward, including Bill 147. And the reason why I worry about 

it coming forward is again the people that are bringing it 

forward have no trust whatsoever that’s being afforded to them, 

especially by the working people, working men and women of 

this great province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I would encourage folks to really watch how Bill 147 

proceeds. I would encourage the union movements, I would 

encourage the shop stewards and all the people out there that 

represent the civil servants to really thoroughly read the Bill 

through because there are some provisions and areas in the Bill 

that do provide a lot of concern to us as the opposition. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in trying to recognize the value of the civil 

servants, this opposition, our leader in this particular party, is 

going to seek the advice and seek the participation of many of 

the working men and women throughout our province on what 

is the problem with Bill 147. And, Mr. Speaker, I would 

encourage them to contact their MLA and certainly contact our 

office to bring forward any kind of glaring challenges that this 

Bill would have, besides the ones that we’ve identified, and to 

also work with their union colleagues because, Mr. Speaker, 

what I think this Bill is intended to do is to not . . . is not foster 

a working relationship between workers. And that’s always a 

worry. 

 

So what I think the Sask Party’s trying to do in plain terms, in 

plain language, Mr. Speaker, is to have the people out of work 

and the civil servants begin bickering and to begin fighting each 

other and devalue their service and certainly discredit their 

union movement. And, Mr. Speaker, I think this Bill, because 

it’s not intended to do anything else but create that confusion 

and that conflict within the workplace, is actually a disservice to 

all people of Saskatchewan and to all those people that seek 

services from our civil servants. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would again point out to folks out there that 

if they see any particular issue that they want to raise in relation 

to Bill 147, the public disclosure . . . The Public Interest 

Disclosure Act, that they’re only a phone call away. 

 

And I would again stress the point that this party is proposing 

this particular Bill. And any Bill that that party proposes that 

affects the labour movement, that affects the working men and 

women in this province, then there’s immediately a huge wall 

of mistrust that is built. And there’s a huge feeling of betrayal 

by this, by the working men and women, when it comes to this 

particular party. And, Mr. Speaker, Bill 80, Bill 5 and 6, the 

essential services Bill, and all the different Bills they’ve 

brought forward is evidence enough that the Saskatchewan 

Party government does not have the interests of the working 

people at heart. 

 

And Bill 147, again we talk about the atmosphere that many 

civil servants work under — by and far it’s professional; they’re 

dedicated. But, Mr. Speaker, there’s no way that this opposition 

and many, many other working men and women will ever trust 

that government to bring forward any Bills without us 

thoroughly looking at it, without us looking at all the angles, 

without us ensuring that there isn’t some other backdoor 

process or ulterior motives that that party has. Because we 

know there are. We just have to track them down. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the reasons why we need to 

take as much time as we can to look at this Bill and to make 

sure it doesn’t harm the people that help us — and that’s the 

working men and women of this great province. So on that note, 

Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate on Bill 147. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 147, The Public Interest 

Disclosure Act. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 



6184 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2010 

Bill No. 149 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 149 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to make a 

few comments on Bill 149, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 

2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened carefully to the Minister of Finance 

propose The Income Tax Amendment Act. And, Mr. Speaker, at 

this time the . . . Mr. Speaker, what the minister had to say was 

the . . . laid out some ground rules under which this Act would 

operate. And those were that the corporation must process in 

Saskatchewan or extract it from a mineral resource located in 

Canada, but not in Saskatchewan, to the prime metal stage. And 

in addition, Mr. Speaker, that the corporation must have a 

minimum capital investment in Saskatchewan of $125 million. 

The minister also went on to say that it must also employ at 

least 75 full-time employees in Saskatchewan and must allocate 

at least 90 per cent of its taxable income to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the face of that, basically we see that this Bill 

implements a five-year tax holding for mining corporations who 

make investments of 125 million and maintaining 75 full-time 

employees. Now we could support that, Mr. Speaker. The issues 

around this obviously would be when those 75 employees 

would be in place. Would that be in the construction phase, Mr. 

Speaker? Would that be in the actual operation? So some 

concerns there, Mr. Speaker. And I think one of the other things 

that we have that we need to look at here is, I think we all 

support, whether it be head office jobs coming here — actual 

jobs, on-site jobs — to Saskatchewan, that is good for all of us 

here in Saskatchewan to see a growing province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the debate we had around the Potash 

Corporation, the issue of what will be done or what won’t be 

done and whether we can hold or trust this government to bring 

forward or to make sure that these concerns are met, that the 

investments are there, that the maintaining of the 75 full-time 

jobs . . . Again there is a lot of detail here in terms of how we 

will determine 75 full-time jobs in terms of definitions and how 

The Income Tax Act will look at those. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So in general I would say that this measure would be supported 

by the opposition, but again how our experience here has not 

necessarily been the best. And one of the questions that we have 

is, who was driving the changes? What exactly were their . . . 

Many people speculated where it would come from. I think the 

Minister of Finance had yelled out one time that it was going to 

be the Northwest Territories, but that was not exactly the kind 

of details we would be looking for. We’d be looking for what 

. . . if there was some investment that they are considering, what 

this would mean for Saskatchewan. 

 

Again it’ll be interesting to see, you know, what commitments 

mining companies make in exchange for this tax holiday and, 

again, how successful the government will be in making sure 

that they keep their commitments. 

 

Again as we witnessed earlier in question period, we have 

issues around deals that are being made in building long-term 

care facilities in this province. And it doesn’t seem to worry the 

Minister of Health or the Minister of Finance very much as to 

how these things are tendered or what is done, which casts a 

dark, a dark and long shadow over many investments and the 

way people do business in Saskatchewan. And we hope that this 

is not what they bring to the table here. 

 

However on this side, we are not very hopeful after the number 

of years that we have watched these folks operate. And in terms 

of what they are doing, that every time things are put down that 

there is an attempt to come up with what they call, perhaps, 

some unique solutions. Those solutions have not exactly been 

unique. Nor, Mr. Speaker, have I seen that they’ve been really 

positive for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now again they talk about that there would be . . . There are 

pledges here in the initial statements by the Minister of Finance, 

pledges of full-time jobs and new investments. And again as I 

sit here and listen to the pledges that have been made, those 

pledges sometimes ring very hollow, Mr. Speaker. They ring 

very hollow in the sense that they are not met with a 

commitment. 

 

And there’s nothing in here that tells us what will happen or 

what the definitions of some of these things will be, like the 75 

jobs that I initially mentioned. What will that mean — 75 

full-time employees — what will that count as? Would we be 

looking at work? Is this contracted work? Is it work of that 

company? How will exactly these jobs and the full-time 

definitions — which we don’t see here — be counted? How 

will they be interpreted? What’ll be the interpretations here? 

 

What does it do further? What does it do for investment? 

Because there’s nothing here about who actually is driving the 

process, who actually thinks this is of benefit. It’s a suggestion 

of how we can increase investment. 

 

Where is the studies? Where is the materials that we should be 

looking at? And obviously we’ll have a lot of questions around 

this Bill. But where’s the material that we should be looking at 

to say to us that in fact what are the commitments of the mining 

companies? What are the commitments, and how successful 

will the government be holding them to commitments? And will 

this, as they say, increase investment? 

 

The Minister of Enterprise had put out a press release at this 

same time outlining this and was talking about that this would 

change, will significantly enhance the attractiveness of refining 

important minerals in our province. We hope to attract quality, 

high-paying jobs to Saskatchewan. And now, Mr. Speaker, the 

minister here is talking about, we hope to attract quality, 

high-paying jobs to Saskatchewan. Now I would hope that there 

would be a little bit more planning than sitting around and 

hoping that there would be high-paying jobs here in order for 

legislation to come. 

 

Or perhaps this is one time that again somebody has sat in the 



November 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6185 

backrooms and come up with some legislation for lack of 

anything better to do or with any real plan in mind. So our 

questions here have been . . . Other than a few unsolicited, I 

would say, unsolicited comments from the Minister of Finance 

that this was in fact, that this was . . . somehow the Northwest 

Territories were going to do this, there are no details here in 

terms of what is happening, how this works, whether it will in 

fact attract investment to Saskatchewan. We have a number of 

companies that are looking in the areas of potash for investing 

in Saskatchewan in new mines. In fact it was the former NDP 

government who put in a whole tax regime around the potash 

that allowed the companies to expand. 

 

And we have a lot of, out there, Mr. Speaker, full-time jobs as a 

result of that expansion in the potash industry. And people are 

working. The mines are expanding. There are hundreds of jobs 

at each of those. And in fact, members opposite agreed with 

those changes because they haven’t really changed any of them. 

They’ve left all those things there. And now people are 

working, working in each of the potash mines and working on 

the expansions. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, I was at the mining association and had one 

of the managers come up to me and say . . . and Mr. Cline was 

standing there, and these came up to him and gave him direct 

credit. He said you’re the one that did this, and we’ll never 

forget that, that you were the one that put in these tax changes 

in to allow us to expand in the potash mines in Saskatchewan. 

 

And then it’s much like 2007, when they get elected. And then 

they think the world has changed, Mr. Speaker, the world has 

changed for them, and that they are the ones that created this, 

where we hear over and over again, many numbers of times, 

that it was in fact that we were at high record levels in 2007. 

And things ever since then, the economic activity, has trended 

downwards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So in all of this, again it will be interesting to see, I guess, as we 

talk about this whether — much as in the potash industry — 

whether the companies will pick up on this and we will have the 

investments that we’re talking about here. 

 

I would think that we would be thinking that there is some 

specific projects that we have that . . . Who are the people that 

were talked to? Who are the stakeholders in this? Who has 

come to ask for this? Is this something that we are negotiating 

with companies? Do we actually necessarily even have to do 

this to attract people? Perhaps we do. These are questions that 

we’ll be looking at asking, that we’re asking, that I will be 

asking, many of my colleagues will be asking here on this. 

 

And again this huge exchange for a tax holiday and whether this 

will . . . and how successful this government will be in keeping 

these commitments which we see, truly, that there is a bit of a 

lack of action on other files when it comes to this sort of thing. 

 

So again the points that I make are overall that we would be 

supportive of this type of measure if it’s bringing in the jobs, if 

it’s doing the things that the . . . if things are turning out as has 

been painted here. But a lot of times, we’ve had a rosy picture 

painted. Perhaps one of the times was the budget that we’ve had 

and the overestimation in potash revenues. We’ve had many 

rosy pictures painted only to find out, Mr. Speaker, that in fact 

that has not been the case. And so a lot of bad planning. 

 

And that’s what makes us a little concerned when we see this 

brought forward and we simply hear members opposite yelling 

out, well this is where it’s from. We would like to see the 

details. We would like to see some thought in here, much as we 

did around the potash issue that I spoke of, the taxation, so that 

we see directly all those jobs that are coming, that are coming 

in, in the potash industry when these mines are expanding. 

 

Is this something that will happen here, or is this just another 

pipe dream thought up from people who perhaps don’t have 

anything better to do and are justifying their existence? 

 

So we support ideas. It enhances investment in Saskatchewan, 

enhances employment in Saskatchewan. We would hope that 

the Minister of Enterprise . . . that these are quality and 

attractive jobs in Saskatchewan. And we would hope actually 

there’d be more than 75. We would hope that we wouldn’t be 

trying to scramble to get 75 jobs. We would hope that it would 

be twice that number and in fact, with all the building of the 

facilities, that we would see that would need to be built, that 

that would in fact also create more work in the initial stages and 

then that we’d maintain no less than 75. 

 

And again 75 full-time employees does not really say what that 

would mean in terms of — lacking anywhere that I’ve seen — 

some explanation of what 75 full-time jobs would be, an 

interesting part of that being that the allocation of at least 90 per 

cent of the taxable income to Saskatchewan is again very 

interesting and something that I think that we would be 

supportive of just in general terms. 

 

Now with this . . . And again I just come to, where is this 

coming from? Who initiated this? Is it just something of the 

Minister of Finance sitting alone on long nights to come up with 

ideas that . . . Did he get together with the Minister of 

Enterprise? Or is this another pipe dream, like we have the 

isotopes, the clean coal? And perhaps now that they’re talking 

about the dome stadium . . . no, not as much though they’ve 

been talking about dome stadium. Maybe in Regina they talk 

about it a lot. But I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, travelling around 

the province and talking about long-term care centres and just 

simply asking people, how’s that dome stadium working for 

you, you don’t get a very favourable response when we talk 

about that. 

 

So I would hope that there’s a little more planning around this. I 

hope that this isn’t just a concocted deal that they’re coming 

forward with to try and get them through, try and get 

themselves elected, and painting again a rosy picture which has 

an underbelly of not a lot happening, perhaps just a huge sign 

out front. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, just the jobs, the incentives for Saskatchewan, 

the creation of the process for the ore that would come to 

Saskatchewan, the processing of this ore are laudable things 

that we should, that we should promote and support. And for 

that, as I have said, this opposition is quite prepared to do that 

in general terms. We will have numerous questions around this 

issue, Mr. Speaker, and we will be asking more questions. 

 

I guess I would just still like to talk a bit about the numbers of 



6186 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2010 

people that this would benefit and whether we have the type of 

ore and whether this processing would be something that would 

extend over a period of time, what agreements are we talking 

about, what mines are proposed, because this is talking about 

ore coming in from outside of Saskatchewan and just definitely 

Canada. It is something that we would . . . I think the people of 

Saskatchewan, when a Bill is put forward like this, have a right 

to know. I mean things like this are not done overnight. It takes 

a lot of planning. And I think it’s only fair that the government 

should be upfront and say that this is what we are doing, this is 

where we’re going, and here’s our plan. 

 

A good plan can withstand criticism. A good plan can stand the 

test of time, and I think that it’s important that the plan is put 

out. Otherwise we all look at this and any number of questions 

that we ask are . . . who’s driving this? What is this? Is this 

going to work? Can we see whether maybe we should have 

added a different incentive in the package to do this? Are there 

negotiations ongoing? Will it be negotiations? And we haven’t, 

again, seen the best track record of people here, the government 

in their negotiations. 

 

I mean they have a pulp mill that they’re trying to get up. 

They’ve been working on that for three years. The member who 

. . . Perhaps we could borrow his billboard for the next election, 

and we’ll run that. A vote for — I think it said — Hickie is a 

vote for a mill. So we would try and do that and make sure that 

billboard’s up there. And in fact perhaps the member wants to 

pay for it. We’ll run it for him, and I guess that would be 

another time we could ask, how’s that working for you? 

 

But there are many examples of that. In terms of the businesses 

that have been attracted and in terms of people coming here, I 

think they have a difficult time measuring up to what happened 

in 2007, in the year of 2007 — be that in oil or gas, a number of 

wells. That’s just a fact, Mr. Speaker. That stands there and they 

have to deal with that. So now they come forward and they have 

introduced . . . I’m not sure if this is their centrepiece, but here 

it is, investment for ore coming in from outside of 

Saskatchewan, and we are going to process it — a laudable kind 

of undertaking but again from folks that not necessarily have 

the best track record with either encouraging investment in 

Saskatchewan or then maintaining and dealing with the 

companies when they get here. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there will be a lot more that many of my 

colleagues would have to say on this venture, and so with that, I 

would adjourn debate. 

 

[15:45] 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 149, The Income Tax 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 150 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 150 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — I’d also like to add to the previous Bill, like 

to make some comments on Bill 150, the Act to amend The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from a reading of this Bill, again it’s one of those 

Bills that perhaps that we have to be aware of and be very 

careful with, well I guess, the intended consequences as well as 

the unintended consequences of this. And a close reading of this 

Bill would show that it has two main provisions and that the 

first is to clarify how spousal survivor benefits are to be 

calculated, and in the case of a person who may have been 

married more than once and who may have both current and 

former spouses who could claim to be qualified to receive some 

type of survivor benefits. 

 

Now again, Mr. Speaker, the benefits of spouses in case of 

survivors, it’s an important issue. It is good that this will be 

clarified so that all parties have a better understanding. It’s an 

important issue for all of us. But we too want to know and have 

a better understanding of the potential impact of this provision. 

And particularly, Mr. Speaker, we’re concerned about 

vulnerable people. 

 

However on the face of it, we believe there may be merit in 

what the government is proposing as I spoke earlier. To split 

these off to find, as we do now, that where there are more, 

there’s more than one spouse is . . . At that kind of time where 

there’s a survivor, people have gone through some very serious 

issues in their life, and it’s very important that it be clear so that 

we do not enter into . . . Perhaps there would be also children 

involved that it’s clear for the parties as to what direction and 

how survivor benefits should be divided. So in that we would 

like to also understand the potential impact, and so we would be 

looking and asking questions on that so that we would get a 

better understanding of it. And with that just generally I would 

think it’s a topic, and this Bill is well worth undertaking so that 

all would be clear. 

 

Now again the second provision is the government proposes to 

remove from public the reporting the amount of money and 

benefits paid out to individual superannuates. Now again here 

this is concerning, concerning for us, as this is again this pattern 

of hiding important information from public view and not 

allowing the reporting of money paid out. We’re not certain 

why, what this is about, and we will not be supporting this 

provision in terms of what we see here. 

 

Now again the government knows full well that any amounts 

over 50,000 paid to individuals, organizations in any one year 

have to be publicly disclosed. Now we’re not certain as to 

where the request again came from to do this and what in fact 

that will mean. Mr. Speaker, the salaries of everyone who 

works for a minister of the Crown or for the Executive Council 

and who can make more than 50,000 a year are publicly 

disclosed in public accounts. Now the same holds true for other 

employers in the public service and so I guess the question 



November 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6187 

would be is, why are former employees being held to a different 

standard? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the many questions in terms of what this would 

mean, what prompted this change, all those remain as well as 

the . . . are a little hidden from view. And we’re not certain here 

as to what the exact reason for hiding this from the public view 

would be, what it would do. Who are the people that are 

wishing that this not be made public? 

 

Now again we believe that this could result in former 

employees being able to collect pension benefits while working 

for the government on a contract basis — again, what the 

people might call double-dipping. And would anybody be the 

wiser, Mr. Speaker, if this was to occur? 

 

Now we know again, and it’s not only in hiding things, but we 

know the government likes to contract out services to its 

friends. And again here we’ve heard many times in this 

legislature during the question period about long-term care 

facilities in Saskatoon and the untendered contracts that have 

been given out to Sask Party donors. 

 

And again this might be pretending that it’s something new and 

innovative, but the understanding from this side is hardly . . . 

Well I guess, Mr. Speaker, the way to say it is we don’t 

understand why you would want to do that, why at some point 

that why you would not want to tender contracts. Again what 

would this mean? What would it mean to people in 

Saskatchewan? Would it mean are we trying to contract out 

services to former employees, is a question I think that we have 

again because simply, would it be people who had committed or 

given money to the Sask Party? Now would those former 

employees be able to get payments from the government? Now 

again are they also after money from the public purse and 

getting a pension? 

 

The point of this is, is that none of this is very transparent. And 

I would say that the transparency issue has again been 

something that these folks came in on, saying that they would 

be totally transparent, and yet 400 pages or whatever blacked 

out in reports on the freedom of information request. I don’t 

think that that stands either the Minister of Health or the 

Premier in good stead, to be blanking out that much 

information. I’m not sure what that does. It must surely must’ve 

been a few lines in there, Mr. Speaker, that they could’ve left to 

read. I’m not certain that every . . . an entire report is blacked 

out to that degree, that number of pages. 

 

And it’s to try and stand there, I guess I feel a bit for the . . . 

Well maybe I don’t feel a bit for the Minister of Health, but 

that’s perhaps why they put him in such a tough position. Every 

day that he would have to get up and defend something, and 

each day trying to blame the NDP. Blame the NDP, because 

every time they run into problems — even after three years now 

— it’s blame the NDP. 

 

The issue for them is, I guess is that, what have they done? And 

there’s not a lot that’s been done, not a lot. Not a lot done, but 

there’s been a lot of . . . Not a lot done; a lot of blacking out, a 

lot of blacking out. Not a lot done from those folks over across 

the way. And we wonder as we sit here, what is it that is going 

on? And it’s a lot of spin, Mr. Speaker, that is going on, a lot of 

talk. But when they . . . They were not too happy when they 

heard those figures that in 2007 we had more oil and more gas 

and that since then they haven’t . . . It hasn’t quite worked out. I 

mean it must be very disappointing to them. 

 

One of the biggest things, I think, that it was interesting to 

watch on the potash debate as to the free traders, or the free 

enterprisers over there, in terms of taking that and the beating 

they’re taking in the national media of their move. 

 

We’re glad they supported us. They saw the Saskatchewan way 

and stood behind keeping our resources in Saskatchewan and 

Canada, and that was interesting because the national press 

don’t . . . They were friends before. I’m sure they’d be still 

friends probably now. But it must be quite an excruciating little 

experience there to go through that, to sit there for years and 

talk about all the things they’ve talked about, about it being free 

enterprisers and promote that, to then change on a huge issue 

and say, oops. Whoa, we can’t do that. 

 

And what happens? So now we have questions out there from 

their free enterprise friends all across Canada, talking about, 

well what do we do? How do we invest in potash? What 

happens? Well PotashCorp doesn’t pay any dividends, so how 

. . . When you invest in this corporation, what’ll happen? These 

are interesting questions, Mr. Speaker. Much I don’t . . . I 

definitely am not an expert in that. But just from sitting down 

and talking to various people who have approached me and 

said, we’re asking what is going on there . . . 

 

It was interesting to listen to the debate and watch this. But I’ve 

noticed that it’s been quite an experience for those folks across 

the way, and how they, for that matter, square all that. So very 

interesting, very interesting debate to see some of the national 

media going after the Premier and whether Saskatchewan is 

open for business. 

 

And then I must have hit a nerve because soon after that we 

have an advertising campaign talking about open for business 

and having to spend money on open for business. You wonder 

if they would have actually needed $2 million to do that if they 

wouldn’t have taken the position they would have. Would they 

have simply said, well we don’t need the $2 million? Because 

as we hear on a daily basis, we’ve got affordable housing 

issues, Mr. Speaker, that could use that $2 million. 

 

We heard today, child care, child care could use some money. 

And they are off spending, trying to say, please listen to us; we 

are still free enterprisers here. We just had a bit of a blip, and so 

now we had to change the way we do business. So here’s . . . 

We’ll buy some ads, spend $2 million, and tell the rest of the 

country that we’re open for business. Because when you run in 

on a program of free enterprise and then you have to change 

that, it’s very interesting. So money could be used in a lot better 

ways. 

 

Again the disclosure item. I want to just mention one other 

point, and that was the government tried to bring in Bill 9 which 

would have raised the bar from non-disclosure government 

spending from 50,000 to 350,000. And this again, this is from 

this government of trying to do this. 

 

And some of the other things they’ve done: how about firing the 



6188 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2010 

employee for trying to raise issues in the public interest? That 

we had numbers of that where we went through and we talked 

about that. 

 

So the whole, Mr. Speaker, the whole issue of the pattern of 

secrecy and lack of accountability and transparency of this 

government, when it comes to this, I’m sure they quietly 

amongst themselves realized that this is something that we 

could not support. That in fact, the provisions of the $50,000 

are in fact unsupportable, Mr. Speaker, because of the, simply 

that they have not shown that they could be trusted in terms of 

dealing and what they would do unless we had everything on 

the table. And in those ways, it’s important for us to ask these 

questions, to have these debates on these Bills, so that we can 

send this message out and talk to our constituents and talk to the 

stakeholders in this and on this Bill and around these two main 

issues in here. 

 

Again the spousal survivor benefits, I just think it is important 

to have clarity in this area. At the time of death is not the time 

and oftentimes, Mr. Speaker, we find ourselves in those 

situations. But in a time of death, it’s much better to know 

clearly and concisely where we are going. And, Mr. Speaker, 

for something like that, generally I think we could have a close 

look at that and look at the provisions. There are some 

questions that no doubt we would have to try and bring clarity 

to the issue, to bring understanding. And I think those are 

questions that we will do. 

 

And of course we have to, as I mentioned earlier, there could be 

the again, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to this, the unintended 

consequences of actions of a Bill like this, the questions around 

who, why we’re bringing it forward I think is somewhat clear in 

the first provision. The first main provision here is to clarify 

survivor benefits, the calculation of those benefits, how we 

would sort this issue out. I think it’s very important for people 

to know this, and who benefits and who doesn’t benefit, Mr. 

Speaker, where families are involved. It is important to 

understand that and get some very clear directions from this. 

And I’m sure that most of us would support that. 

 

It is again the second part of the provision, when I spoke of the 

transparency issue, spoke of the accountability issue, Mr. 

Speaker, that we need to hold this government to account 

because on the many issues that they have brought forward that 

there has not been transparency. Right from day one, there has 

not been the transparency or the accountability. 

 

[16:00] 

 

We have many Bills, many times, whether it was in 

Environment or the pony Bill, where there was talk about 

consultation. The consultation was not there. It did not happen. 

Many times people were brought back and asked whether they 

had spoken to people, and people came forward and said that 

they had not in fact been spoken to. 

 

And again then it comes back to that now an issue, wherever an 

issue comes forward like $50,000 that people would not have to 

declare and what they are getting over $50,000, I think these are 

public funds that are here. The public has a right to know about 

these things, much like we have disclosure in conflict of 

interest. 

I mean we have had issues. I know the Minister of Justice had 

issues around the conflict of interest with the disclosure rules. 

It’s for us to function properly in here. We all come here, and I 

think it’s important that we disclose those sorts of things. 

Because over time people have known that it’s very easy to get 

into situations where we have to make sure that there is an 

objective look. 

 

We are dealing with taxpayers’ money and in most cases the 

people demand that of us. It raises the bar here for us inside this 

legislature. It raises the bar so that when we go out, we can say 

that we are doing the best job with people’s money — the best 

job, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Many times on the doorstep when we go out door knocking, 

talking to people — and many times I’ve gone — and people 

look, and when you come, most people are friendly, most 

people. And some people do have an opinion of politicians, and 

it is that . . . I think that is our struggle, Mr. Speaker, for both 

sides to want to be able to talk to people and have people have 

the confidence in us as politicians that we are dealing with their 

taxpayers’ dollars in the proper manner. 

 

And again when we have the Justice minister in terms of in a 

conflict of interest situation, that’s important that these kind of 

things are written down so that people can say, we’ve got a 

problem here. And then that individual has to remove 

themselves from that area because in fact they are not in a 

position where people have felt that they can make an unbiased 

decision on this. And that’s fair; that’s fair, Mr. Speaker. That 

goes across the piece where people . . . It’s just common sense. 

Whether that be in our everyday activities, we want to know 

that there’s a sense of fair play. Where people have a sense of 

fair play, they might not agree with what you’re putting 

forward, but in fact if there’s a sense that if the decision was 

arrived in a fair manner, people would be more likely to accept 

that. 

 

And that’s why the government has got itself into all sorts of 

trouble around the long-term care facilities in the province 

because they’re not simply being transparent. They’re not being 

transparent. One year they say they’re building all of these. The 

next year they pull back money. And they simply withhold the 

money and tell people, here’s the money; we give you that 

money, but use it for operating. Use it for operating, they said to 

the people of this province, and we’ll see about next year. 

 

And many times they have spoken about, well we will build, or 

there will be recruitment of doctors, and that’ll be a plan that’ll 

take us past the election. And it’s those type of statements that 

do not lend themselves to a lot of trust in the government. And I 

think that that’s what people of Saskatchewan are telling us. 

They’re telling us these kinds of things, that they’re sitting there 

and wondering what happened. What happened to the great 

promise? What happened to the rosy picture when we elected 

this government? We are still hoping that they would come true. 

 

But truly, Mr. Speaker, they are losing faith in this government. 

And it is through issues like transparency and fairness, because 

those are important to people, that people feel that they’re being 

treated fairly. And it’s difficult for people to see that they’re 

being treated fairly. And issues like trying to hide money over 

$50,000, issues like . . . Then they come up of untendered 



November 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6189 

contracts. Those are things that people want us here to ask 

questions on. Those are things that people want us here to 

debate, as I’m doing here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. They 

want us to ask the much-needed questions that, what is this 

government really all about? Can we trust them? Do we have to 

. . . 

 

And we need the details, Mr. Speaker. We need details on all of 

this because without those details, Mr. Speaker, we are left in a 

void, in a void where we have to ask questions and try and find 

what is going out. It’s not the easiest thing to do in the 

Assembly sometimes. Sometimes there are no direct answers to 

our questions. Where we would ask questions of the 

government . . . And in fact they seem to enjoy talking about 

previous years, Mr. Speaker. They enjoy talking about if we get 

elected. I think they have forgot to do things and to implement 

policy, to pass legislation, much like this legislation that we 

have before us here in the superannuation supplementary 

provisions, Bill 150. We need to be doing more of this, and 

there is a scarcity, I think, of initiatives by this government on 

these particular issues. 

 

Pensions are an important issue, Mr. Speaker. Pensions are 

something that, in my opinion, we should have legislated for 

everyone, Mr. Speaker. Because I know on the pension issue, 

many times people, when they are younger, would not think 

that pensions are important and would in fact say, why am I 

getting pension deducted from my wages? And I would rather 

do that because I’ve got some bills to pay at home, and many 

times at that. 

 

But when they come, Mr. Speaker, when they’re starting to get 

up there — even not quite where you and I are at — they all of 

a sudden see the importance of pensions and they see how 

important that is for their well-being and for their families. And 

again, in terms of division on that, what happens to that pension 

at a time of death where there’s survivor benefits? What would 

happen? What happens? And it’s important that we talk about 

this type of legislation. 

 

But again we have here something that at first glance appears to 

deal with an important issue, but again we’re not clear because 

of the . . . There’s so little information around what is driving 

this. Have we had a clear explanation of what some of the 

unintended consequences will be around this Bill? And then 

again, then they, just to make matters worse, we’ve put in an 

issue of, sort of, just trust us to do the right thing here. And we 

have a problem with that, Mr. Speaker. And I think I’ve spoken 

on that and don’t need to reiterate my entire points on that. 

 

But suffice to say, there is definitely a concern here and a 

question of credibility in terms, on issues that this party has 

brought forward. And again I point out that Bill 9 . . . When 

they tried to get Bill 9 in there and tried to raise the bar from 

50,000 to 350,000 so that they wouldn’t have to talk about 

payouts for people, I think that they found what can happen 

when the public hears stories like that. 

 

So what we have is again a piece of legislation that we think 

deserves, has some things and deserves our attention here. But 

again we would like to know our questions around the $50,000. 

And again, why are former employees going to be held to a 

different standard? Why would that be necessary? That question 

has not, neither in the remarks that I was able to look at, 

nowhere has there been anything that outlined that there was a 

concern here. We have not been told that there was a concern. 

 

And again the legislation is brought forward leaving many 

questions, many questions unanswered in terms of what is 

intended here. And it’s that intention. People might say, well 

you know, just trust us. You don’t have to be constantly — as 

we hear from the other side — being negative. There’s a 

difference, Mr. Speaker, between being negative and asking 

questions and asking questions on why a certain piece of 

legislation has been brought forward. If you are not interested in 

telling people why people over $50,000, why you will not tell 

them . . . of individuals why they’ve had this . . . [inaudible] . . . 

disclosure. 

 

Surely if there were some legitimate concerns brought up for us, 

we would . . . We on this side are reasonable people as well. We 

would agree. We could say we could support this. But if you 

simply say, we’re going to try and hide anybody who has over 

$50,000, and we’re not going to talk about that and to say, well 

now you just accept that. And again the history here has not 

been exactly exemplary on this front. We didn’t really . . . 

There’ve been many issues. I think I’ve spoken of just a few. 

But there is a . . . The list is growing longer, Mr. Speaker. The 

number of years here, it’s surprising of how long that list 

actually is in terms of people being non-transparent. 

 

I think one of the most unfortunate, of course, was the wildlife 

habitat issue we had last year that arose and the lack of 

consultation and the lack of meeting. Having people have to 

actually indicate that they had not met with the minister was in 

fact rather disturbing. So that’s definitely a problem. And again 

the transparency issue that comes with that of not being 

transparent and saying who was met with on what occasion. 

What was said? These are very serious, serious allegations. And 

of course we would continue to ask those hard questions, 

continue to pose the questions for this government in terms of 

why they are in fact doing the things that they are doing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the continued pattern of secrecy, lack of 

accountability and transparency that has defined this 

government and is becoming ever deeply embedded in the 

minds of Saskatchewan people, and what they are doing, leads 

us to have a lot of difficulty with this particular piece of 

legislation, a lot more questions that we will be asking on that. 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would adjourn debate on Bill 150. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 150. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 153 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 153 — The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 



6190 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure today to speak on Bill 153, The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, I want to say right off the hop 

that on the surface of it, it looks like, you know, it’s certainly 

. . . Not all of the proposed Act is bad or poor or whatever other 

words that you might want to put with it. Some of it is actually 

probably even commendable. 

 

But we have some significant concerns with this Bill 153 as it 

repeals the civil division of the Provincial Court and it looks 

like it transfers some significant responsibilities that are 

currently handled by Provincial Court judges and shifts that to 

justices of the peace. And some of the questions we have, Mr. 

Speaker, are: how is that going to affect the serving of justice? 

How is it going to affect people who rely on our judicial system 

to help us find what the path is, what the law says, to interpret 

the law in a wise — we hope — wise way? 

 

And usually justice doesn’t have to be pretty, but it does have to 

be honest. And so we want to be very careful that we’re not 

doing something to the judicial system that would in some way 

make it less stellar than it is today. We want to make all the 

changes that are ever made to a judicial system improvements. 

 

[16:15] 

 

One of the questions that immediately comes to mind is, who 

called for these changes? Who called for it? There’s no mention 

in any of the research that I’ve done, any of the reading I’ve 

done around this Bill, about where the call for these changes 

came. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say off the hop, I’m not a 

lawyer. I have no significant legal training at all so there’s my 

denial of legal expertise. But I am an MLA and have been for 

just long enough to know that there is a separation of our 

responsibilities as legislators and the judiciary. I know there’s a 

separation there, and it’s often an uneasy separation. 

 

So I’m questioning what the relationship is with respect to Bill 

153, The Provincial Court Amendment Act as it’s being 

proposed in this session of the legislature. Again I ask, who 

called for these changes? I noted that in the Bill, some of the 

things that are happening actually are taking some of the 

responsibilities away from the chief provincial judge and 

moving it presumably into the Department of Justice. I’m 

talking some of the administration. And I’m always uneasy 

when there’s even the remotest appearance that somehow a 

government might be more involved than it should be in the 

judiciary. 

 

Governments clearly have to have some responsibility. We have 

to fund the justice system. We have to put legislation in place 

that sets the standards of judges, if I can describe it that way, 

make sure that the minimum standards are set. But we have to 

be very cognizant all the time about recognizing the 

independence of the judiciary, and we want to make sure that 

the judiciary want the changes that are being proposed here, that 

somehow it will be an aid to the implementation of justice. 

 

And I’m just not getting a sense, frankly, one way or the other 

on this one, but I have to ask lots of questions around it. You 

know, who asked for this? 

 

See the Bill allows for a greater public disclosure of the results 

of investigations into the conduct of judges by the Judicial 

Council. Well it’s interesting because we’ve asked questions. 

The member for Saskatoon Nutana has asked questions day 

after day after day after day about Amicus. The media gathered, 

report zippo, day after day after day after day. The government 

seems to have its way — a $27 million untendered contract and 

no answers. 

 

How is it, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill 153, The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act, will hold judges to a higher level than they 

hold themselves, the government? How is it that this Bill will 

allow greater public disclosure of the results of investigations 

into the conduct of judges than it will allow into the conduct of 

itself? How can that possibly be? Because we’re MLAs, 

because we’re government, we get to pass the legislation. We 

get to pass good legislation for us. It reminds me of Tommy 

Douglas’ white cats, black cats that passed laws that were for 

good for cats but not so good for mice. And, you know, there 

are analogies. If anyone doesn’t know the story, I invite them to 

look it up. Google it if you must, but get some of that 

information for yourself. 

 

I again have to ask, how it is that we legislators could possibly 

think that it’s a good thing to pass legislation on somebody else 

that holds them to a higher level of accountability than we’re 

prepared to hold ourselves? The government clearly is not 

wanting to be held accountable for the Amicus deal, $27 million 

untendered contract. We have heard that close to $70,000 in 

political donations to the Sask Party from several of the major 

contractors in this $27 million untendered contract. 

 

Again I’ve got to just ask, well how can this possibly work? 

How can we in The Provincial Court Amendment Act say it’s 

okay to report what the judges have done. You know, when the 

Judicial Council does an investigation, a proper investigation 

into the judges . . . okay, we can make it public whatever they 

find out. We’ll just tell them everything. We’ll just make it . . . 

Maybe post it on the Internet, I don’t know. You know, it 

wouldn’t be the first time that inappropriate information gets 

posted on the Internet under this Sask Party watch. But how can 

we hold judges to a higher level of accountability than 

ourselves? 

 

You know we talk about disclosure. And I’ve mentioned the 

Amicus deal now a number of times. I think I’ll leave that for a 

little while, Mr. Speaker. But I mean this is a government that 

. . . I just listened to my colleague speaking just before me 

about the superannuation Act. And I heard him speaking, as I 

did just yesterday, of some concerns we had in that Bill that is 

around public disclosure because that Bill says less public 

disclosure. And this Bill, Mr. Speaker, says more public 

disclosure. 

 

And if you wonder why it is that we’re sometimes confused or 

I’m sometimes confused, wonder why it is that the public is 

sometimes confused, it’s because we get two Bills in the course 

of five, ten minutes proposed, one that says we’re going to 

restrict information that’s currently, currently released to the 

public in public accounts, but we’re going to change the law so 

that that information regarding superannuation does not have to 



November 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6191 

be released publicly. And then this Bill, we’re saying but we’re 

going to make public everything about Provincial Court judges. 

When the Judicial Council does an investigation, we’ll make 

public whatever their findings are. 

 

So how can it be, you know? It’s like the right hand doesn’t 

know what the right hand is doing with this government. And 

yes, you heard me right. I hate to admit that they might actually 

have a left hand over there, considering that I’m left-handed 

personally and I’m proud to be — what many people consider 

— left on the political spectrum, and I’m proud of that and 

always have been. 

 

But how is it that the right hand doesn’t know what the right 

hand’s doing? How is it that two Bills . . . one can propose 

eliminating disclosure, public disclosure, and the other one, this 

Bill 153, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, says oh, but 

we’ll do public disclosure when it’s on the judges, not on us. 

Not on the government, but on the judges we’ll publicly 

disclose any and all information. 

 

So who has asked? Who is it that is driving these changes? Who 

is it that wants the changes in Bill 153? I don’t think that this 

would be something that necessarily Provincial Court judges 

would want. It diminishes their responsibilities in some ways. It 

moves some of the judicial work that they do into the realm of 

what do we . . . I’m having an old-timer’s moment here, Mr. 

Speaker. The courts are not looking at the things that have been 

looked at by Justice of the Peace. It was Justice of the Peace 

that I was absolutely struggling for and thank goodness it rolled 

around in my head and popped in. 

 

But how is it that a Provincial Court judge would ask that the 

Justice of the Peace take on their responsibilities? Maybe they 

are. Maybe that’s what’s happened. But we certainly haven’t 

heard any indication of that from the Minister of Justice or from 

the government on this Bill. We’ve just got questions and 

questions and questions about what this is really all about. 

Who’s driving it and why is it that it’s good for us to have 

public disclosure, Mr. Speaker, around judges, but not public 

disclosure around government operations? 

 

Because there is a separation of the judiciary and of 

government. We clearly are responsible to make sure that we 

report on ourselves — if I can describe it that way — on 

government, on opposition, on MLAs. We have obligations to 

be clear and as transparent as we can be with the public. I 

hesitate to use the word reasonable, reasonably, but I do say that 

because there are simply things that we do on a daily basis that 

are so inconsequential. Why would you report them? You don’t 

want to know how many meetings I’ve attended earlier this day, 

Mr. Speaker. Nor do I want to know how many you have 

attended although I can say, just for the record, I know it’s 

significant in both instances. I know it’s significant, but I don’t 

know the number. 

 

Why is it that we want to open up to the public — open up 

widely — what judges do but hide what it is that we do here? 

Why is it that the government wants to do that? Why is it? I’ve 

talked about Amicus. I’ve talked about some of the other things 

going on. Why is it under Bill 9 that’s before the legislature that 

the government is proposing to enable itself to spend up to 

$350,000 without public disclosure? That’s in Bill 9. How is it 

that it says for $350,000 of taxpayers’ money being spent, we 

don’t have to disclose it? Why? Because it’s the government. 

But if the judicial review panel looks at Provincial Court 

judges, by gosh we’re going to open it up so they can report 

everything. 

 

It seems to me . . . I’m trying my best to paint this picture of a 

double standard. And it’s just so bizarre, this double standard, 

that I’m struggling to understand how it is that we could 

possibly, how could a government, how could a Sask Party 

government possibly propose double standards that are so 

vehemently opposed to each other? One standard for 

themselves that says whatever we touch, we don’t have to 

disclose. Whatever we do — if it’s a $27 million sweetheart 

deal, Amicus deal — we don’t have to report that. It’s 

untendered. We don’t have to report that. That’s what they say, 

and they’re making it stick every day in question period. With 

the help of our friends in the media, they’re making it work. 

And I say shame on our friends in the media. That’s me saying 

that. That’s none of my colleagues. That’s me. I say shame on 

them for not reporting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

How is that we can have that? How is it that we can have a Bill 

before the legislature that proposes when the government can 

spend up to $350,000 without reporting it now, without public 

disclosure? It’s under Bill 9. Look it up, Bill 9. Up to $350,000 

without public disclosure and yet . . . Those are two examples, 

Mr. Speaker, that affect the government. 

 

And yet this Bill 153, An Act to amend The Provincial Court 

Act, says we’ll open it up. Whatever is found out about the 

judges, we’ll just allow for greater disclosure. It’s bizarre. It just 

doesn’t make any sense that the results of investigations into the 

conduct of judges by a judicial council can have more reporting 

now, while these other examples that I’ve used . . . the 

government is saying but we won’t report that. We won’t report 

that because it affects the government, but because this affects 

judges, we will report it. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that does seem to make sense 

about this Bill . . . and I did say there are some good things 

about it. One of the things that does seem to make sense is the 

Bill allows for the appointment of temporary judges that are 

currently serving on the bench in other provinces, to serve. And 

the minister has said this is to address cases where all the 

available judges on the Saskatchewan Provincial Court have a 

conflict of interest with one or more of the parties involved in a 

particular legal matter. 

 

I can’t imagine what that matter would be, but you know, on the 

surface of it, that explanation makes sense because you know 

that all of the Provincial Court judges are not available at any 

given time to take on an additional caseload. And you may have 

one or two or three or, you know, relatively small number of 

Provincial Court judges that are available to take on a new case. 

And that one judge or two judges or a small number of judges 

may all know one or more of the parties and have a conflict of 

interest and not be available to hear that particular case. 

 

In the service of justice, what this one provision does is allows 

for a temporary appointment of a judge from out of province, a 



6192 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2010 

duly appointed provincial judge from presumably one of the 

other provinces or possibly one of the territories. And that we 

can salute on the surface of it. That seems to make sense. I’m 

always reluctant to say we salute on the surface of it because, 

Mr. Speaker, it frankly displays that I have some lack of trust in 

what the government members say. 

 

And I just — but having said that — just know that I have some 

doubts about it. We will want to ask some questions about this 

to make certain that that explanation is absolutely straight up. 

And we will also of course be wanting to know if we’ve ever 

had a situation where that has occurred, where there has been a 

conflict or where there’s no Provincial Court judge available to 

hear a judicial matter because of conflict of interest or the judge 

knows everybody or too many of one or one of the parties 

involved. But that appears to be a reasonable part of this Bill. 

 

But that’s just one tiny part of it that almost never comes into 

effect. I doubt if it’s ever . . . I don’t know that it’s ever been 

utilized, but we’ll certainly look forward to finding that out. 

 

There is a provision to bring eligibility for disability benefits to 

the same standard as is provided to other provincial government 

employees. So the judges would get the same three months of 

disability benefits that other provincial employees get. Well of 

course that’s just a logical part of the Bill that is really easy to 

salute. 

 

We hope that nobody ever needs to use disability benefits, but 

the very fact of the matter is that things happen in life, and 

we’ve got enough Provincial Court judges that some things . . . 

I wish them all nothing but good. I wish all of our Provincial 

Court judges and all of the people of Saskatchewan nothing but 

good, but the reality is that life sometimes throws a curveball at 

us, and we need some disability benefits. And we would want 

our Provincial Court judges to have the three-month disability 

benefits equal to that of other government employees. 

 

There are changes to the law, the nature of the Law Society, that 

as it respects its representation on the Judicial Council. Mr. 

Speaker, currently the president of the Law Society serves 

directly on the council and it results in frequent turnover on that 

council. So this Bill will allow representatives of the Law 

Society to serve for a longer period of time, and it allows the 

Judicial Council thereby to keep its experience for a longer 

period of time. And on the surface both of these seem to be very 

reasonable. 

 

You want to have, in any good operation, you want a certain 

amount of continuity. You don’t want to change your personnel 

every year. Or nor would it, nor would it be healthy, quite 

frankly, to change the entire Legislative Assembly every 

election, to say that members can’t seek re-election. The voters 

will decide that. And in a similar way you want, in the Judicial 

Council, you would want to have some corporate history — if I 

can use that term — so that you get better service out of the 

Judicial Council at the job that it’s challenged to do. 

 

This would help for any person, organization that brought 

complaints before the council. And again that’s fairly easy to 

support that particular amendment. Because at the end of the 

day, what all judicial services are, what we hope they are, is an 

attempt, a sincere attempt to provide the very best ethical legal 

service that we possibly can so that the rules are the same for 

me as they are for my constituents as they are for all of our 

constituents — in other words, all Saskatchewan people who 

want the law to be the same for us all, and we want it to be 

applied equally for us all. 

 

And I know that they . . . Well I know that my experience with 

legal matters is pretty limited. It tends to be transfer of property. 

But whether that’s what it is or something that we would 

consider more serious than a transfer of property or the 

arrangement of a will or something like that, we want, Mr. 

Speaker, to have . . . I know I want to have first-rate legal 

services provided to me. And I want that for everybody. I want 

it unanimous right throughout the province. It should be as 

readily available and as good a service as we possibly can. 

 

So An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act, 1998, Bill 153, is 

proposing some significant changes. We’re in favour of three 

fairly small changes that I’ve just spoken about, but we’re very 

much questioning the need for all of the changes in total. We’re 

questioning a couple of things. One is, what functions are being 

transferred out of the Provincial Court? What types of cases are 

going to be handled by justices of the peace that are currently 

handled by the Provincial Court system? And why is it that we 

would suddenly think that these types of cases have less merit 

today to be heard than they had a year ago or 10 years ago? And 

it may be that there are some legitimate reasons for these 

changes. 

 

But as I said earlier, I’m wondering what’s driving the changes, 

Mr. Speaker. Who’s requested it? Where was this Bill 153 

dreamt up? Where does it come from? Who’s the proponent of 

it? What was broke that needs to be fixed? What is it? And why 

is it, with the separation of state, of government, from the 

judiciary, why is it that we are saying in Bill 153 we want to 

change the way the judiciary operates, in some fairly minor 

ways but they are nonetheless changes to the way the judiciary 

operates? 

 

So my question is very clear: does the judiciary, did they 

request these changes? Did they say, we don’t want to be 

involved with the administration of this, that, and the other? Did 

the judges, did the judiciary say, but we want where we’re 

investigated by — I want to get the words right here — by the 

Judicial Council, where as a judge I’m investigated by the 

Judicial Council, I want the Judicial Council to be able to make 

the results of that investigation more readily public than is 

currently the case? 

 

It may be, Mr. Speaker, the judges asked for that, but it’s sure 

counterintuitive to me. It’s counterintuitive that the judges 

would say, when a governing body looks at what I’m doing, not 

usually because I’m doing such a terrific job, usually because 

there’s some question of something that I’ve been involved with 

or done, and I’m going to ask for that Judicial Council to be 

able to make it more readily public what the results of their 

investigation are. It just doesn’t quite seem to me that the 

judges would have asked for that change in Bill 153. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on. I could go on, but I think the key to 

this is we’ve got a Bill that’s being proposed. We know not 

from whom it’s proposed, other than the government has 

brought it forward, the Sask Party’s government brought it 



November 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6193 

forward. But we don’t know who’s asking for this Bill. We 

don’t know what’s broken that needs to be fixed. We don’t 

know why it’s coming, whose ox is being gored, if I may 

borrow a metaphrase. Whose ox is being gored? I don’t know 

this. But why is it that this legislation is changing some of the 

job that Provincial Court judges do and moving it to the justices 

of the peace? 

 

I’ve got nothing against justices of the peace. Maybe the 

justices of the peace asked for this legislation. I don’t know. 

Doubt it, but I don’t know. Again I say I don’t think that the 

judges asked for all of this either. And I’m particularly 

concerned when we can have a situation where we’re saying in 

Bill 153 . . . The Sask Party government is saying in Bill 153, 

An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act, that where the 

Judicial Council investigates into the conduct of judges, that 

this Bill allows for greater public disclosure of the results of 

that investigation. 

 

So if greater disclosure for judges but no disclosure for actions 

and activities of the Sask Party government . . . They can spend, 

under Bill 9, up to $350,000 without public disclosure. That’s 

what they’re proposing for themselves. But judges, they have to 

report any time there’s any, any Judicial Council investigation 

into them. It can be publicly reported. 

 

We have a situation of $27 million untendered contract, and the 

government’s saying, we don’t have to report that. We don’t 

have to report that. It’s only $27 million in an untendered 

contract. They’re saying they don’t have to report it. It seems to 

me, it seems to me we have a double standard here, Mr. 

Speaker, with respect to the Sask Party government and things 

they want to do. No public disclosure, oh no, oh no. The public 

doesn’t need to know about the $27 million and how that got 

awarded without tender — $27 million. You know, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re not talking chump change here. 

 

And Bill 153, The Provincial Court Amendment Act says but 

when it respects judges . . . And I think I’ve hit a chord here 

with the government. They’re saying, oh talk about Bill 153, 

they say. If I had the Amicus deal, if I had a $27 million 

untendered contract, if I had that, I would want you to be 

talking about Bill 153 as well. If I was responsible for a $27 

million untendered deal that stinks to high heaven, I would want 

the opposition to talk about something else. I say, shame on 

them. Shame on the media for not reporting this — not what 

I’m saying, but what the member for Saskatoon Nutana’s 

saying — for not holding the government’s feet to the fire and 

getting an answer. Shame on them all. 

 

[16:45] 

 

I would want the opposition, if I was a government, I would 

want the opposition to talk only about Bill No. 153, The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act. That’s what I would want, I 

would want. But, Mr. Speaker, you know full well that every 

piece of legislation we pass in this legislature, every piece of 

legislation we pass, is for the people of Saskatchewan. It’s to do 

the greater good. 

 

I was elected here to represent my constituents and, in a broader 

sense, the people of Saskatchewan to make sure that we get as 

good a piece of legislation as we can possibly get here. We’re 

elected. We’re chosen by the electorate in our constituencies, 

and we either are fortunate enough, Mr. Speaker, to be part of 

the government or — some would argue — a little less 

fortunate, and we’re put in the position of being in opposition as 

I am right now. 

 

I want to tell you this. There’s no bad seat in this legislature, 

Mr. Speaker. Every one of these seats, every one I’ve had the 

privilege and honour to sit in, has been a good seat and every 

one of the seats has allowed me to raise questions whether I’ve 

been in opposition or government or back in opposition as I am 

right now. And I’ve served all through the NDP administration 

and served proudly. I want to tell you we didn’t do everything 

right. I want to tell you that. But we did an awful lot more 

things correctly for the people of the province than we did 

wrong. An awful lot more was good. 

 

And I tell you that this, this piece of legislation . . .  

 

An Hon. Member: — What’s the number of this Bill? 

 

Mr. Trew: — What’s the number, the member for Cannington 

says? Without looking, it’s clearly 153. It’s . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — What’s it about? 

 

Mr. Trew: — Well now I can’t help. Now I can’t help the hon. 

member for Cannington who asks what’s it about. And I’ll tell 

you why I can’t help him. I have been speaking to this Bill for 

half an hour now, Mr. Speaker, a half an hour and with a 

recurring theme about accountability from the Sask Party 

government and how they hold judges, Provincial Court judges 

accountable to a much higher level than they hold themselves. 

And for half an hour, that member’s been sitting there, I thought 

maybe listening a little bit. I thought that was what democracy 

was about, Mr. Speaker. Clearly, clearly there’s none so deaf as 

he who will not listen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 153, The Provincial Court Amendment 

Act is a Bill that has some good points to it. It has some 

strengths to it, but it has some real concerns. And my concerns 

are growing by the minute with this administration because, Mr. 

Speaker, we’ve got a Sask Party government that inherited 

more than $2 billion in the bank and, and, and they parlayed 

that into two successive multi-billion dollar deficits. They say 

what’s that got to do with the Bill? Mr. Speaker, I want to tell 

you what that’s got to do with Bill 153. 

 

And I’ll tell you this, because in 1991 I was elected to be part of 

the government. We took over from the previous right wing 

government. The debt problem was so bad, Mr. Speaker, that in 

our caucus when we were looking at the first budget, we didn’t 

have one nor two, we had three complete discussions about 

what it would mean to declare bankruptcy as a province. And 

the first answer we were told was our jobs would be gone and 

that Brian Mulroney in Ottawa had a transition team to take 

over. That was the first answer: our jobs would be gone. And 

we said okay. Then what, Mr. Speaker? And without money, 

you can’t deal with Bill 153 or any other legislation. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — Why is the member 

on his feet? 

 



6194 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2010 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the member opposite is ostensibly speaking to Bill 

153, but — over the course of the last half an hour of ranting 

that we’ve heard — very, very little that he’s spoken about has 

had anything to do with Bill 153. The member’s been here for a 

long time. He knows the rules of this House. He chose to stand 

up to speak to this Bill; he should speak to this Bill rather than 

irrelevant matters. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — The member from 

Regina Coronation. 

 

Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I want to continue 

my debate on Bill 153 which is a Provincial Court amendment 

Act. And quite clearly, quite clearly any government needs to 

be able to fund its legislation. That was the point I just made. 

But Bill 153, Mr. Speaker, is quite, quite clear. This is 

proposing . . . It’s a 10 clause Bill. There are . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — Sorry about that. I 

take the member’s point of order. And I have been listening to 

the debate, and there was a certain amount of rambling around 

which is allowable in debate. But I would ask the member to 

stick more to the Bill if at all possible. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much 

for that. And Bill 153, The Provincial Court Amendment Act . . . 

And I’m just getting warmed up because clearly there’s some 

misunderstanding by government members about what all is in 

this Act, this 10 clause Act, Mr. Speaker. The changes that are 

being proposed in Bill 153 are allowing for a judge to be 

appointed from out of province where there’s a major conflict. 

I’ve said, I’ve said that that’s a good thing. It can be from 

another province or I presume another territory. It says . . . I 

think I believe the wording is a jurisdiction outside of 

Saskatchewan. I may be corrected on that, but clearly the intent 

is another province or territory. I don’t think we can go beyond 

that. I don’t think we could go to another country. But in a rare 

case — I’m not sure it’s ever happened — but in a rare case, we 

might well want, we might well have to use that provision. 

That’s one provision that we would be supportive of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have said that, with respect to public disclosure, 

that there is some real concerns here because we’ve got a 

government that holds itself to one very low standard. It set the 

bar so low that you can’t hardly even trip over it. You just walk 

over it. And yet for judges, they’ve set the bar significantly 

higher. And I’m just trying to point out on behalf of Provincial 

Court judges who do not have a seat here, don’t have any 

representation . . . They have to rely on MLAs, members of the 

legislature, to make good decisions for them because they have 

no voice in this legislature. They have no voice here. 

 

So I’m trying to point out that what the Sask Party government 

is trying to do is to, in this Bill, is to make any . . . Well it will 

allow for a greater public disclosure of results of investigations 

into the conduct of judges by the Judicial Council — so greater 

disclosure. And yet the government, by its own actions, is 

saying but don’t look at us. I’m saying in opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, that we have to have similar rules for all. Why are 

judges different than government MLAs? Why is it? 

 

And I point out the additional seriousness here. There’s a 

separation of legislature and judiciary, and they’re distinctly 

separate. And we have to be very careful what it is we’re doing 

with respect to the judiciary. We have to be respectful. We have 

to be always trying to make the situation work better. We have 

to be cognizant of public expenditures. We have to make very 

clear, Mr. Speaker, that we can’t, we can’t have this double 

standard. It just doesn’t work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have clearly stated a number of concerns to Bill 

153, The Provincial Court Amendment Act. I’ve clearly outlined 

them. I invite government members to read the Hansard and 

review that particularly as it’s respecting the Amicus deal and 

the $27 million untendered and other comments that I made. 

 

I don’t think I have a whole lot more that MLAs opposite are 

willing to listen. So, Mr. Speaker, at this point, to allow us to do 

a little bit more research, I’m going to move that we adjourn 

this debate. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — The member from 

Regina Coronation Park has moved adjournment of debate on 

Bill 153. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To facilitate 

work in committees, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — It has been moved 

that this Assembly now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — Carried. This 

Assembly now stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:55.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6165 

  Trew ............................................................................................................................................................................... 6165, 6166 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 6165 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6165 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6166 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6166 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 6166, 6168 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6166 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6167 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6167 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6167 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6167 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6168 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6168 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6168 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Gabriel Dumont Institute Celebrates 30th Anniversary 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6168 

 Canadian Western Agribition 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6169 

 Celebrating Success at O’Neill High School 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6169 

 Moose Jaw Festival of Trees 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6169 

 Community Leader Supports Youth 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6169 

 Salvation Army Red Kettles 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6170 

 Saskatchewan Waste Electronic Equipment Program 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6170 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6170 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6170 

 Budgeting for Health Services 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6172 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6172 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6172 

 Housing 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6172 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6173 

 Child Care 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6174 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6174 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6174 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Private Bills 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6175 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6176 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 905 — The Sisters of the Presentation Act, 2010 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6175 

 Bill No. 152 — The Commissioners for Oaths Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6176 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6176 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6176 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 156 — The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Act, 2010 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6176 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 6178 

 Bill No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6178 

 Bill No. 158 — The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6179 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6180 

 Bill No. 147 — The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6180 

 Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6184 

 Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6186 

 Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6190 

  Harrison (point of order) ....................................................................................................................................................... 6194 

  The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw) (point of order) ......................................................................................................... 6194 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


