




















































Hansard: May 10, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 58A  MONDAY, MAY 10, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5423 

 May 10, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave of 

the Assembly to make an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was former 

British Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli who coined the 

oft-used phrase, “I am prepared for the worst but hope for the 

best.” That phrase really encapsulates the mission of 

Saskatchewan‟s H1N1 working group, Mr. Speaker, consisting 

of representatives from ministries and Crowns. This working 

group toiled at the outset of the pandemic, or what was 

projected to be a pandemic right through until, Mr. Speaker, it 

was dealt with through the vaccination program. We have had a 

chance in this Assembly to thank those in the Ministry of 

Health who were in the bunker, for want of a better word, right 

over at T.C. Douglas, the T.C. Douglas Building. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there was a cross-ministry group that was 

involved in this effort right from the very, very beginning, 

identifying first of all the need from a vaccination standpoint, 

from a public awareness standpoint, from a communication 

standpoint. There was the need to make sure that Crown 

corporations were involved, Mr. Speaker. There was a need to 

ensure that ministries were involved. And so I want to thank the 

group that‟s joined us today for their leadership in this regard. 

They themselves represent many behind the scenes who were 

also responsible for the very efficacious approach that the 

government was able to take towards H1N1, again not because 

of the elected members, but because of our professional civil 

service. 

 

Seated in the gallery today are Mae Boa, Tom Young, and Judy 

Orthner from Corrections, Public Safety and Policing; Lauren 

Donnelly, Mark Wyatt, Marg Moran McQuinn from the 

Ministry of Health; James Hoffman from the Crown 

Investments Corporation; Shannon Creighton from SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance]; Nancy Cherney from 

Executive Council; Scott Brown from the Ministry of 

Agriculture; Mr. Speaker. Bill MacDonald from ITO 

[Information Technology Office]; Cathy Bulych from Social 

Services; and last but not least, Ken Ludwig from the Public 

Service Commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again I just want to thank this group of women 

and men who served the province so very, very well through the 

H1N1 pandemic. 

We had a chance to meet this morning. We were discussing 

lessons learned from the H1N1 effort on the part of the 

government. We were also discussing steps for the fall and of 

course the approach of another flu season, and what the 

government will be able to learn from this to better deliver on 

that for the people of the province. And I just want to thank 

them for their work on behalf of a grateful province, Mr. 

Speaker, and welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to welcome 

the working group that did so well with the H1N1 pandemic 

preparedness and following us through it in the months that it 

was upon us. And I‟m looking forward to seeing anything that 

comes out about what we learned. And I‟m sure that the group 

will be ahead of the curve again in this fall season coming up, 

and whenever we see a pandemic coming, I think the work that 

they have done will serve us well in all of that. 

 

And I particularly want to say hello to Mae Boa, and she‟ll 

know why. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to ask for 

leave to do an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has asked for leave as 

well for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 

to all of my colleagues. Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery, I 

believe way up in the top row is a number of students, a large 

group representing three high schools in northern 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students are student representative council 

members, and they‟ve been invited to take part in the youth 

mentorship program that is jointly developed by different 

groups here in the city. They have come from high schools in 

Stanley Mission and in Pinehouse Lake and at La Ronge. And, 

Mr. Speaker, these students have travelled from across the 

North, as you can tell, to spend some time in our capital city 

and learn about Saskatchewan‟s provincial government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Cameco Corporation has partnered with the 

Government of Saskatchewan along with the Government 

House Foundation to provide an opportunity for these students 

to come to Regina for the period May 9th to 12th. It‟s a fine 

opportunity for these young women and men to consider what a 

career in government has to offer. 

 

This morning, these students had an opportunity to spend some 

time with His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, as well as tour 

the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] training academy. 

And looking at the agenda for this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and 



5424 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

tomorrow, they‟re going to have two very busy days meeting 

with a number of individuals, and they conclude on Wednesday 

morning with a breakfast at the University of Regina and then 

proceed back to their home communities.  

 

So I‟d ask all members to join me in welcoming this group to 

Regina and to their Legislative Building. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join the Deputy Premier in welcoming all the students from 

La Ronge, Stanley Mission, and Pinehouse. I think it‟s really 

important for them to be here to watch the Assembly, and I‟m 

always very proud when northern people come to visit. And I 

welcome all the students here. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

So I really hope you have a very pleasant visit. And I point out 

to all the students throughout northern Saskatchewan that visit 

here . . . 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 

 

Don‟t be afraid of this Assembly. This is your Assembly. And 

one of these days, Mr. Speaker, I predict that a young, 

aggressive student, him or her will become the next MLA 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Athabasca or 

Cumberland. And the message we have for them today is, don‟t 

be afraid of anything here; this is our Assembly, the people‟s 

Assembly. 

 

And I‟ll ask all members to welcome this fine bunch of young 

leaders from northern Saskatchewan to their Assembly today. 

Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I introduce 

Ms. Annie Whitehead. If you‟d give us a wave, Annie. Annie is 

not only a good friend of mine, she‟s also my constituency 

assistant, a very integral part of our team back in Yorkton. I ask 

all members to welcome Annie to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d ask all 

members to welcome to you and through you, two individuals 

seated in the Speaker‟s gallery. I‟m speaking of course of 

Vivian and Sandra Fowler. Both hail from the Eyebrow region. 

They‟re very proud of family and community.  

 

Bearing this out, Mr. Speaker, Sandra Fowler won the Southern 

Saskatchewan YWCA [Young Women‟s Christian Association] 

Rural Woman of Distinction award this past Thursday evening 

in Regina. And these two individuals are here to observe the 

proceedings of the legislature and to have a quick visit with 

their granddaughter and their daughter, Hillary Aitken who‟s 

doing a fine job as a researcher with the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] caucus. So I‟d ask all members to join me in welcoming 

these two important women to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the legislature, it gives me a 

great deal of pleasure to introduce a group sitting in the east 

gallery. Mr. Speaker, these are all members of the United Food 

and Commercial Workers Local 1400. And the majority of this 

group have been locked out by their employer, XL Beef in 

Moose Jaw since September 18th of 2009. Prior to that, they‟d 

been laid off in April of 2009. 

 

And joining us today are Daniel Papuc, Ron Rumble, Michael 

Jabs, Julio Yanes, Jayson Skinner, Matt Abell, Bev Arrance, 

Syd Klein, Gord Miller, Dustin Peebles. Also staff rep for Local 

1400, Darren Piper and Kathryn Hiller, who is the education 

coordinator, along with the president of the United Food and 

Commercial Workers Local 1400, Norm Neault. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a great deal of pleasure to have them here. 

But I‟m sure many of us in Moose Jaw, and I know the group 

themselves, would much rather be back at work at the XL beef 

plant, and hopefully it opens soon, Mr. Speaker. I ask all 

members to welcome them here. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you I‟d like to join the member opposite in 

welcoming these guests from Moose Jaw. And like all members 

of the Assembly, we wish for a resolution to this outstanding 

difference and that the individuals can get back to work in 

Moose Jaw. Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I ask all members 

to join me in welcoming these individuals to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In the east 

gallery, I draw your attention to a group of grade 4 and 5 

students that are here from Gladys McDonald School. There‟s 

21 of them in all. Their teacher is Donna Raiter. And along with 

them there are not one, not two, not three, but four people who I 

absolutely say are not chaperones. They‟re here because they 

have a keen interest in the Legislative Assembly. These people 

with an interest in the Assembly are Greg Staruiala, Cheryl 

Rogoza, Ashley Hollinger, and Cecilia Jacobs. 

 

So I ask all members to join me in welcoming this fine group 

from Gladys McDonald School to the Legislative Assembly. I 

look forward to catching up with them at 2:30, and then I‟ll be 

spending a bit of time with this wonderful group from Gladys 

MacDonald School. Please join me in welcoming them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you and to all members of the Legislative Assembly, it gives 

me great pleasure to introduce Heather Malek here in the west 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5425 

gallery. A TV and film editor here in Regina who, among 

thousands of others, is concerned about this government‟s 

decision to privatize SCN, the Saskatchewan Communications 

Network. She and a number of others had an opportunity to 

visit Weyburn this weekend and there were a number of citizens 

there in Weyburn who shared her concerns. So I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming Heather to her Legislative 

Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Yes, I‟d like to, to you and through you, Mr. 

Speaker, introduce the northern students that are here from the 

North and join my colleagues in welcoming them to their 

legislature. And just to make a point, it is the Cumberland 

constituency that a lot of the students are here representing and 

I represent. 

 

So I just want to make sure, give you a warm welcome, and 

wish you all the best. I hope you have a good time, a learning 

opportunity and challenges and some interesting questions that 

you may present to all the different groups you meet with today. 

Ask all you want. Like the colleague from Athabasca said, 

don‟t be nervous. Ask the questions, and hopefully we can all 

provide you the answers. I‟d just like to welcome you to your 

legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 

Saskatchewan who are concerned over the condition and the 

safety of our highways. This petition pertains to Highway No. 

10 between Fort Qu‟Appelle and the junction with No. 1 

Highway. This particular portion of the No. 10 Highway is a 

year-round route to tourist destinations, as well as it serves three 

major inland grain terminals. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu‟Appelle and 

the junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety 

of Saskatchewan‟s motoring public. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Balcarres, Kelliher, Regina, Cudworth, and Balgonie, 

Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition from people who have heard that current studies show 

that venous anomalies that restrict cerebral spinal blood flow 

returning to the heart is more common in MS [multiple 

sclerosis] patients, and that they‟ve heard that despite the 

overwhelming positive outcome, testing and treatment of 

venous anomalies is still not approved in Saskatchewan for MS 

patients. And they do believe that MS patients should receive 

equal access to health services. The prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan cause the 

government to immediately recognize the principles of the 

United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with 

Disabilities and support the rights of people with MS to 

receive diagnostic services and recommend a treatment 

related to chronic cerebral spinal venous insufficiency or 

CCSVI by a qualified medical practitioner. 

 

And the signatures on the petition are from Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present yet another petition with respect to rural water issues in 

Saskatchewan. A government agency has ordered the town of 

Duck Lake to upgrade their water system, and this has come at 

an exorbitant price that Duck Lake residents now have to pay 

for clean, safe, and available water, Mr. Speaker, amounting in 

monthly bills of upwards of $165 a month. Mr. Speaker, and 

it‟s causing them great hardship. and we‟re even hearing that 

there are residents that now have to look at moving out of the 

community because they can‟t afford the monthly water bills. 

 

[13:45] 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates now being forced on them by 

a government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 

here today to present petitions on behalf of residents from 

across Saskatchewan who are concerned with the 

unprecedented mismanagement of our finances by the Sask 

Party. They allude to the two consecutive $1 billion deficit 

budgets put forward by the Sask Party and the billions of dollars 

of debt growth under the Sask Party and projected over the next 

so many years, Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 



5426 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Now these petitions are signed by concerned citizens of 

Estevan, Bienfait, Balcarres, Theodore, Kamsack, Canora, 

Preeceville, and Pelly. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Women of Distinction Awards 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This past 

Thursday evening in Regina I had the pleasure of attending the 

29th annual Women of Distinction gala awards. Mr. Speaker, 

since 1981 the award gala has recognized women whose 

outstanding achievements contribute to the health and future of 

our community and are an inspiration to all. The YWCA 

Women of Distinction nominees is a woman who displays a 

substantial and significant contribution in her field of 

endeavour, whether locally, nationally, or internationally. 

 

There were many deserving women nominated, and I am sure 

that the judges had to make the difficult decisions. Mr. Speaker, 

I would like to personally acknowledge Stephanie Carlson. Ms. 

Carlson had the distinction of winning the Education and 

Mentorship Award for her incredible work in creating rape kits 

at the Pasqua Hospital. 

 

Another female worthy of recognition in community leadership 

and enhancement is Barbara Hildebrandt. Barbara is the driving 

force behind Dress for Success. This is an incredible program 

which strives to promote the economic independence of 

disadvantaged women by providing professional attire, a 

network of support, and career development tools to help 

women thrive in work and in life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like this Assembly to recognize all the 

award recipients and nominees for the countless hours of hard 

work and dedication. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday, May 6th, 

earmarked the 29th Annual YWCA Women of Distinction 

Awards here in Regina. Since 1981, the awards have recognized 

the outstanding achievements and contributions that women 

have made to our communities and our province. 

 

The 12 award winners this year and indeed all the fellow 

nominees offered absolutely impressive resumes with 

accomplishments raising from environmental protection, 

encouraging physical activity, fighting cancer, advocating for 

victims of sexual abuse, and everything in between, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Doris Knight took home the Jacqui Shumiatcher Award for the 

arts, and U of R [University of Regina] president Vianne 

Timmons was recognized in the leadership and management 

category. Other victorious women included Deanna Ratcliffe, 

Stephanie Carlson, Michelle Yaskowich, Jenna Gall, Carla 

O‟Reilly, Elita Paterson, Tania Bird, Barbara Hildebrandt, 

Dionne Warner, Mary Kolitsas and June Zimmer. Eyebrow‟s 

Sandra Fowler was awarded for her contributions to a rural 

community. Fowler has long been involved with her area school 

board, health board, community development, the Terry Fox 

Run, and has been a pioneering female leader for her entire life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Lifetime Achievement Award went to a 

formidable community leader and a woman that is no stranger 

to this House, former NDP MLA, Joanne Crofford. Crofford 

was recognized for her long and successful political career, as 

well as her contributions to the arts community here in Regina. 

Along with bringing together 600 people and raising $40,000 

for the Regina YWCA, the awards were a salient reminder of 

the strong spirit, determination, and innovation that women in 

this province possess. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating all winners, nominees, nominators, and 

organizers of the YWCA Women of Distinction Award. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Autism Services Spring Gala 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 

weekend there was a very important event held in Saskatoon, 

the 12th annual Autism Services Spring Gala. Mr. Speaker, our 

government realizes how important it is to support those 

suffering from autism spectrum disorder. ASD affects people 

from all walks of life as well as their families, friends, and 

caregivers. Roughly one out of every 150 Canadian children is 

affected by ASD. 

 

While there has been progress in research, care, and education, 

we need to learn more about the causes of ASD and the most 

effective treatments and interventions. 

 

I was proud that our government brought forward a budget this 

March that included $2.5 million in new funding to enhance 

autism services. Our government realizes that there is more 

work to be done, but we believe we are on the right track. 

 

The Autism Services Spring Gala is just another example of the 

people of Saskatchewan coming together to help one another. 

This event is a wonderful way to shed light on ASD and in the 

process raise funds to aid in the research of this disease. On 

behalf of the government, I would like to congratulate all the 

people that put this year‟s spring gala together and thank 

everyone that attended. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Member’s Participation in Debate 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s a harsh reality of life that no 

matter the nature of your quest, it doesn‟t matter how much 

training you have if you fail to rise to the occasion when the 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5427 

spotlight is on you. We saw that happen in this very Chamber 

last Thursday, Mr. Speaker. The member from Sutherland was 

supposed to be all geared up to rip into the NDP for simply 

telling the truth, but she failed to rise to the occasion and her 

colleagues were left scrambling. 

 

It‟s puzzling, Mr. Speaker, because the member from 

Sutherland always has so much to say from the comfort of her 

seat on the backbenches. But when the spotlight was turned on 

and she was given her 15 minutes of glory, she failed to rise to 

the challenge. In the past when she defended the Sask Party‟s 

lack of action on the children‟s hospital, she said that time was 

needed to find the best spot for the parking lot. 

 

Well okay, Mr. Speaker, maybe the member passed on her 

opportunity to shine because she was planning a little 

adventure, tromping along the South Saskatchewan River bank 

scouting the best spot for the parkade. Or perhaps she chose not 

to participate in the debate because she is finally realizing that 

the Premier‟s knack for running everything he touches into the 

ground is hurting the provincial coffers and leading to a 

multitude of broken promises like the funding they cancelled 

for the children‟s hospital. 

 

Either way, Mr. Speaker, it‟s clear that the Premier‟s team can‟t 

manage a speaking list, can‟t manage a balance sheet, and 

certainly can‟t manage our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Physician Recruitment Strategy 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to tell my 

fellow members and others about a great success in physician 

recruitment. Mr. Speaker, two family physicians are headed for 

Assiniboia. Both are from the United Kingdom and will arrive 

within the next three months. In addition, a husband and wife 

team will be coming to Moose Jaw. Originally from South 

Africa, the couple is moving to Moose Jaw from 

Newfoundland. Dr. Cheddie, a general surgeon, is expected to 

arrive in September; Dr. Singh, a family physician, will arrive 

as early as next month. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is good news, but there‟s more work to be 

done. We have committed $3.5 million to a physician 

recruitment strategy to enhance efforts to recruit and retain 

physicians and build sustainable medical practices throughout 

the province. The new physician recruitment agency will act as 

a one-stop point of contact for physicians seeking to set up 

practice in Saskatchewan. And we have increased the enrolment 

of the College of Medicine and are on track to implement our 

commitment of 100 undergraduate seats and 120 residency 

positions within this term. 

 

Today we welcome the four physicians who are coming to the 

Five Hills Health Region. Their recruitment is a shining success 

as government, health regions, and communities work together 

to make Saskatchewan the most attractive place for physicians 

to call home. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Globe and Mail Interview 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, we heard a few weeks ago from 

the Minister of CIC [Crown Investments Corporations of 

Saskatchewan] that Saskatchewan holds 20 per cent of the 

natural resources on the globe. She was wrong of course, Mr. 

Speaker, but if political spin were a natural resource, the 

Premier would be responsible for at least that percentage in The 

Globe and Mail, and there is the Premier, boasting of a biblical 

proportion list of resources in Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I hope his hand wasn‟t anywhere near a 

bible when he gave this interview. For example, we read in the 

article that in his early career he operated two businesses. What 

he failed to leave out were four words at the end that said, right 

into the ground. The Premier talks in this article about a 

virtuous circle here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but then he 

lodges a vicious cycle of spin when he tells the national press 

his goal is a debt-free province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Premier has no plan to pay down the 

province‟s debt because his own budget documents prove by 

showing the province‟s debt growing by 55 per cent by 2014. 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier‟s budgeting is another vicious spiral 

of debts and deficits that will be costing Saskatchewan‟s 

families for decades to come. 

 

The Premier did speak a true word, Mr. Speaker, when he said 

in the article, politics will soon be over for me. Unfortunately, 

Mr. Speaker, even November 2011 won‟t be soon enough for 

Saskatchewan citizens who are now growing tired of the 

Premier‟s spin. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Positive Economic Outlook for Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, the hard work of 

Saskatchewan people has continued to have a positive effect on 

our provincial economy. The latest report from the Conference 

Board of Canada proclaims Saskatchewan‟s economy is “Firing 

on all cylinders.” Mr. Speaker, the report states, and I quote, 

“. . . public and private construction investment continues to 

grow unabated. Several . . .” 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I‟d ask . . . The member 

from Athabasca will come to order. Government members have 

been listening while opposition members . . . and the opposition 

members for their part, in general, have. I would just ask 

opposition members to allow the member from Moose Jaw 

North to make his statement without interference. I recognize 

the member from Moose Jaw North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — 

 

. . . public and private construction investment continue to 

grow unabated. Several private construction projects are 

entering their peak development period, including 

Loblaw‟s $200-million Regina warehouse and distribution 

facility, and Mosaic‟s $1.7-billion potash mine expansion. 



5428 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

Job creation follows these large projects, Mr. Speaker. There 

are 521,700 people working in Saskatchewan this past April, an 

increase of 8,900 over the same period in April of 2009. 

Full-time employment increased 12,400 during the same period. 

Mr. Speaker, a report by the CMHC [Canadian Mortgage and 

Housing Corporation] today shows that the construction starts 

for single family dwellings were up by 182 per cent. The 

multiple units increased by 463 per cent in April of 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these reports stand in stark contrast to the negative 

news releases coming out of the NDP caucus office. While the 

NDP tries to sell their negative spin, the people of 

Saskatchewan have done an excellent job of continuing to move 

this province forward. Saskatchewan‟s positive economic 

outlook is a direct result of their optimistic . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member‟s time has elapsed. 

 

Before we move into oral questions, I‟d just like to remind our 

guests that you‟re certainly welcome to be in the chambers or in 

the galleries to observe the proceedings, but I would ask 

members to refrain from any involvement in the debate 

whatsoever. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Support for Agriculture 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, last week the Canadian 

government issued a report on the forecasting of farm income 

for 2010. And in that report, Mr. Speaker, they indicate that net 

farm income in the province of Saskatchewan for 2010 will 

decrease by 55 per cent. This at a time when power rates, 

because of the mismanagement of this government, are up 18 

per cent in the last 14 months; diesel fuel for the farm is up 24 

per cent this spring; durum prices have dropped from $10 a 

bushel to 4; wheat prices from 10 to 5. 

 

Can the minister tell the Assembly — but more importantly, the 

farmers of Saskatchewan — what plans he has in place for the 

problems that will face farmers right across this province as a 

result of this drastic and very quick change in farm income and 

increased cost to production? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to the member opposite, I think he knows as well as I 

do farm incomes go up and down and have for the last 100 

years right across the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think some of the optimistic things that are happening in the 

province right now is we see in the hog sector right now where 

prices are better right now, Mr. Speaker, than they‟ve been 

probably in the last three or four years — in fact to the point 

now where hog producers in this province are actually starting 

to recover and make a dollar, Mr. Speaker. We see the cattle 

prices still depressed, Mr. Speaker, but at the same time with 

the high dollar we see cattle prices actually starting to move a 

little bit in the right direction. Having said that, Mr. Speaker, on 

the grain side, we probably have more grain right now on store 

in this province than we‟ve had for many years due to two years 

of fairly decent crops right across the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that the farmers in this province are 

somewhat optimistic at this point of the year. We have ample 

moisture to start this crop off and I think right now things are 

looking half decent in the agriculture sector. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, while the hog prices might 

be improving a little bit, the problem is the minister has allowed 

a good percentage of the hog producers to go broke in the last 

two years since he became minister. That‟s the problem. Today 

we see the president of the Canadian Federation of Agriculture 

saying, and I quote from last week when the report came out: 

 

The government‟s own forecasts show deep losses for 

many commodities and highlight that the business risk 

management programs currently in place were not 

designed to function with today‟s unique set of economic 

circumstances. 

 

The minister is correct; the prices do go up and down. The 

question is, Mr. Minister, what are you doing to plan for the 

problems associated with the rapid decrease in prices for grain 

and the increase in the production costs? What‟s your plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I find it 

interesting that the member opposite would even mention hogs 

in this province because their solution, I would presume, would 

be to pick one part of an industry — like Big Sky Farms in this 

province — due to the detriment of all the other hog producers 

in the province, invest about 25 or $30 million of taxpayers‟ 

money, and where has that got us, Mr. Speaker? We see Big 

Sky has gone under and we‟ve lost about 30, in excess of $30 

million of taxpayers‟ money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We don‟t invest in individual businesses out there, Mr. Speaker, 

at the expense of all the other businesses in the same industry. 

What we do do is we make improvements to crop insurance. 

We didn‟t cut spot loss hail; that was the members opposite. We 

did a review and we‟ve made some improvement to the crop 

insurance program. We‟re working with producers on both the 

livestock sector and on the grain side, Mr. Speaker, and trying 

to improve programming right across this province for every 

producer in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in this year‟s budget the 

federal government followed the example of this provincial 

government and announced they were cutting agricultural 

programs by 45 per cent, that at a time when farm income 

across Canada is predicted to be down by 91 per cent. In this 

province we‟ve seen the budget for Agriculture cut by 20 per 

cent or $100 million being taken out at the very time when the 

Canadian Federation of Agriculture is saying there‟s a crisis on 

the horizon. 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5429 

My question to the minister is this: why would you choose to 

cut support for farmers when we‟re looking at a reduction of 55 

per cent in net farm income? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 

had been watching close, a year ago the provincial budget for 

Agriculture went from $303 million to 483 million. Mr. 

Speaker, if the member opposite, when he was minister of 

Agriculture, had paid attention, he would know that it‟s the 

federal government projections that put the cost to the 

AgriStability program every year. It‟s the federal government 

that put the price to grain for the crop insurance program. And 

due to that added expense, last year . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it was due to the federal projections . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The Speaker just 

no sooner called the House to order than the member from 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre entered into the debate. The 

individual that‟s been recognized is the Minister of Agriculture. 

I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, as I was saying before, the federal government — 

as the member should know and I think does know — the 

federal government projects what the AgriStability program 

will cost and we budget accordingly. The difference, from that 

government when they were in power to this government, is we 

fully fund the programming right upfront, Mr. Speaker. That 

wasn‟t happening under the previous NDP. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, yes, AgriStability went away up last year. And 

between crop insurance, grain prices dropping, and 

AgriStability costs going down, our budget did go down, Mr. 

Speaker. But for all we know, they‟ll go right back up next 

year. And, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll be there to fund those programs 

accordingly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, this speaks to the math of 

this government. The minister says that while 55 per cent drop 

in farm income triggers that minister pulling out $100 million 

of budget in the Department of Agriculture . . . The minister 

should quit talking to the Premier because math is not the 

Premier‟s strong point. 

 

My question to the minister is this: have you approached the 

federal government since this report was released and asked the 

federal government to restore the 45 per cent they have 

announced in cuts and put your $100 million back in to make 

sure farmers are taken care of and their needs are met as they 

face a radical drop in income and increase in the cost of 

production? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — But, Mr. Speaker, think what the 

member opposite is saying. We take the $100 million that was 

saved from the AgriStability program this year and put it into 

other programming. Next year the projections go up another 

100 million to replace where they‟ve gone this year, and we‟ll 

have a budget over excess of $500 million for Agriculture. Mr. 

Speaker, that would be about double any year that the NDP 

were in power, when the average was about $250 million. 

 

So I‟m amazed that the member opposite would ask for that 

many dollars to go into programming when there has been no 

cuts to the programming, Mr. Speaker. It goes directly on what 

the federal government projects the payouts to be for 

AgriStability and prices to be for crop insurance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, wildlife compensation program is a good example 

— a program we have never had in this province, even with 16 

years of NDP government. Producers were asking for it. We 

brought it to the table and we funded it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Long-Term Care Facilities 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

question to the government: who in the government can confirm 

that Amicus Health Care Inc. has been given the green light to 

build a long-term care facility in the city of Saskatoon? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when we look at the 

long-term care facilities that are around the province and the 

need for more beds in some areas, Mr. Speaker, when we look 

at the deterioration of some of our long-term care facilities over 

a number of years of former government, that they simply 

neglected them, it is a big challenge in the province to make 

sure that we have the proper complement of beds in the proper 

locations, Mr. Speaker. We‟re looking at options in all of the 

areas to . . . in some areas to . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the members to allow the minister to 

answer the question. I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — We are looking, Mr. Speaker, in some 

of the rural communities to replace facilities that are antiquated, 

Mr. Speaker. We‟ve announced 13 of those. We are looking in 

Saskatoon at how we can best meet the need there. Right now 

we‟re using some of our acute care beds for long-term care. 

That‟s not the proper use of that space. It‟s not the proper 

facilities for housing long-term care. We‟re looking forward to 

Oliver Lodge coming online real soon, Mr. Speaker, and we‟re 

also looking at other options that will certainly meet the 

demand of long-term care in the various areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



5430 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well yes, Mr. Speaker, they certainly are 

looking at other options. Now non-profit organizations 

operating in health care are required to raise 35 per cent of the 

cost of construction from their own sources, such as Oliver 

Lodge — they‟re presently holding bake sales to raise their 35 

per cent. The government then contributes the other 65 per cent 

of the building costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve been told, in the case of Amicus, the cost of 

constructing this facility is instead being backed with a loan 

guarantee by the Saskatoon Health Region. 

 

To the minister: can he confirm that the Saskatoon Health 

Region is providing a loan guarantee for 100 per cent of the 

cost of this $27 million facility? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, when you talk about 

long-term care, right now in our system we have a number of 

variations of long-term care delivery within the system, Mr. 

Speaker. We have faith-based already within the system — 

Lutheran Care obviously is a faith-based that provides . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — As I said, there is faith-based delivery 

of long-term care within our system, Mr. Speaker. There‟s also 

variations of long-term care. There are affiliates that we 

contract through, the full cost of the contract through like 

Extendicare in other communities, Mr. Speaker, that aren‟t 

owned by the health region but are funded through the health 

region. There are a variation and a real variety of long-term care 

delivery within the system, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Speaker, 

we‟ll continue to look at all the options to provide the best 

possible care for the citizens here in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there are indeed 19 

affiliated organizations for long-term care delivery in the 

Saskatoon Health Region, and no doubt many of these 19 

affiliates would have been interested in the same kind of deal 

the Saskatoon Health Region was able to offer Amicus. 

 

To the minister: has the government or the Saskatoon Health 

Region offered to back 100 per cent of the health capital 

construction for other affiliates, and if not, why not? Why not 

an exception and why the exception for Amicus only? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous 

answer, there‟s a variation and real variety of long-term care 

facilities within the province, whether it‟s . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the opposition members to 

allow the minister to respond to the question placed by the 

member from Saskatoon Nutana. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, there is 

faith-based care, Mr. Speaker. There are affiliates that aren‟t 

faith-based that are, as I said, a variety of mixtures within the 

system. What I do know, that after many years of NDP 

government the long-term care facilities were absolutely 

neglected in our province, absolutely. In rural Saskatchewan 

after community after community, whether it‟s in Kelvington, 

whether it‟s Biggar, whether it‟s in Rosetown, whether it‟s in 

Radville, Mr. Speaker, Kipling, there are a number of facilities 

that were neglected. We‟ve moved on that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Even the Speaker is not that far 

removed but it‟s becoming difficult, especially at times, to hear 

and I‟d ask, I‟d ask the . . . There‟s a half a dozen opposition 

members continually interjecting from their seats. I recognize 

the minister to complete his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said, there are 

a number of facilities that needed to be replaced. We are 

moving in that direction. There are also areas in the province 

that certainly need more beds as we look at the demographics as 

we move forward. 

 

What we are interested in, Mr. Speaker, paramount, the number 

one priority is to ensure we have the best delivery of care within 

the system that we have today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the lawyer acting on 

behalf of Amicus is Rod Donlevy. Now Rod Donlevy is the 

brother of Joe Donlevy, the chief of staff to the Premier. Mr. 

Speaker, can I ask this simple question: what discussions have 

taken place between staff in the Premier‟s office and the 

proponents of Amicus, and has the Premier‟s office directed 

that this project be done? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there is a 

Catholic Health Corporation within this province that has 

delivered health care in this province for many, many years, 

dating back to the Grey Nuns Hospital here in Regina and many 

other facilities around this province, Mr. Speaker. They‟re 

involved in Estevan, Mr. Speaker. They were involved in 

Humboldt. The Catholic Health Corporation has delivered great 

care. 

 

Now I‟m surprised that the members opposite are saying that a 

certain family is running this whole program. That‟s absolutely 

ludicrous, Mr. Speaker. It‟s through the Catholic health 

foundation or organization, Mr. Speaker, and Amicus is just 

part of that. We are not guaranteeing any loan for Amicus, Mr. 

Speaker, not whatsoever. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5431 

Treatment for Multiple Sclerosis 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, last week a group rallied at the 

legislature to raise awareness of the research being done that 

demonstrates the connection between chronic cerebrospinal 

venous insufficiency, or CCSVI and MS. The research has been 

dubbed the liberation procedure. Today a number of the group 

are in the gallery and on the floor of the legislature. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: is he aware of the research 

being done? And when can Saskatchewan MS patients expect to 

be able to access the liberation procedure? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, first of all our thoughts and prayers go out to anyone 

in the province that suffers from MS. We have a higher 

prevalency here in Saskatchewan than most any other 

jurisdiction around the world. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I can cite a 

couple of family members, young women that are suffering 

from MS. And hearing the debilitating effects that that has on 

their life, young women with young children, and the impact 

that that has. 

 

I think everybody around the world is heartened by some of the 

news — early news, very early news — that‟s coming out 

regarding the liberation treatment and other advancements 

regarding MS and the treatment of MS, Mr. Speaker. I want the 

people of this province to know that our government will be 

there in every way that it could possibly be there to help the 

advancement so that we could prove the efficacy of this 

treatment and help treat people that are suffering from MS here 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s been discovered in 

approximately 90 per cent of people with MS that the veins 

draining blood from the brain are blocked and that‟s causing an 

iron buildup in the brain. In Saskatchewan no screening is 

taking place to determine if there is vein blockage in MS 

patients. MS patients here in Saskatchewan have no recourse of 

action and are being told to be patient. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why are patients with MS not 

being allowed to access screening and the treatment that opens 

the blockages and allows the blood to flow freely? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, these 

treatments are in the early stages. Through the University of 

Saskatchewan in Saskatoon, the Saskatoon City Hospital 

Foundation are working on a study that will help further this 

research, Mr. Speaker, and look at the efficacy. The MS Society 

themselves are saying that there needs to be a much larger 

group studied before we can say that this is as effective as what 

we all hope it will be. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, our government is there, committed, with the 

Saskatoon Health Region, with the City Hospital Foundation in 

Saskatoon to see research done and move this project ahead, 

Mr. Speaker. Because we certainly understand how important it 

is for Saskatchewan residents to find a treatment for MS. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The research being 

done at the U of S is a small group of people. The world will be 

way ahead of us if we don‟t do something fairly quickly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the rally last week called on the federal 

government to provide $10 million to the Canadian Institute of 

Health Research for CCSVI and MS research. The liberation 

procedure may be groundbreaking research that could 

drastically alter the lives of MS patients for the better. It needs 

to be looked at soon. And it needs to be looked at very 

thoroughly. 

 

To the minister: has he spoken to his federal counterpart to 

lobby for funding for CCSVI and MS research? And is the 

provincial government prepared to put extra money into the MS 

research and the CCSVI research? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is part of 

the overall national picture when you look at research and 

improvements that can be made. As the member opposite said, 

this is a groundbreaking research. It really has started, I think 

probably over I think in Italy, that this is kind of a bit of a 

breakthrough. But it is early, early in the trial basis, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I won‟t take much counsel from the member opposite. The 

member opposite, back about eight months ago, was wanting us 

to run around with HINI vaccine to every outbreak around the 

province as if that was going to cure the problem, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, we stayed the course. We did an excellent job on 

HINI. We‟re going to be staying the course with research on 

MS and making sure that our province is part of the research 

done across Canada so that we can find the treatments for MS. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise. 

 

Efficiency in Government 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier took notice of a 

question last sitting and I am very pleased to provide an answer. 

It was regarding Mr. Dale Botting. Mr. Botting is not on salary 

with Enterprise Saskatchewan. Mr. Botting has a six-month 

renewable contract for specific investment attraction services 

and the development of innovative partnerships. This is a 

logical continuation of his past work, his expertise, and 

experience in the field of investment attraction. Mr. Speaker, 

the contract is less than his final salary as CEO [chief executive 

officer] of Enterprise Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the interim CEO continues to receive his 



5432 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

salary as senior VP [vice-president], marketing and 

communications. I would note that Mr. Dekker also continues 

his responsibilities with marketing and communication. That 

means it is actually costing the taxpayers less, and I would say 

that‟s pretty efficient, Mr. Speaker. As far as the member‟s 

notion that this was done behind the scenes, Mr. Speaker, I 

would remind him that we were so secretive about this that we 

issued a news release . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister‟s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate very much the minister repeating his March news 

release to the Chamber. 

 

The Deputy Premier will know that the question to which he 

took notice for had to do with the efficiency secretariat, which 

started out in the Minister of Finance‟s office and then now 

seems to have moved to the Public Service Commission office 

without any news release, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so this quiet movement of the efficiency secretariat from 

one point to another was part of the question, but more 

importantly the question was: has the efficiency secretariat 

reviewed the situation of two deputy ministers working for the 

department? The Premier‟s comments about efficiency on one 

hand, and spending more on the other, Mr. Speaker, has the 

efficiency secretariat reviewed this matter and do they concur 

with the Minister of Enterprise? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

the member opposite talking about the efficiency secretariat, 

that was discussed in the budget that we brought forward. We 

didn‟t have to put out a news release because it was discussed at 

that time. 

 

I said last week and I will repeat, that the efficiency secretariat 

looks at projects that deal across ministries. And I gave as an 

example the project of accounts payable. When it comes to the 

individuals, they are looked at within their own ministry. We 

talked about the workforce adjustment strategy, ensuring that 

we have people that are doing a job and not duplicating. I am 

very positive . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker, the members 

opposite heard from the Minister of Enterprise, saying there is 

not a duplication of jobs. There‟s people that are carrying out 

their jobs as well as somebody else‟s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that the work that we‟re doing right now is 

a good example of what we‟re doing in government to make 

sure the taxpayers‟ money is spent wisely. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, so we‟ve got two deputy ministers 

in the department. We‟ve now got three ministers answering the 

question. We haven‟t got a single answer back yet, Mr. 

Speaker. This may appear efficient on the other side, Mr. 

Speaker, but I don‟t think to the public that‟s the case. 

 

The efficiency secretariat, Mr. Speaker . . . Two questions and 

I‟ll relate it to Enterprise Saskatchewan as well: Mr. Speaker, 

when was the efficiency secretariat moved to the Public Service 

Commission, Mr. Speaker, and why was it done so? 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, has the efficiency secretariat now 

reviewed this proposition of 18 sector teams, three strategic 

issue teams, a board advising this government, and the 

government not accepting the advice of the members of any of 

those teams, boards, or committees, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

again aren‟t letting the facts get in the way of their rhetoric. 

We‟ve already said that there is not two people doing the job 

over there. We have somebody hired that‟s been carrying on a 

consulting job and we actually have people that are still 

carrying on their job within Enterprise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the work that we are doing within the efficiency 

secretariat was well established and was talked about during the 

budget process. I am very pleased there are initiatives that are 

coming forward right now, not just payables but in other areas 

where we make sure taxpayers‟ money is spent efficiently and 

that we are getting good value for our dollars. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Celebrates 

Saskatchewan Roughrider Centennial 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure 

today to stand before you and talk about a very proud moment 

for two long-standing Saskatchewan institutions — SGI and the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders. 

 

As part of Saskatchewan‟s community and long-time supporter 

of the Roughriders, SGI wanted to do something special to help 

Rider fans celebrate their favourite team during their centennial 

celebrations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SGI is giving the world‟s greatest fans the 

opportunity to display their Rider pride on their vehicles by 

introducing an official Saskatchewan Roughrider licence plate. 

Mr. Speaker, let me say this is more than just a licence plate. 

It‟s a way for fans to pay tribute to the Saskatchewan 

Roughrider organization. 

 

Rider plates feature the team logo and the phrase, “Pride Lives 

Here.” The cost for the regular Rider plate is $50 plus GST 

[goods and services tax], and fans can buy a duplicate plate for 

the front of their vehicle for an additional $20 plus GST. 

There‟s also an option to personalize the plate with five 

characters or less for $125 plus GST. This covers the initial fees 

associated with personalized plates and the Rider plate. For 

those that already have a five-character or less personalized 

plate on their vehicle, they are not forgotten in this initiative 

that‟s very exciting. They can transfer their plates to a Rider 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5433 

plate for the fee of $70 plus GST. 

 

After covering the administrative costs of the plates, any net 

revenue earned from the sale of the Rider plates will be given to 

the Saskatchewan Roughrider Football Club to continue to help 

the team flourish. Future generations of fans will also be able to 

partake in the display of Rider pride for years to come as fans 

will be able to purchase this plate not only this season but for 

many seasons to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this initiative cannot be more fitting for the 

people of Saskatchewan as Rider pride is woven into the fabric 

of who we are. SGI is giving us the opportunity to take pride on 

the road and showcase the passion we have for Saskatchewan 

Roughriders. Mr. Speaker, I am proud of SGI‟s commitment to 

the people of Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan Roughriders. 

 

With the training camp just a few weeks away, the new 

Saskatchewan Roughrider licence plate will start a drive to a 

successful season that will end in November in a Grey Cup 

championship win in Edmonton. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

minister for supplying the ministerial statement in advance of 

the comments here today. Certainly the announcement that is 

put forward here today by SGI as it relates to the Saskatchewan 

Roughriders is one that we support, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know that just a few short weeks here from spring training is 

an exciting time in Saskatchewan and it‟s sort of that rite of 

spring where you‟re starting to plan to look at some of the new 

talent that will be on the field. There‟s been many new changes 

here this year, and I know we anxiously await seeing this year‟s 

team come together. 

 

What I know about the Saskatchewan Roughriders, Mr. 

Speaker, is that they are a huge part of Saskatchewan‟s fabric. 

And what I know goes on across Saskatchewan is that right now 

at this point in time, many young men and women are inspired, 

Mr. Speaker, by the Roughriders and are dusting off their cleats, 

are working in their respective communities and small towns 

across this province, hitting the weight rooms, and watching 

their diets, and of course studying hard, Mr. Speaker, to make 

sure that they‟re as able and ready to play this year as they can 

be. 

 

I think specifically of — and this goes across our province right 

through the North — but specifically I wish the Martin 

Monarchs in Rosemont and the Luther Lions well who will be 

conducting their spring camps here right away. 

 

And of course Rider Pride in Saskatchewan runs incredibly 

deep. As we look forward to the coming year, we certainly are 

excited about the centennial for the Roughriders, and we wish 

President and CEO Jim Hopson all the best. We wish Coach 

Miller the best with the upcoming season and of course General 

Manager Brendan Taman. And of course that being our front 

office, it‟s nice to note that two of those individuals are in fact 

Saskatchewan born and bred, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s a thing of 

pride for our team, just as it is to see the great Saskatchewan 

content in the players on the field. Mr. Speaker, they‟re an 

inspiration to all of us. They better our community. 

 

And it‟s not just football season, Mr. Speaker, that these 

football players are working to inspire Saskatchewan people. 

We know through the winter that a complement of these players 

are travelling the many, many communities and schools across 

this province bringing forward a message of positive living, of 

health, of wellness, and it‟s a message that‟s inspiring. 

 

I know that I look forward, Mr. Speaker, to seeing the 

Roughriders, I believe, play in Edmonton in November, Mr. 

Speaker, that being the time and location of the Grey Cup. We 

wish the team well. I like the motto “Pride Lives Here.” Mr. 

Speaker, this speaks beyond football, Mr. Speaker, and 

represents our province and our producers and our 

entrepreneurs and our people of our province in so many ways. 

And, Mr. Speaker, with all that said, Mr. Speaker, I simply 

remind you that green is the colour and football is the game. 

Thank you. 

 

[14:30] 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Private Bills 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Private Bills 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Private Bills to report Bill No. 904, The Orange 

Benevolent Society Amendment Act, 2010 without amendments 

and to present its seventh report. I move: 

 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Private Bills: 

 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 

Private Bills be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — I request leave to waive consideration in 

Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that the Bill be now 

read for a third time. 

 

[Interjections] 

 



5434 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

The Speaker: — I‟d ask members to come to order and allow 

us to move, proceed so we can hear what‟s happening on the 

floor. The member has requested leave to waive consideration 

in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 904, The Orange 

Benevolent Society Amendment Act, 2010 and that the Bill be 

now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The member may proceed to third reading. I 

recognize the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 904 — The Orange Benevolent Society 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

Mr. Hart: — I move that this Bill be now read the third time 

and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood that Bill No. 904, The Orange 

Benevolent Society Amendment Act, 2010 be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of 

Finance. 

 

The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

General Revenue Fund 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

 

Subvote (EX01) 

 

The Chair: — We‟re in Committee of Finance. The first item 

of business is the estimates for Executive Council, vote 10, 

found on page 67 of the Saskatchewan Estimates book. 

 

Before we begin, I would like to advise the Committee of 

Finance of the process. First I will invite the Premier to 

introduce his officials, followed then by calling the estimates. 

Then the Premier can make, if he has any, his opening remarks. 

I will now recognize the Premier to introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. I will 

just give you notice at this point that I have no introductory 

remarks. We can get right to questions from the hon. member. 

But it is an honour for me and a privilege to be able to introduce 

officials that have joined me to answer questions here from the 

opposition in Executive Council estimates. 

 

To my left is the deputy minister to the Premier, Doug Moen. 

To my right is Reg Downs, the senior advisor in Executive 

Council. Bonita Cairns, director of corporate services in 

Executive Council has joined us. James Saunders, also a senior 

official within Executive Council. And then because I also, as 

you know, Mr. Chair, have duties responsible for 

Intergovernmental Affairs to the government, our assistant 

deputy minister for intergovernmental affairs, Dylan Jones has 

joined us as well, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I look forward to a frank exchange, questions and answers for 

the duration of the afternoon. 

 

The Chair: — We‟ll start with Executive Council, vote no. 10, 

subvote (EX01) central management services. I recognize the 

Leader of the Official Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, 

and thank you to the Premier and his staff for being here today 

to dialogue and answer questions about what I expect to be a 

broad-ranging array of questions likely dealing with many of 

the departments in government, with the finances of the 

province. Some things we know. Some things we hope to learn 

and glean from the Premier today. 

 

And it‟s pretty obvious that we live in a province rich in 

resources, rich in people, and that in the election of 2007, we 

were at a pinnacle in the economy — if you look at the number 

of oil wells drilled or gas wells drilled, housing starts, vehicle 

sales — that ‟07 and ‟08 were at the height of the economy or 

that the Saskatchewan economy had ever risen to. And during 

the period of ‟09, of course, the world recession that most 

people knew, Saskatchewan would have to deal with. 

 

It seemed surprising when the budget was read in ‟09 that the 

Minister of Finance at that time laid out a strategy that would 

cause Saskatchewan, as he said, to avoid the recession. And a 

lot of business people, and especially people from other parts of 

Canada and the world, wondered out loud how it would be 

possible for a province that exported 90 per cent of everything 

they produced — whether it was potash, grain, or other 

manufactured goods — would be able to avoid the impact of the 

recession when they were exporting their goods into a world 

ravaged by a recession. 

 

And our Finance critic, Harry Van Mulligen at the time raised 

that issue and said, are you sure we‟re not being overly 

optimistic on the ‟09 numbers because obviously China, India, 

United States, where the bulk of our goods were being exported 

are in recession and shouldn‟t we be a little bit more cautious. 

 

I just wanted to ask the Premier, in retrospect, looking now at 

that period of ‟09, the budget that was being prepared and read 

about a year ago in this Assembly, how is it that the people 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5435 

sitting around you now and yourself weren‟t simply able to read 

The New York Times or other newspapers and come to the 

conclusion when ships were lined up in the ports in Shanghai 

and other parts of the world not unloading goods from, and 

resources from not only Saskatchewan, but from a broad base 

around the world, how would you ever come to the conclusion 

that you would avoid and not be involved in the recession? 

 

Now we know that in retrospect the economy which the 

Minister of Finance predicted to grow, I think, 2 per cent in ‟09 

actually contracted by 6.3 per cent. I think that‟s the biggest 

mistake made in a budget in any of the years that I can 

remember — an 8 per cent mistake on the estimate on the GDP 

[gross domestic product] of the province. I don‟t know that any 

other government has got it that wrong. 

 

The only other province that had that kind of a contraction . . . I 

think Newfoundland had even a greater contraction, but 

Saskatchewan fared the poorest of all the provinces with the 

exception of Newfoundland when it came to the economy in 

‟09. And during that period what many of the people found 

fascinating is to look at the billboards and hear the speeches 

about the booming economy, that somehow the economy was 

booming during ‟09. 

 

And members laugh from their seat because they think making 

a mistake on the economy of 8 per cent is funny, but the fact of 

the matter is that the people of the province don‟t think an 8 per 

cent mistake on the GDP of the province is funny. 

 

But I just ask the Premier, how did it become that you got the 

numbers so wrong in ‟09, and how can we count on the 

numbers in ‟10 being even any more accurate than that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. You know, Mr. 

Chair, the questions the member raises relate to the budget 

previous to the one we‟re considering in estimates today, but 

it‟s fair enough to have them asked and debated again today. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, I think in the Speech from the Throne last 

fall, in the Speech from the Throne the government readily 

admitted that the forecasts for potash were wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding what that member will stand and 

say in this Assembly, the counsel that we received for the price 

for potash came from not just industry but officials in ministries 

of the government, many of the same officials that were here 

when the previous government was in office. That is the fact of 

the matter. Officials and industry believed certain revenue 

projections. I think as late as last week at the annual meeting of 

the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. Doyle was 

reaffirming that it was the position of the Potash Corporation 

that the estimates provided by the government were reasonable, 

that the Potash Corporation was also surprised. 

 

Now I know that that member opposite when he was a minister, 

at the end of his time as a minister, went in and demanded a 

senior executive job from the potash officials of companies in 

the province. Maybe it‟s because he has this magical crystal ball 

that none of the officials actually currently employed in the 

potash industry have, because he knows more than all of them 

and he knows more than all of the officials. 

 

That said, that said, a significant mistake was admitted to by the 

government in terms of a revenue projection. Mr. Chairman, 

our government took immediate steps to deal with that drop in 

revenue. We tightened the belt, Mr. Speaker, of government 

finances. We did defer some projects, Mr. Chairman. We made 

some adjustments with respect to the financing of the 

government so that we could maintain the healthiest financial 

balance sheets in the Dominion of Canada from a provincial 

government perspective. 

 

I would also point this out, Mr. Chairman, that the member‟s 

language has changed markedly since his first speech at the end 

of that recession in November of this year, his first session, 

where he described the economy of the province as being in a 

free fall. That‟s what he said . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Well he just said, it was. This is why that member is so out of 

touch with the people of the province. Because during what he 

called an economic free fall, the economy of the province of 

Saskatchewan created a record number of jobs — get that, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

[14:45] 

 

During the middle of this recession, the international recession 

that we were not immune to, but during that recession when that 

member was saying the economy was in a free fall, 

Saskatchewan women and men were busy creating more jobs 

than ever were created in the history of our province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well it‟s true. When that member says Saskatchewan‟s 

economy is in a free fall — which was irresponsible to say the 

least on the part of the members opposite — while he was 

saying that, do you know what else happened in the province of 

Saskatchewan? We were breaking building permit numbers set 

in 2008, a record economic year. That‟s what was happening in 

the year he described as a free fall. 

 

Do you know what else happened, Mr. Chair, in the year that he 

described as an economic free fall for the province? We turned 

around 17 years of NDP-enabled decline and set the population 

record for the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That‟s 

why, that‟s why, that‟s why, Mr. Chairman, the people of the 

province have little time for the kind of backtracking and 

negativism that we see from the member since he came back 

from Calgary. He is out of step with the economy. He is out of 

step with the notion that when potash sales stop, there will be a 

precipitous decline in GDP. 

 

But there is more to this economy than one resource. There is 

oil and gas. There is agriculture. There‟s the innovation sector, 

Mr. Chairman. There‟s the service sector, category after 

category. Jobs were created, Mr. Chairman. That‟s why the 

people of this province say whatever happens, whatever potash 

revenue calculations happened in the past, the important 

forecast for the province of Saskatchewan is that that member 

never sits on this side of the House again. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the one thing we do know is 

that in the dying days of the Devine administration, when he 

was working in the back offices as a political hack and he was 

leaving to go because he knew the rats were fleeing the ship, he 

headed back to Swift Current. And he walked in and demanded 

a $150,000 grant for the guitar museum. That‟s what he did. 



5436 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

The fact of the matter is he had to . . . He needed a little hand 

up; he needed a handout. The great free enterpriser needed a 

little gift, so he went and demanded $150,000 to start up the 

country western music hall of fame. That‟s what he did, public 

money. And you know what happened? He went to Swift 

Current and he opened the museum. 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. I just started to listen to the 

line of questioning. I think we‟re dealing with Exec Council. I 

would ask the member if he would stay with what we‟re dealing 

with, Executive Council estimates. I recognize the Opposition 

Leader. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Yes, and when he opened the centre in 

Swift Current and took taxpayers‟ money — which he never 

repaid, never repaid any of that money, Mr. Chairman, which 

obviously is part of their record of the finances of the province 

— he estimated how many people would come and visit the 

centre, paid for by the taxpayers. And he estimated that 30,000 

people would come. And he was wrong because only about 

2,800 came, 2,800 people. Now that sounds like the potash 

numbers, Mr. Chair. He got that number about as correct as he 

got the potash numbers. The fact of the matter is that this 

Premier doesn‟t get the numbers right very often. 

 

I want to ask a very specific question to the Premier. Can he tell 

me how many oil wells were drilled in the province in 2007, 

and how many were drilled in 2009 . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Better than yours. Better than yours. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Mr. Chair. Well let me deal 

with the preamble, then I‟ll answer the question directly or at 

least commit to get the member the exact specifics that he‟s 

asked for. 

 

He mentioned about my former role as a ministerial in this 

building. He‟s mentioned it often, Mr. Chairman. Fair enough. 

It‟s absolutely part of what I did. And it‟s interesting to know 

that in his own party, there‟s been a minister of Finance whose 

sole experience — unlike anybody on this side — only 

qualification to be the minister of Finance was to be was that he 

was an assistant in this room. 

 

But here‟s what is even better, Mr. Chair, because he keeps 

using this as a preamble. What‟s even better is that the current 

member for P.A. [Prince Albert], for P.A. Northcote, for P.A. 

Northcote, I think the former minister of SPUDCO‟s 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company] 

son-in-law‟s sole qualification . . . Now and remember this, Mr. 

Chairman, that that Leader of the Opposition has already gone 

around the province announcing his cabinet, Mr. Speaker. Can 

you imagine the hubris? He‟s already been announcing his 

cabinet. 

 

And I don‟t know if members opposite know this, but he‟s 

already made the member, who only ever was a ministerial 

staffer in the building, he‟s made him the minister of energy 

resources, Mr. Chairman. Nothing could be worse for the 

industry than that. We‟re going to do everything we can to 

make sure that never happens, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I remember, I remember at an event we had at Husky Oil where 

we went to attend the opening of Husky Oil, the member 

opposite was there. The critic was there. I had to introduce the 

critic to the oil industry . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. We‟re going to be here for four 

hours. And in fairness to the person that‟s asking the questions 

and also to the person that‟s answering them, I would ask that 

the yelling be kept very low so the members can ask and not 

lose their voices. And it‟s starting to get loud and I can‟t hear, 

and I‟m sitting right here. I can‟t hear the person that‟s asking 

the question or the person that‟s answering. So I would ask the 

members to act with respect to the person that has the floor. I 

recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chair. I‟m looking at the expression on the member for 

Dewdney‟s face. He‟s saying, what? He‟s already been 

announcing cabinet positions? He seemed quite surprised by 

that. But he has. I‟d say to the member for Dewdney, 

unfortunately the Leader of the Opposition‟s already announced 

that he‟s going to be the minister of Energy if that party‟s ever 

elected to government again. I love the humility of the hon. 

member opposite, that he would already make that 

announcement two years away from a campaign. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I remember, I remember two of the visitors that 

came to the hall of fame. I did have a management contract 

through my company, TCB Communications, Mr. Speaker, 

which worked quite well. My last client was able to offer me a 

full-time position at the city, and I took that, Mr. Speaker. And I 

would say this as well, that two of the visitors at the hall of 

fame, two of the visitors, two of the first visitors to cut the 

ribbon was Brian Sklar and the current Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Oh yes, yes. Oh yes. He never ever misses a chance for a photo 

op, Mr. Chairman. 

 

You know what? You know what, Mr. Chairman? It was the 

previous NDP government that approved the grant. Those kinds 

of grants to business are what we‟ve ended on this side. Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Chairman, mistakes are made. This side‟s learned 

from the mistakes. That side shows up for a photograph at the 

mistakes, Mr. Chairman. 

 

With respect to the question on oil and gas wells drilled, Mr. 

Chairman, we‟ll get the specific numbers to the member 

opposite. It‟s likely that the 2008 drilling numbers may not have 

been as high as 2007. The member opposite should also note 

that land sales records, oil and gas land sale record was set in 

the same year that he‟s talking about, in 2008 of our 

government. 

 

Since then in terms of activity in the industry, in terms of 

horizontal drilling activity in the province, Mr. Chairman, and 

indications of same, we‟ve seen never a time in the history of 

the province where there is this much momentum in the oil and 

gas sector, Mr. Chairman. We want to keep that momentum 

going. 

 

The previous administration did the right thing when they didn‟t 

change the royalty structure from the previous Devine 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5437 

administration. The member, Mr. Cline, who‟s now out of 

politics, made some good improvements to the royalty 

structure, Mr. Chairman. We‟re trying to build on that success 

to develop and grow this important industry in the province, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

I‟ll tell you what doesn‟t help. What doesn‟t help the industry 

today is talk from the member opposite, who‟s applying for this 

job over here, about nationalizing the oil industry. That is what 

is not helpful and . . . Well the member looks like he didn‟t say 

that. We‟ll get into the details of it, but we should have a debate 

about the energy sector in the context of estimates, of Executive 

Council estimates. The bottom line, Mr. Chairman, is, what 

would be bad for the industry is the approach the member‟s 

articulating about a state-owned oil company, Mr. Chairman. 

We‟re going to continue working with the . . . 

 

Well here it is just now, Mr. Chairman. From a leadership 

candidates forum for the NDP, April 2, 2009, here‟s what he 

said, and this sends a chill through the industry in the province, 

to the resource sector, not just to oil and gas but the resource 

sector. Here‟s what he said. This is the member opposite, the 

Leader of the Opposition, running to be the leader of his party: 

 

In the Blakeney government, we set up SaskOil, we 

nationalized the potash industry. What I regret in many 

ways is that we didn‟t fight harder the privatization of 

those things that we did in the Blakeney era, allowing the 

potash corporation to be . . . [He just said, hear, hear . . . 

allowing the potash corporation to be] privatized was a big 

mistake. 

 

Well the member for Dewdney says it was a big mistake, even 

though now there is significant more investment in the 

province. There are more families employed in that same 

company today than there ever was when it was a Crown, but 

the quote goes on. The member opposite said: 

 

We fought it but I think there is a question of whether we 

fought it hard enough. We allowed the privatization of 

SaskOil which I think was a big mistake for the province 

as well. And we should get back . . . [Oh, here we go, Mr. 

Chairman, and we should get back] to the point of setting 

up an energy company that does our own drilling and 

exploration for gas in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Strange, strange, Mr. Chairman, that he would be so concerned 

about fighting for SaskOil because what we‟ll get into in a later 

debate today is how, when he was comfortably ensconced at the 

oil company in Alberta, he lobbied his former colleagues in this 

Assembly — Mr. Axworthy, the minister of the time — to 

introduce legislation that allowed that oil company, the one he 

worked for, to have the golden share removed as a former 

Crown. And that head office, all those head office jobs, 

followed that member to Calgary, Mr. Chairman. That‟s the 

kind of deleterious energy policy we will not allow happen 

again in the province. Better yet the people of the province will 

not allow that kind of policy to happen again in the province. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite wants 

to talk about his bankrupt companies, and he‟s proud of it and 

how many people came, but the fact of the matter is, that he 

doesn‟t answer the only question I asked. I asked him how 

many oil wells were completed in 2007 and how many were 

completed in 2009. Now you‟ve got a whole passel of staff 

sitting around you, and I want to ask the question again: how 

many oil wells were completed in 2007 and how many in 2009? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, the answer to the member‟s 

question: in 2007, 2,297 oil wells drilled — this is the 

information I‟ve just been provided — 2,297 oil wells drilled, 

‟07; 2,824, ‟08; down significantly in ‟09, 1,610 oil wells 

drilled. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — So when we deal with facts, the number 

of oil wells drilled between the last year of the NDP and 2009 is 

down considerably. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, when we deal with facts, 

when we deal with facts, the number of oil wells drilled 

increased significantly in the first year of our government. And 

then, and then when the biggest recession to hit the world hit 

the world in 2009, when the price of oil for a while touched into 

the 40‟s, West Texas Intermediate, when drilling was back 

across the country, was decreased across our country and 

around the world, yes the numbers went down, Mr. Chairman. 

So I‟m not sure what Sherlock‟s discovered by that, but I‟ll be 

interested in the next question. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — What a lot of people are curious about is 

that you don‟t tell complete answers. You talk about things 

getting much better, but when it comes to natural gas, can the 

Premier tell me what, the number of gas wells drilled in ‟07 

when Lorne Calvert was the Premier, and in 2009? What were 

the numbers then? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, similar, similar numbers 

frankly: 1,156, Mr. Chairman, in 2007 increasing to 1,221 in the 

first year of our government. And then when the price fell out 

of gas — something the member should know about — when 

the price fell out of natural gas, down to 233 is the forecast 

when we close out the numbers for 2009. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the reason the public is 

interested in these numbers is because they hear you talking 

about how everything has gotten better under your 

management. And they hear . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . well 

if you can spin that, if you cheer that, here‟s what the members 

are cheering about. The number of gas wells drilled in 2007 was 

1,217, and they cheer about the fact that it‟s gone down to 330. 

And they all cheer for that. 

 



5438 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

That is a new definition of spin. How can you spin that going 

from 1,200 wells in ‟07 to 300 in ‟09 is something to cheer 

about? People in the province don‟t understand that or how you 

cheer when the economy contracts 6 per cent in 2009. It gets 6 

per cent smaller, and the economists say we‟re now back to 

where we were in 2005 when you relate it to the GDP. And the 

members opposite cheer about that and brag about it and spin. 

And even the press here in Saskatchewan is now getting onto 

the spin. 

 

And so the Premier now isn‟t spinning as much here, but he 

goes to Toronto. And what does he say in Toronto in the 

interview that he did late last week? He‟s talking about Norway 

and comparing how great we‟re going to be to Norway, which 

is by everyone‟s definition a social democratic government, has 

a mixed economy, has very large oil companies owned by the 

people, Stat Hydro which returns hundreds of millions, no, 

billions of dollars from investments around the world, from 

billions of dollars around the world. 

 

And he‟s using this as an example of how he wants to operate 

here in Saskatchewan. And then he says, he makes another 

point. He said, and this is the title, “After weathering a 

commodities hurricane . . . [Saskatchewan Party] leader has his 

sights set on a debt-free province . . .” 

 

Now why didn‟t you take your budget document along? 

Because you must have forgotten what is true here, because in 

your own document, here‟s what you say about the debt: in 

2009, 7.7 billion; in 2010, 8.1; in 2011, 8.8; in 2012, 9.8 billion; 

going to 11 billion in 2013; and to 11.9 billion in 2014. These 

are your documents. 

 

Now how do you spin that in Toronto? I understand how you do 

it because you don‟t think anyone knows you‟re there, so you 

can exaggerate like you did with the country and western 

museum and how you did with potash. You can‟t get away with 

that with the press here anymore, so you go to Toronto. And 

you say, I‟ve got a plan to make the province debt free. That‟s 

what he said in Toronto. It‟s going to be debt free. 

 

But here are the facts. In your own budget document — and 

members opposite know this because many of them will have 

read that — in fact your projections, the government 

projections, your Finance minister is projecting that between 

2009 and 2014 the debt in the province will go from 7.7 billion 

to 11.9 billion. To the Premier: what were you referring to in 

Toronto when you said, we will be debt free? Based on what 

document, if not your budget document? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I‟ll get to the member‟s 

direct question in a moment. I‟ll deal with the preamble first. 

The member commented on why members on this side of the 

House would be applauding with respect to the economic record 

of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Let‟s review, let‟s review, Mr. Chairman. In terms of 

population, here‟s the record of this government in power: 

30,511 more people in the province, the fastest growth rate in 

80 years. Here was the record from 1996 to 2000 when that 

member sat in the cabinet under the member opposite‟s term, 

down 11,380. That‟s why we‟re clapping now in Saskatchewan 

versus what was the case before. Net in-migration now 21,731; 

net out-migration when he was the deputy premier, 32,749. 

School enrolment increase on this side, first time in 17 years. It 

decreased every single year he was in Executive Council, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

The reason they‟re applauding across the province and on this 

side of the House is that we‟ve set our job creation record in the 

midst of a recession, Mr. Chairman. The Conference Board of 

Canada says today again we‟ll be a leader in economic growth 

across the country. Almost every forecaster is saying the same 

thing. We led the country in building permits last year. That‟s 

why this side and the people of the province are applauding. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we led in manufactured goods sold, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s why this side of the House and the people of 

the province are cheering. We have the fastest growth rate in 

terms of weekly average earnings, Mr. Chairman. That‟s why 

this side is clapping. And the people of the province never want 

to go back to when members opposite oversaw the decline of 

what should have always been a leading province in the 

Dominion of Canada, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Chairman, when we came to office, there was $6.8 billion 

in debt, general debt in the province. There was about 1.2 

billion cash in the bank account. Today there is . . . Well there‟s 

going to be news on this shortly. The number is probably going 

to move up after the year is closed, but the minimum $700 

million cash in the account and the General Revenue Fund debt 

of the province is about 4.2. 

 

The reason for that, Mr. Chairman, is that this government, 

because we were listening to Saskatchewan people, paid $2.6 

billion of debt off of the books of the province. Now that 

member asked the question based on how can we talk about a 

plan for a debt-free province? Well in terms of the first two 

years, a reduction in General Revenue Fund debt of 38 per cent 

is a pretty good start, Mr. Chairman, and more work to come. 

 

I would also say this, the member opposite likes to use 

summary financial numbers. These are the numbers he likes to 

use. Let‟s have a look at the summary debt of the province of 

Saskatchewan in the last year of that government. The summary 

financial debt in the last year when members opposite sat at the 

Executive Council, the number, $11.4 billion, Mr. Chairman. 

The number today after just two years of this party in 

government, $9.2 billion, Mr. Chairman. So it‟s amazing. The 

member asks us well why do you put up those billboards that 

say you‟ve reduced the debt by 38 per cent? Because we have 

reduced the debt by 38 per cent, Mr. Chairman. That‟s why 

that‟s well-received by the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Well they‟re asking again, why? They‟ve asked again, why? So 

let‟s go over it again. The former minister of Health from North 

Battleford is heckling. He sat at the cabinet table and presided 

over the following summary financial debt for Saskatchewan — 

$11.4 billion. He‟s now heckling at a government who‟s 

reduced that debt to $9.2 billion, Mr. Chairman. That‟s the fact 

of the matter. These are the facts of the matter. 

 

Mr. Chairman, part of the reason that we can talk about 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5439 

continually reducing the debt is because we‟ve already said 

that‟s a priority of the government. The member says where‟s 

the plan for debt reduction? Where is the plan? I‟ll tell the 

member. While he was still in Calgary, the very first Act of this 

government was The Growth and Financial Security Act that 

prescribes what, Mr. Chair? That prescribes that more than half 

of any unbudgeted surplus automatically goes to debt reduction. 

That‟s why the debt‟s already down by over $2 billion. 

 

There‟s going to be unbudgeted surpluses in the future, I 

believe, I believe, Mr. Chairman, because the economy 

continues to move forward because of the economic 

momentum, credit the people of the province and the economy 

of the province. We are going to continue to reduce debt over 

the objections and the heckling of members opposite, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Government House Leader. Go 

ahead with your point of order. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Committee Chairman, members opposite, while the Premier 

was speaking, were utilizing unparliamentary language in this 

House, particularly the Opposition House Leader, the member 

from Regina Walsh Acres, the member from P.A. Northcote, 

Mr. Speaker. I would ask that you ask them to apologize and 

withdraw those remarks. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I request 

that you check the official record and make your determination 

from the record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. As I 

mentioned before, the level of heckling was starting to get out 

of hand and it makes it very hard for me to hear. I would ask 

that members would refrain from heckling and be respectful to 

one another. If some member in the heat of debate, if some 

member in the heat of debate going across the floor yelled 

something that could be viewed as unparliamentary, I would 

now give that member an opportunity to stand and apologize. 

 

With that, I guess since I couldn‟t hear because of the heckling, 

I will control that if I have to. I will ask members not to 

exchange in verbal talking across the floor and just to recognize 

and respect the people that have the floor. I recognize the 

Official Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to just go back to page 62 of the 

budget document, budget summary where it indicates very 

clearly that between 2009 and 2014 the total debt of the 

province will go from 7.7 billion to 11.9 billion. And I just want 

to compare that with what was said in Toronto, that we were in 

a program to become debt free, and how this page in your 

budget document showing a drastic increase in debt matches the 

words you said in Toronto. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, well first of all I think I was 

in Saskatchewan. I was doing an interview with somebody who 

came from Toronto because, you know what, the national 

media, the international media have been coming to the 

province increasingly. Not because of the Government of 

Saskatchewan, but because of the amazing success story of our 

economy. The same economy that the member opposite said 

was in a free fall. Even when he was saying those nonsensical 

things in this Legislative Assembly that bore no resemblance to 

fact, that frankly were irresponsible in terms of what we all 

want for the province — future economic growth. 

 

While he was saying those things, the world wanted to know 

about the Saskatchewan story. Part of that Saskatchewan story 

is debt reduction. Part of the story for the province of 

Saskatchewan is the payment of $2.6 billion in debt for the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well he says, we left you that, the NDP left 

you that. Then why didn‟t they pay off the debt, Mr. Chairman? 

Why didn‟t they pay off some debt? Do you know why, Mr. 

Chairman? Because they wanted to try to buy votes in the 

election with that pharmaceutical program that was roundly 

rejected, because they wanted, Mr. Chairman, a slush fund. 

 

Do you know what we did with the resources of the province of 

Saskatchewan? We paid off $2.6 billion in debt. That‟s why we 

can make the comment to The Globe and Mail or anywhere . . . 

 

The Chair: — I would ask the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres not to be yelling from the back. I‟d recognize the 

Premier, who has the floor. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And, Mr. Chairman, the reason we can talk 

to The Globe and Mail about a long-term debt reduction plan is 

that it‟s written into the legislation of the government, the first 

Act that we passed, prescribed in law, debt reduction with half 

of any unbudgeted surplus to the province. We actually 

exceeded that requirement in our first two years. That‟s how we 

got to $2.6 billion. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I would say this: that the forecast summary 

financial statement of debt, including the Crowns, in the NDP‟s 

last budget, 2007-2008, was $11.4 billion, Mr. Chairman. That 

was the forecast summary of financial debt under the NDP, 

Crowns and executive government — $11.4 billion. That‟s 

what they left behind. Today the province of Saskatchewan 

summary financial debt, including the Crowns, $9.2 billion. 

 

[15:15] 

 

We have a record of paying down debt. We‟re going to continue 

to pay down debt because of the strength of the economy, 

because of the business women and men of this province who 

continue to lead the country in almost every single category. It‟s 

prescribed in our legislation. It is the vision of this government 

that we would continue to exceed the national average in 

population growth and that we would systematically reduce the 

$11.4 billion in debt we inherited from the NDP. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 



5440 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, it‟s obvious that the 

Premier will not deal with his own budget document that shows 

the debt increasing, and increasing significantly, over the next 

five years. So we‟ll leave that. He won‟t respond to the facts 

because he is too busy spinning a story. And what‟s amazing is 

that his backbenchers and cabinet ministers all cheer when he‟s 

giving out information that is less than accurate as it would 

relate to his own budget document. He will not go to page 62 

that showed the debt going from 7.7 billion to 11.9 billion. 

That‟s his document; that‟s the Premier‟s document, but he 

won‟t deal with that. 

 

My question to the Premier is: on oil production, since the 

Premier came to office, can he indicate, based on barrels per oil 

a day, what has happened to the production level of oil in the 

province of Saskatchewan, ‟07 to ‟09? Can you give us the 

average daily production of crude oil? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member was I think 

an executive, some say an executive, at an oil company. So he 

will know the context for all of these questions has a lot to do 

with price. I‟m sure he will know that. The price for West 

Texas when it‟s $120, West Texas activity drilling is going to 

be higher than it is if it‟s at $50 West Texas. 

 

Well the member for P.A. Northcote, who‟s already been 

named by the Opposition Leader as the Energy minister, has 

just offered a pearl of wisdom that to say, to say that the price 

of oil dictates how much oil is drilled, that that‟s spin, Mr. 

Chairman, that‟s political spin. That‟s why the people at that 

Husky announcement in the oil industry didn‟t recognize him, 

Mr. Chairman. And if they did recognize him and know what 

that member was going to make him if they ever won 

government, they‟d be very afraid, Mr. Chairman. It‟s 

interesting how supply and demand, how supply and demand 

and microeconomics become spin with the member for P.A. 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Chairman, notwithstanding the change in price, 

notwithstanding the change in price, in terms of barrels 

production we have: 2,007, 156.2 million barrels up to 161.0 

million barrels in our first year in government of 2008. Down 

again, down again to 151 million barrels but, Mr. Chairman, not 

significantly down. When you consider the differential in price, 

you‟d see that the barrels production even in ‟09, and these are 

still estimates, is only down 5 million barrels from 2007. But 

we went up in our first year to 161. The production of oil in 

Saskatchewan went up to 161 million barrels, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I‟ll tell you the biggest threat to the ongoing health of the oil 

and gas sector, Mr. Chairman, and it‟s been well noted, 

including in the editorial pages of The StarPhoenix by a 

columnist at that particular paper. And I‟m going to quote, Mr. 

Chairman. I‟m going to quote from his, from his recap of the 

member opposite‟s energy policy that he has offered to the 

people of the province. And I‟m quoting: 

 

Lingenfelter‟s declared yearning for a provincial Crown 

oil company will help put to rest suggestions that he‟s a 

freebooting capitalist who would turn the NDP sharply to 

the right. Now he looks more like one of [those] . . . New 

Democrats who nationalized . . . scared off investment for 

decades to come. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the editorial goes on to characterize the 

member‟s energy policy as “crazy talk.” I think we‟ll stick with 

what we have, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, what‟s crazy talk is the 

member opposite going to talk to the Toronto Globe and Mail 

and talking about having the province debt free when his budget 

documents, when his budget documents say that the debt is 

increasing. That‟s crazy talk. What‟s crazy talk is the Premier of 

this province talking about keeping chiropractic services 

insured and then cancelling them. That‟s crazy talk. 

 

And what‟s interesting, Mr. Chairman, is the fact that oil 

production in the province has actually decreased, has actually 

decreased since he became Premier. Now he hasn‟t said that to 

anyone. 

 

The Premier goes to Toronto and he travels to Calgary and he 

says, do you know what? We‟re going to overtake Alberta, 

going to overtake Alberta. Well I have a chart here that it‟s not 

quite there yet. We‟re producing this year in ‟09, last year, 423 

million barrels of oil a day. That‟s down, that‟s down 4,000 

barrels a day from 2007 under the Calvert government — it‟s 

down 4,000 barrels a day. And yet if you listen to the Premier 

spin, you would think that oil production has increased 

dramatically in the province. And the fact of the matter is it‟s 

gone down. 

 

Now I don‟t know how many members opposite know that or 

whether you just blindly follow the Premier. And when he says 

oil production is up, it‟s actually down by 4,000 barrels a day 

from the day he took office. By the end of ‟09 — the Minister 

of Energy will know this — the oil production has actually 

dropped. And that has nothing to do with who‟s in government; 

it‟s got to do with the fact that oil production has gone down. 

 

Now the member can say that all the oil companies would move 

here after the defeat of the NDP government, but the fact of the 

matter is, oil well drilling in the province has gone down, gas 

well drilling has gone down, production has gone down. It‟s 

gone down in this province while in Alberta it‟s actually 

increased. Oil production in Alberta, in that same period of 

time, has gone up. 

 

Now he can talk about conventional oil and pick and choose, 

but the fact of the matter is, oil production overall in Alberta 

has actually increased in that two-year period when you include 

conventional and oil sands and oil . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . Yes, well why wouldn‟t you include all the oil? Most people 

do. 

 

The Premier will want to exclude; he will want to exclude. But 

the fact of the matter is, and the Premier should know this, and 

he laughs like a . . . well I won‟t say what he laughs like, from 

his seat. But the fact of the matter is oil production is decreasing 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5441 

Now on conventional oil, he‟s correct that it‟s decreasing faster 

in Alberta. Conventional oil is going down in both provinces. 

You‟re like the guy in a race who‟s running backwards slower 

than the other person. That‟s how you‟re gaining and that‟s how 

you‟re winning. You‟re like a kid. And the reason the books 

aren‟t balanced in this province is because you don‟t know how 

to read a balance sheet. That‟s the problem, my friend. 

 

And whether it‟s the Country Music Hall of Fame, which you 

didn‟t do a very good job on reading the balance sheet, or 

whether it‟s Last Stand Adventure, which I understand didn‟t 

go bankrupt . . . You just wound it down and it just went broke, 

just went broke. Because most people, when you have a going 

concern, you don‟t just wind it down. If you have a Kentucky 

Fried Chicken place and it‟s making money, you sell it. You 

don‟t wind it down. 

 

Or if you have an oil company that‟s producing 1,000 barrels 

. . . [inaudible interjections] . . . Well you have a Minister of 

Finance who knows a lot about, and he should be proud of it, 

because he ran a business. But you don‟t just wind it down. You 

sell it. Now the reason the Premier didn‟t sell the Last Stand 

Adventure company and wound it down is because there was 

nothing to sell. It had gone broke. And he quibbles over 

whether we use the word bankruptcy or broke. And I‟ll give 

him this: we should have said he had one company that went 

bankrupt and one that went broke. I‟ll give him that. He‟s 

accurate on that. 

 

But when it comes to running a $10 billion budget, we should 

know whether oil production is going up or down — and it‟s 

going down. And I‟d ask the Premier if in the year that we‟re 

comparing, ‟07 to ‟09, can he give me the gas production? Did 

gas production between ‟07 and ‟09 go up or down under your 

management? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I know the member will 

understand. I know the member will understand. Sometimes a 

person gets elected to public office and you have to wind down 

the thing you were doing, especially if you were intricately 

involved in the business. Maybe you have to have an auction of 

your farm because you can‟t do everything you used to do on 

the farm so you‟ve got to wind down that part. 

 

Mr. Chairman, sometimes what‟s worse, Mr. Chairman, what‟s 

worse is that if you used other people‟s money, like the 

taxpayers‟ money, and you say you get engaged in a potato 

business or some sort of gas arbitrage nonsense — one was 

SPUDCO, one was Channel Lake — what was that, Mr. 

Chairman? Was that a wind-down or did that member just go 

broke on behalf of taxpayers in this province? I wonder which 

one it is, Mr. Chairman. 

 

We can talk about . . . I‟d be happy to talk about either of those, 

be happy to talk about his decision, which I respect. Obviously 

that member does not have the time to be engaged on his farm 

like he used to be so he‟s winding down. He had an auction, 

Mr. Chairman. That‟s what happens sometimes. You get 

elected, sometimes you have other duties, and you can‟t do all 

the things that you did, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Now it‟s interesting that the member said, the member was 

comparing Alberta to Saskatchewan. He was comparing both 

conventional and non-conventional oil assets. Mr. Chairman, 

when we talk about in the future potentially overtaking Alberta, 

we‟re not . . . We‟re talking about conventional oil. And unlike 

the member, we‟re not talking about offshore oil or olive oil or 

palm oil, we‟re talking about conventional oils, assets in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I would also say that in direct answer to the 

member‟s question — and this is an incredible line of question 

— let‟s consider what‟s happened to price, price per gigajoule 

of gas, price for West Texas Intermediate dropping like it has 

never dropped before in the face of a world recession. The 

likely impact of that is going to be a reduction in the wells 

drilled. That‟s what happened in Alberta. 

 

That‟s what happened in Alberta. And get the Alberta number 

for natural gas, Mr. Chairman: 2007, 10,679 was the number. In 

2007 in Alberta, it dropped to 4,184. Well why would that be, 

Mr. Chairman? Why would that be? Would it have anything to 

do with the fact that the price for natural gas dropped by more 

than 100 per cent in some cases, Mr. Chairman, from over the 

high levels of double digits per gigajoule to 4 and $5 a GJ 

[gigajoule], Mr. Chairman? Would that have an impact on the 

number of oil, of gas wells drilled? 

 

It did have an impact in Saskatchewan, to be sure. Mr. 

Chairman, natural gas is important to industry to the province. 

It‟s not as important as oil but it‟s very, very important. And 

production indeed dropped in 2008 and in 2009. Mr. Chairman, 

that‟s the record. And the record is the price for natural gas fell, 

so activity across the world in terms of drilling for natural gas 

fell. 

 

I think the hon. member is going to want to stand in his place 

and support some initiatives coming forward from our 

government that will apply some innovation with respect to 

royalties on the gas side. We know the potential of shale gas. 

We‟ve seen it right across North America. We know we are 

blessed in this province, as we are with so many other 

resources, with the shale gas resource. We need to make sure 

our royalties are right. The royalties we inherited from the NDP 

government may need some tweaking to see some increased 

investment in this sector. 

 

And I know that would be a substantive debate to engage in. 

Rather than start up our own government-owned oil and gas 

company, like a SPUDCO, like a Channel Lake, I‟d be 

interested in hearing the member, the Opposition Leader‟s ideas 

for natural gas royalties. He does come from the energy sector. 

He may have some ideas, Mr. Chairman. We‟re currently 

working on some innovation. If he wants to add to that, this is a 

great forum and I invite him to do that, Mr. Chairman. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, I know 

that the public are interested in the fact that the Premier has 

finally today said oil production is down from when he came to 



5442 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

office. Natural gas production is down. Oil wells drilled are 

down. Natural gas wells drilled are down. Land sales are down. 

 

And finally, after all his spin, he is admitting that the economy 

of Saskatchewan in ‟09 contracted by 6 per cent. Oil wells 

being drilled are less, gas wells less. And finally today, if you 

take away all the spin that he‟s doing on the surface, underneath 

he admitted some interesting things today — that oil production 

is down, gas production is down. Wells drilled are down. Potash 

production is down, and the economy of Saskatchewan has 

contracted by 6 per cent last year. Now after all the bravado and 

getting red and yelling, this is the . . . Mr. Chairman, we find 

that this is what we determined today. 

 

Mr. Premier, I want to turn to the issue of The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act that‟s being debated hotly across the province. 

And we have many letters from former members of the 

Department of Agriculture and Environment who say that the 

idea to sell this land certainly didn‟t come from the department. 

And the minister will I think say it didn‟t come from her 

personally. But if it doesn‟t come from the department and it 

doesn‟t come from the minister‟s office, who in the world 

decided or instructed the department to prepare the legislation 

that would sell off 3.5 million acres of sensitive habitat land in 

this province without consultation with the public at large? 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 

Committees. Just with respect to the member‟s preamble, let‟s 

be very clear on conventional oil production. When he was last 

in the cabinet of this province, the difference in terms of 

conventional oil production between Saskatchewan and Alberta 

was that they held a 121 million barrel lead on the province of 

Saskatchewan . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

 

Well the hon. member wants to talk about when Mr. Calvert 

was the premier. The lead had narrowed to 35 million barrels, 

and now the lead for Alberta is down to 12 million barrels, Mr. 

Chairman. That‟s why we say, that‟s why we say we are . . . We 

believe, we have faith in the industry. We have hope in the 

resources of the province. We have a commitment to the 

industry to continue to make sure we avoid crazy talk like the 

member opposite when he wants to nationalize the oil sector. 

And with those things, we do believe we will catch Alberta as 

the number one producer of conventional oil. 

 

Member after member has decried that. The gentleman that the 

hon. member says will be his Energy minister said, that‟s crazy. 

Even though the gap has narrowed in 10 years from 120 million 

barrels to 12, only 12 million barrels difference between 

Alberta and Saskatchewan, they kind of, they‟ve been mocking 

this fact over on the other side of the House. 

 

Do you know why, Mr. Deputy Chair? I‟ll tell you this. That is 

not well-received by industry. Because never mind what the 

government has to say, but you know the women and men that 

are involved in the oil and gas sector in my hometown, many of 

my constituents — the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy, the 

member for Cut Knife-Turtleford, the member for 

Lloydminster, the member for Estevan, increasingly more and 

more members around the province, the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose — they represent families who are building 

the energy sector like it has never been built in the history of the 

province. 

 

And, you know, Mr. Chairman, you don‟t have to . . . 

Obviously the member opposite doesn‟t want to take my word 

for it. He can check with RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] and 

their senior economists. He can check with CIBC [Canadian 

Imperial Bank of Commerce] and their senior economists about 

what‟s going to happen with respect to the resource sector in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, the member asks a question 

about who decided the . . . who made the decision with respect 

to the WHPA [The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act] legislation 

currently before the House. Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, it 

followed the normal course. Cabinet makes a decision and the 

minister begins to draft the legislation. The minister reaches 

out, as she did in June, with letters to groups to comment on it. 

Mr. Chairman, that consultation has continued and we know 

that a number of groups are very strongly in favour of this. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I had a chance to talk to some landowners just 

last night who have for 50 years been very, very able stewards 

of their land. They have only ever been able to lease it. They are 

happy to have the chance to purchase it. And they are happy to 

actually accept the easement, the conservation protection that 

will come from this legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, you know here is the 

NDP in action with a bit of sleight of hand. The member used 

the number I think of 3 million acres, intimating, implying that 

those 3 million acres, three and a half million acres will lose 

protection. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, through the conservation easements that will 

in many cases make conservation a higher priority, increase 

penalties for violations, over 90 per cent of that 3.5 million 

acres will be protected, will benefit from stronger protection, 

Mr. Chairman. 

 

The minister continues to consult with groups including last 

week, and I think that consultation‟s going to continue into the 

future. Mr. Deputy Chair, and we will have struck a balance 

between the desire on the part of these producers to be able to 

own this land — producers who have a great track record as 

conservationists themselves — and also the balance between 

the environmental priorities of our government and of the 

province, and that is the preservation of our wildlife habitat in 

the province, as it has been preserved by leaseholders in the 

past and now by landowners into the future with the 

government easements providing protection as well. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I have a letter here that 

was addressed to the Minister of the Environment on the 

proposed changes to the critical wildlife habitat protection Act. 

And this individual‟s name is George O‟Bertos who‟s an 

agrologist who was involved in the establishment in bringing 

land in to be protected. And I want to read part of the letter. It 

says: 

 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5443 

I was the land resource management specialist at the 

Department of Agriculture lands branch at the time these 

lands were being determined for designation under this 

Act. Because of my expertise in the field, I was chosen to 

work directly with the provincial wildlife biologist in 

determining which lands were designated as wildlife 

habitat protection Act lands. 

 

My area of responsibility was mainly in the parklands and 

northern grain belt of Saskatchewan where many of these 

lands are located. My submission to you is therefore based 

on that study. 

 

In the letter he goes on, Mr. Chairman, to describe how much of 

this land is not exactly suitable for farming and he says: 

 

Your ministry must surely be aware the value of 

preserving natural habitat and wetlands, and how the loss 

of these is extremely detrimental to our environment. For 

the sake of citizens of our great province and for future 

generations, we‟re asking you to rethink your position on 

this issue. 

 

In light of the fact of the hundreds of calls and hundreds of 

emails and letters that we‟re receiving, and I‟m sure other 

members are getting these kind of calls on both sides of the 

issues — some supporting, but I would argue, at least in my 

office, many, many more opposed — that we take a breather on 

this Bill, that we withdraw it for the coming 12 months. And if 

we hold public hearings and the people who own the land — 

that is the million citizens in the province who presently own 

the land — are consulted and it comes back that there is general 

will to sell this land that the public now owns, that we would 

come back and have a debate here in the House. 

 

But the fact of the matter is that nobody who has sent us letters 

or emails have said, we‟ve been consulted. And quite honestly, 

everyone who has called us has said, nobody asked us. It‟s our 

land. We own it and nobody asked us if we wanted to sell it. 

And I know the Minister of Energy heckled across and said, but 

the ranchers want the land. And I don‟t dispute that, that the 

people renting it would like to have an opportunity to buy it. 

But before you sell property, you should ask the owners if 

they‟re in agreement. 

 

SaskPower‟s another example of that. Where you have . . . 

SaskPower is owned by the million citizens of the province, and 

it might be that Northland Power wants SaskPower, but that‟s 

not a good reason to sell it. There may be arguments to sell 

property that‟s owned by the people of the province, the 3.5 

million acres of land. I don‟t know what it‟s worth, but I would 

expect it‟s around — the member from Cypress would know — 

around 2 or $300 an acre. And you know, a piece of grassland, 

a quarter section, probably 40 or 50,000 a quarter. And if my 

math is right that 3.5 million acres is worth something in the 

area of a billion dollars. 

 

Now the question is, the public of Saskatchewan, if they want 

that billion acres of highly sensitive habitat land privatized and 

sold to individuals, and they may, but the problem is that 

nobody‟s asked the owner whether they want to sell. And I 

know members in the backbenches may for philosophical 

reasons want to get rid of that land, and that‟s fair comment. 

But the fact of the matter is, before you sell the land, you should 

ask the owner. And it doesn‟t belong to the members opposite 

or to the members on this side. It doesn‟t belong to Ducks 

Unlimited or to the ranchers. It belongs to a million people, 

million extra people who own that land. And what should 

happen is there should be town hall meetings, discussions 

where people have an opinion and can come forward and 

express it. And my question to the Premier is whether or not, 

even at this late date, we can take a breather, pull the Bill. And 

if consultation takes place and there‟s general agreement we 

should sell the land, that it could be reintroduced in the next 

session of the legislature. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, when that member was 

in cabinet in 1996 and his government made the decision to sell 

11 636 hectares or 25,600 acres with no conservation easements 

— none — not one conservation easement . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well the member from Regina Rosemont says, 

pretty rich. That‟s the fact of the matter. 

 

Now he wasn‟t involved in that government at the time, but 

that‟s what his government did. Not a conservation easement on 

one of those acres. And there was land, in terms of wildlife 

habitat protection, at stake. And the minister responsible was 

Lorne Scott, was Lorne Scott. That was the member 

responsible, the minister. In fact he made the announcement. 

They passed amendments to The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act. Now were there town hall meetings? Were there town hall 

meetings? Were there town hall meetings? Mr. Deputy Chair, 

there was not. 

 

That is not to say there should not be consultation. And if for 

any reason, if for reasons the groups involved feel the . . . many 

environmental groups who have, certainly who are properly 

motivated, have all the right motivations, if they need 

clarification, if they need changes made to this legislation that 

gives them a greater assurance of our determination to protect 

this habitat, to provide that protection, then they should have it. 

Absolutely. That‟s what the member‟s been working on. That‟s 

what the Minister of the Environment has been working on with 

these groups. 

 

The Minister of the Environment has been . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . well, the honourable members say, two 

meetings. I can tell you this, Mr. Deputy Chair. There are some 

specific requests that have been made by these groups with 

respect to the legislation and my understanding is the minister is 

accepting those recommendations, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

 

The desire on the part of the government of Saskatchewan is to 

allow for greater ownership of the people who have been 

stewards of this land for decades while protecting the 

environment, while protecting the environment. Ninety per cent 

plus of the acreage that we‟re talking about, unlike what the 

members opposite did in 1996, has conservation easement or is 

protected in a number of other ways in terms of the habitat of 

the land itself. That‟s the fact of the matter, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

 

I had a chance on the weekend to be at music festival in Swift 

Current. There was a gentleman there whose father had began 

leasing land on a small holding, a small farm and ranch they 



5444 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

have north of Swift Current, quite small. And he made the point 

to me that they never broke that land. They‟re very, very serious 

about habitat protection. They always have been. Currently that 

land is in the middle of parcels that are deeded and they‟re 

grateful for the chance to consider, at least, buying the land. 

Their resolve to take care of the land won‟t change. In fact, Mr. 

Deputy Chair, you know, it‟s a fact in our province that when 

ownership happens, you‟re actually sometimes better motivated 

to keep care of that property. 

 

The member for Moose Jaw Wakamow is chirping from her 

chair about slamming it through. In 1996 she should have 

phoned up somebody in her government and asked them why 

you‟re selling all of this acreage without an easement, without 

any protection at all. People would have, would describe that in 

a certain way, Mr. Deputy Chair — having one position when 

you were the government and then another position when 

you‟re in opposition. 

 

The bottom line is the groups have some serious concerns. The 

minister‟s been working on those concerns. We want to strike 

the balance between habitat protection and allowing for private 

ownership of those who wish to purchase it. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Chair, it is true that this side of the House 

believes in our producers. We do believe in our ranchers. We 

believe in their track record of maintaining their own 

environment and their own habitat. We note, Mr. Deputy Chair 

of Committees, the Saskatchewan Environmental Stewardship 

awards that have been won in so many cases by ranches in 

Dinsmore, Meadow Lake, Stockholm, in Maple Creek, in 

Radville, in Beechy, in Lisieux, in Radville and Bethune, Cabri, 

Maple Creek, Glaslyn, Hallonquist, in Cypress Hills, Mr. 

Deputy Chair. These are families who have cared about their 

environment for a very long time and, more than cared about it, 

they have acted on it. 

 

And we know, Mr. Deputy Chair, we will add actually to their 

diligence with our own protection, our own conservation 

easements that are actually — I would characterize them as — 

stronger than was previously available under the NDP. And we 

will strike the balance between land ownership, for a relatively 

small percentage of the acreage, and the environment of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, my question had been to 

the Premier whether he would undertake to put a pause and hold 

the Bill off until this time next year. And after the consultation, 

the town hall meetings, that we would take the opportunity to 

move the Bill at that time if it was generally accepted by the 

public. But the Premier, maybe, when he rises can respond to 

that. 

 

The fact of the matter is is that many, many people who were 

involved in 1996 know that there was no net loss of habitat 

land; that for every acre that was sold, another acre was brought 

back in. And the Premier knows that, and I would just ask that 

he would understand that there was no net loss. 

And Lorne Scott, if he were here — a former MLA and 

somebody who worked in that area and is presently, I think, 

meeting from time to time with the minister, trying to bring a 

resolve to this issue — would be the one who would stand up 

and say there was no net loss in 1996, that land was exchanged. 

 

And in many cases, less sensitive land was sold and more 

sensitive land was brought in under protection and net . . . 

When you talk to the biologists — the member from Regina 

South who will not understand this but — the fact of the matter 

is that we were ahead of the game in protecting land after the 

arrangement in ‟96 than we were before we sold land. And so if 

the Premier‟s going to talk about the ‟96 exchange, he should 

tell the whole story because it‟s an important message to give. 

 

The fact of the matter is is that we have a number of letters and 

I just want to quote from a few. This letter is from Frances 

Hilderman from Regina, because it‟s not only rural people who 

are interested in this issue. Many people who live in Shaunavon 

or live in Regina are also interested in this issue. But Frances 

says: 

 

As an urban dwelling Saskatchewanian, I hold the 

government-owned parcels of land very dear to my heart 

and critical to our wildlife. In addition, the rest of the 

province is privately owned and therefore unavailable for 

the enjoyment of the province. 

 

They go on to say: 

 

I‟ve written a previous letter on the issue several months 

ago and was assured that no lands were being considered 

for sale. 

 

So not only wasn‟t there consultation, the letters that were 

written by the Premier‟s government got responses from his 

government that said no land would be sold. And that is far 

from consultation. These are serious matters. And not only are 

we saying this, but members of the media are saying it, 

members of families across the province. 

 

Here‟s another letter. It‟s an Anne Smith from Martensville 

who says: 

 

This is a very important issue and it affects all residents, 

not those just from the concerned groups that will profit 

from this coveted deal. This is a very serious important 

issue, and I think that you would find that most residents 

believe that as well. How on earth did it get to second 

reading without the coverage that it should have? 

 

And the letters . . . and I‟ll quote some of them into the record 

briefly because I think they‟re important to get on the record. 

But my question again to the Premier is: in light of the fact of 

many people arguing against the sale of 3.5 million acres that 

belonged to all the people of the province, the residents who 

live here now — but many of the letters indicate not only the 

group who live here now but the grandchildren and children 

who will come later and will want to have this land protected — 

that what gives us the right, without consultation, to allow for 

the sale of this 3.5 million acres? 

 

I might add too, that as we go forward from the 1990s to 2000, 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5445 

now in 2010, that protecting wildlife habitat is a much bigger 

issue than it was 20 years ago. And the Premier will know that, 

that whether you‟re in the Amazon and protecting forests or in 

the boreal forest in northern Canada, that actually protecting 

wildlife habitat is a bigger issue now than it was five years ago, 

10 years ago, or 15 years ago when the exchanges that took 

place then even recognized that if you were going to sell some 

land, you replace it with other more sensitive land. 

 

Can the Premier explain, first of all, why he wouldn‟t pull the 

Bill and do proper consultation? And what is the rush to do 

this? This land has been in this position for a long time. And 

what would it matter, 12 months to go out, consult, talk to 

people, and bring back a report? And if the overwhelming 

pressure is to sell the land, and we could prove that, we would 

be able to discuss it in a proper manner, fully consulted with the 

people of the province. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 

Committees. You know, last week in this Assembly there was a 

considerable amount of debate about accurate information 

coming before the Assembly — as there rightly should have 

been. And there was some degree of concern on both sides, and 

a lot coming from members opposite. 

 

The Hon. Leader of the Opposition just has stood up and said in 

reference to 1996 — he was a member of the cabinet and he 

will have the information — that in reference to 1996, there was 

a net increase in the lands added to protection by his . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well that is what he said, and we 

could check the record. No net loss, that‟s what he said, sorry 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, well I‟m going . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . That there was no net loss. And he 

just said it from his seat again. 

 

A big debate in this House, as there should have been, about 

standing on your feet and getting your facts right. Whether it‟s 

wilful or not wilful, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, the 

record, the record of history for 1996 is 25,600 — as I‟ve said 

already — acres of WHPA land sold without any easement; 

3,600 added back by the government in that year. That‟s the 

fact. 

 

No net loss in . . . Now I hope he‟s going to take an opportunity 

to stand in his place and apologize to the House, and apologize 

to the House for what is not accurate information, because 

we‟ve seen it time and time again in hyperbole in debate where 

that member just gets up and says something, including three 

and a half million acres being sold without habitat protection, 

including no net loss, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees. There 

was a net loss to the habitat lands under that government in 

1996 and, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, there was no 

conservation easements provided to the land. 

 

Here‟s the other intimation, at least, that we hear from members 

opposite about this: that somehow if there is a change in terms 

of ownership of this land, even with stronger conservation 

easements provided by the government to protect the habitat for 

the future generations that he‟s talked about, that somehow 

there is less access to the land by the public. And I‟ve got letters 

too, and I understand where they‟re coming from, letters from 

people in our cities that are saying, well if you make this 

change, I won‟t be able to hike in the Qu‟Appelle Valley if it‟s 

a parcel affected. I won‟t be able to enjoy the environment, to 

enjoy the habitat that‟s there. Mr. Deputy Chair, that‟s not 

helpful to the debate because it‟s not true. 

 

Today leaseholders can post land. Today leaseholders who have 

paid their rent to the Government of Saskatchewan, to the 

people of the province, they can prevent hunting on their land. 

They can control access to their land. That happens today. It‟s 

always been the case in the province. Many of them of course 

choose not to do that, thank goodness. Many choose . . . And I 

don‟t fault the ones that do. They have good reasons to. But 

many have open access to their land for hunting. Many, it‟s on a 

permission basis for hiking. 

 

You name the activity, Mr. Deputy Chair; none of that changes. 

And for members opposite to be trying to foment this concern 

and this fear that you can‟t access the habitat lands of the 

province if we make this change is nonsense, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

And it doesn‟t, frankly, help the debate at all. 

 

I will repeat again, Mr. Deputy Chair, that consultation letters 

were sent out to stakeholders by the government in June. We 

invited their input, Mr. Deputy Chair. We understand that now 

the minister‟s been meeting with groups again, those same 

groups. 

 

There‟s a number of very specific changes that we‟ve offered to 

make. I‟ll go over those. I think it improves the measure, to be 

sure, Mr. Deputy Chair. It says that we‟re prepared to look at 

devoting a portion of the revenue from WHPA land sales to the 

Fish and Wildlife Development Fund. That‟s a good suggestion. 

 

It says that we‟d be willing to establish a Crown land 

conservation steering committee that could be made up of 

conservation and producer stakeholder groups together. So 

you‟d have groups like the stockholders and Ducks Unlimited 

or the Nature Conservancy . . . [inaudible] . . . these very 

excellent environment groups together with some very excellent 

producers groups to provide a steering committee on 

conservation. 

 

They asked that we would endeavour to apply the Crown land 

ecological assessment tool to all Crown lands in the province. I 

think that‟s also a reasonable request. The minister‟s looking at 

that request. 

 

They‟ve asked that we potentially protect under WHPA other 

unoccupied agricultural Crown land where CLEAT [Crown 

land ecological assessment tool] shows it to be either of high or 

moderate ecological value and, Mr. Deputy Chair, that‟s also a 

good suggestion. That‟s also a good suggestion. 

 

The intent here is to protect the habitat of the province of 

Saskatchewan while affording ranchers and families, who have 

been stewards of that land for generations, for decades, to own, 

to own that land, Mr. Deputy Chair, and we‟re going to do it 

with a comparatively small parcel of land. We‟re going to apply 

the conservation easements to that land. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, we understand that not everybody would in 

agreement with that. But, Mr. Deputy Chair, when you consider 



5446 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

the consultation offer back to last June, what‟s happening today, 

and what‟s actually in the fact of the matter — what‟s actually 

in the measure and not what‟s being referred to in a rhetorical 

way by members opposite, Mr. Deputy Chair — I think that the 

balance has been achieved. Now, because if we move towards 

this conservation committee, we can evaluate this going 

forward, Mr. Deputy Chair. And we would be happy to do that. 

 

We would be happy to work with conservation groups and with 

producer groups to, on an ongoing basis, evaluate how this is 

working, how habitat is being protected . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well the member for P.A. Northcote‟s yipping 

from his chair again. It‟s a request that‟s been made by the 

groups, by the environmental groups, for this steering 

committee. And so, Mr. Deputy Chair, we may invite him on 

the committee because he has the answers to everything. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Chair, we think we‟ve struck the right 

balance. We want to be vigilant about it, and we will be in the 

future, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — The Premier I‟m sure didn‟t intend to 

give information that wasn‟t accurate. But he will know that in 

1996, the then minister of Environment who is sitting here kept 

track . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, but he was in cabinet. 

He was in cabinet. And Lorne Scott, Lorne Scott was the 

minister of Environment, that as the land was sold, every week 

we got reports on land coming back in. And at the end of the 

period, not in one year, but at the end of the period, the land 

was net the same. The same amount was sold as brought in. 

 

And while I‟m on my feet I would ask the Premier to table the 

document that he‟s referring to because he‟s giving information 

that isn‟t accurate. He‟s giving information again that isn‟t 

accurate to the Assembly. And we saw this last week where we 

had a motion of privilege where information given to the House 

was not accurate. So I would like the document the Premier‟s 

referring to tabled so we can see what it is he‟s referring to. 

 

But I want to be clear. That in 1996, in that period when land 

was being sold, that it was being exchanged and other land was 

being brought in. And net amount remained the same. And it 

happened over a period of time. Not over one year . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well yes, because the land was sold 

over a period. Well the Premier shows how naive, how naive he 

is about the way this process will work. The land he‟s selling 

now. The land he‟s selling now . . . 

 

[16:00] 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. Order. I‟m listening to 

this committee in stereo. I hear one voice over here, and I hear a 

number of voices over here. It‟s happened the other way around 

I might add. And we need to get this work done in a calm and 

more considerate manner. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — The member will know that if this Bill 

passes, the 3.5 million acres will not be sold in 2010. Surely 

he‟s not that naive. And surely he would know that in 1996, the 

arrangement made, the land wasn‟t sold and brought in in 1996. 

It happened over a period of time. 

 

So if the briefing note that he‟s been given by his Minister of 

Environment is inaccurate and she‟s that naive that she‟s trying 

to say that in 1996 the land was, because the legislation was 

passed, all the land was sold at one time, it only speaks to the 

lack of knowledge about how this is going to work. The fact of 

the matter is if we pass this Bill, the 3.5 million acres won‟t be 

sold in 2010. It will be sold over a period of time. And that‟s 

what happened in 1996. 

 

And my statement stands, and the Premier is absolutely wrong 

in that it was net. The land was net. What was sold, other land 

was brought back in in the deal that was made in 1996. The 

same as his deal made in 2010 — the transaction won‟t occur in 

2010. Surely he knows that. Surely he knows that.  

 

Well maybe that‟s why his two companies went bankrupt. 

Maybe that‟s why his two companies went bankrupt is because 

if he‟s that naive, if he‟s that naive that he doesn‟t understand 

how the sale of the land, after he passes this Bill, will not 

happen in 2010, then really we should be pulling the Bill. Then 

really we should be pulling it because it speaks to the inability 

of the Premier to understand the complication of selling off 3.5 

million acres of sensitive habitat land. 

 

And the Premier laughs from his seat. He thinks it‟s a joke. He 

thinks that privatizing this land is a humorous event. The fact of 

the matter is it‟s very serious, and that‟s why we‟re getting 

hundreds of letters and emails. And my question to the Premier 

again for the third time is: will he consider pulling the Bill so 

we can take the next 12 months to consult with the public? 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Chair, what we‟ve just seen 

from the member opposite was forecast quite presciently by a 

columnist who covered politics, actually in 1996, the year that‟s 

apparently in dispute. And I‟m quoting from this particular 

column, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Well no, the member, well the members say they didn‟t want to 

talk about 1996. 

 

The member raised 1996. He made some emphatic statements 

about it and now he‟s saying, well no, I didn‟t mean 1996; I 

meant for some nondescript period. He doesn‟t even know the 

period. He just knows that at some point they put a bunch more 

acres in that may have compensated for the massive, for the 

massive selling of the land or the removal of WPHA lands 

without any conservation easement. 

 

Here is what that columnist had to say about the tactic we just 

witnessed, and I‟m quoting. He said: 

 

While Lingenfelter is never completely forthright and 

open about anything, there‟s always enough of a grain of 

truth to make almost everything he says plausible. And on 

the rare occasion when our “Premier to be” is caught in the 

middle of some falsehood he can argue that black is white 

like no other. 

 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5447 

Mr. Chairman, those aren‟t our words. I read for the record a 

column that appeared. And we just saw it actually in action, Mr. 

Deputy Chair. The debate is a good one to have. Certainly 

we‟ve seen questions and answers in this Assembly. We‟ve 

seen it on the op-ed pages of the province. We should. We‟ve 

had the media asking very good questions about this to the 

minister and to government members and to the opposition 

members. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, I‟ve said very clearly letters were sent out to 

the stakeholders in June to get their commentary on the 

proposed changes that we were going to make . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well the Environment critic is saying no that 

they weren‟t sent out, and we know in fact that they were. 

 

Since then, since then when groups have come forward with 

very legitimate concerns, Mr. Deputy Chair, we have worked 

through those concerns — not resolved every one, I‟m sure, for 

every single group. But we‟re now at a point, Mr. Deputy Chair, 

where we‟ve indicated four specific improvements, 

commitments we can make to ensure the protection of this 

wildlife land. We will do that. 

 

In the meantime, the stock growers support it. The 

Saskatchewan cattlemen support it. The cattle feeders support 

it. The Equine Ranchers Association support it. The elk 

breeders support it. Whitetail and Mule Deer Producers 

Association support it. Landowners and lessee rights groups 

support it, CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent 

Business], bison association, horse federation, the Livestock 

Marketers of Saskatchewan. Other groups are being worked 

with by the minister now to accommodate some of their 

reasonable concerns. 

 

We‟re going to move forward with this Bill. The Bill will pass. 

And, Mr. Deputy Chair, it will represent an important balance 

between our desire for habitat protection and to give ranchers, 

who are great stewards of the land, the right to own the land 

that they‟ve rented in some cases for decades. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I take from that that the 

Premier is saying to the hundreds of people who are writing, 

thousands and tens of thousands who are concerned, that he will 

not withdraw the Bill. And so we‟ll move on to another issue 

where there‟s as much concern or even more, and that is on the 

health privacy issue. 

 

And we have had a lot of calls and a lot of people referring this 

issue to our caucus, asking that we pressure the government and 

the Premier on this issue, that the health records of the public 

not be released. And I would like to ask the Premier whether or 

not he is reconsidering the idea to release health information of 

individuals and he‟ll back away from that idea and let the public 

know today that this was a wrong-headed move, that he hadn‟t 

consulted broadly enough with the public, and that today he‟ll 

announce that he‟s withdrawing this plan. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 

Committees. The . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. The Premier has the floor. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the question‟s a good 

one. It‟s the subject of, has been the subject of significant 

debate in the Assembly and so it should be debated. I want to 

clarify here now for all members of the Assembly and anyone 

watching, the hon. member used the word “health” information 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well you know, now he‟s 

clarifying that too. Remember that quote from 1996. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, none of this concerns health care information 

for patients, for any citizen of the province of Saskatchewan. 

Yes, it includes name and address information, Mr. Deputy 

Chair, and there is a significant difference. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

as this initiative moves forward, we‟re going to be monitoring it 

together with the foundations who support the initiative because 

they believe they‟ll be able to perhaps more effectively raise 

money which has always been important to our health care 

system. We‟ll be monitoring it with the health regions 

themselves. 

 

The minister has indicated we can have a look at this in a year 

to see if it‟s having the desired effect and also to examine the 

other side of this issue that‟s been raised by members opposite 

and others in the province. We know that a number . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — And the Privacy Commissioner. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — And absolutely. The member says, and the 

Privacy Commissioner. Absolutely. The hon. members will 

know that a number of other provinces have gone down this 

route, I don‟t know for sure but likely over the objection of their 

respective privacy commissioners. They‟ve gone down this 

route and some have experienced some success with it. At least 

they haven‟t gone back on it. They haven‟t overturned those 

original decisions. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Chair, we‟ll be monitoring this very carefully to 

make sure that the objectives of the government in terms of 

helping foundations raise money, like raise money for the 

children‟s hospital or raise money in our tertiary centres or in 

the regions outside of our tertiary centres, that it‟s actually 

having its desired effect and that the issue of privacy for people 

is paramount. We will have a look at it again in a year, Mr. 

Deputy Chair, but we will move forward with the initiative as 

it‟s been laid out by the government in concert with the health 

care regions. Remember that this is not going to happen unless 

a health care region has an agreement with their respective 

health care foundation. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, could the Premier tell me 

what lists have been given out, how many agreements have 

been signed, and whether that process is under way at this time? 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 



5448 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, no agreements have 

currently been signed. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I‟m wondering why the Premier then 

wouldn‟t take this opportunity to just put this on hold and take 

the time necessary to talk to the public because he must know 

by now that there are many tens of thousands of people who 

don‟t want any of their information released, whether it‟s health 

information, names, addresses. We have not had one call or one 

letter saying, would you make sure that my name is released to 

anybody. In fact the Privacy Commissioner makes the 

interesting comment, and I paraphrase, when he says that it 

could actually lead to less money being raised because of 

concerns that people have by having their names out in public 

that they have visited a doctor or a specialist or been in a 

hospital. 

 

I think, Mr. Chairman, you‟ll understand how sensitive that is 

for young people, old people, who simply don‟t want any 

reference made to their illness or the fact that they were at a 

doctor. Or if they have any concern when they go to see the 

doctor, that somehow information may be released to the 

public. That it actually could have negative impact on health 

care. And these are the concerns that the Privacy Commissioner 

and health care givers are worried about. 

 

And is it really true that we‟re so hard up in this province for 

health care money that we have to go to that length to raise 

money, especially in light of the fact that a few moments ago 

the Premier was talking about how the economy is going to be 

growing by leaps and bounds, and the resources, and what he 

said in The Globe and Mail about all of the biblical proportion 

of resources we have. The words he‟s using is about the 

economy growing rapidly. 

 

Are we really sure that giving out this information is necessary? 

And couldn‟t the Premier at this point in time, because we have 

no deal signed, no agreement signed, simply back away from 

this wrong-headed idea? 

 

I don‟t know whether it came from his Minister of Health or 

from the people trying to raise money. I‟m sure they‟re asking 

for it in good intent. But his job is to protect the public at large. 

And I would ask him if he would take the opportunity today to 

announce that he is withdrawing this idea that he has very, very 

little support for in the public. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 

Committees. You know, I think I dealt with the member‟s 

questions in my first answer. We don‟t agree on this issue. 

We‟re going to move ahead with the initiative. 

 

I want to be clear though that members of the public can opt 

out. And I know that‟s the nature of the debate — opt in versus 

opt out. 

 

But I would say if the member is getting letters from people 

who simply don‟t want even their name and address shared with 

anybody, that he should forward those to the Minister of Health. 

We can ensure regions keep a record of that, so if the region 

that individual lives in and does indeed execute an agreement 

with their foundation that they do not wish their name and 

address to be released — that‟s the principle here, people can 

opt out of this — and I‟m sure we would want to honour that 

request even if it‟s made now. There have been no agreements 

signed, but we would certainly be happy to refer those names to 

the regions so they know to not ever include those, the names of 

individuals should they ever be a patient in the system, Mr. 

Deputy Chair. 

 

We know that this has been something the foundations have 

asked for. It‟s apparently working in other provinces. We‟re 

going to initiate this plan here in the province, there will be a 

review in a year, and we‟ll move forward from there. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, I 

understand that some of the fundraisers want the information — 

and this isn‟t dissimilar from some of the people who lease land 

want to buy the land — but the question is do the people whose 

information you‟re releasing want you to release it? That‟s the 

more important question. 

 

In the report from the Privacy Commissioner, just on the issue 

is this personal health information or not, I want to quote from 

his report where he says, “It has been suggested that the 

information that would go to foundations would somehow not 

be „personal health information.‟ This is clearly inaccurate.” 

 

[16:15] 

 

So just for the Premier, so he knows for the future because he 

was again not giving accurate information when he said that it 

was not personal health information, he disagrees with the 

Privacy Commissioner. Because the Privacy Commissioner 

does not agree with what you‟ve said. And let‟s be clear about 

that in the Assembly, that this information, by the definition of 

the Privacy Commissioner, is personal health information that 

we‟re releasing. 

 

And I quote again, and it‟s on page 10 of his report, it says: “It 

has been suggested that the information [you can put the 

Premier because he just said it isn‟t personal information] that 

would go to foundations would somehow not be „personal 

health information.‟” The commissioner is saying to the 

Premier: “This is clearly inaccurate.” 

 

So you should be careful about information you bring here to 

make sure it‟s accurate because what you said a moment ago 

wasn‟t accurate. By the Privacy Commissioner definition, this 

is personal health information. And I‟d ask the Premier to 

correct that statement. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I want to be very clear. 

When the NDP talk about personal health care information in 

the context of rhetoric and political debate, it‟s my view — and 

if I‟m wrong here, if I‟m wrong then the member can clarify 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5449 

things — it‟s my view they‟re trying to stir up some fear that 

people‟s health care affairs in the system are being disclosed, 

Mr. Deputy Chair, the reason why they were involved in the 

health care system is being disclosed. 

 

And at every single time I can or the Minister of Health can 

stand on our feet and clarify the record, which I did, I said, 

name and address. Name and address. Name and address. Every 

time I will do that because I‟m not sure that‟s what members 

opposite tell people when they talk to them privately or would 

like people to believe about this initiative. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, it is not the nature of anybody‟s involvement 

in the health care system that would be disclosed. It would be 

their name and address. And those members of the public have 

the chance to opt out of it, Mr. Deputy Chair. They have that 

option, I would say, now. We would want to work with those 

members of the public who have a concern, make sure in a 

proactive way we ensure that if there is an agreement with their 

foundation, that it not, Mr. Deputy Chair, that it not include the 

release of their names if that‟s their request. We would be 

happy to do that now. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, I wonder if members opposite would clear 

up rumours that we‟ve heard for some time, that the only thing 

preventing the NDP from actually moving on this was the 

provincial election, the last provincial election in ‟07, including 

health care foundations who at least were under the impression 

that after the next election this change would happen, a change 

that had been proposed and offered by the government to the 

Privacy Commissioner. Yes, commented on. But the rumours at 

least, Mr. Deputy Chair, were that the previous government was 

going to move on it. The election intervened. 

 

We‟re going to review this in a year, Mr. Deputy Chair, to make 

sure we‟ve struck the right balance between improving 

fundraising abilities of the foundation and also balancing off the 

privacy concerns of not just the Privacy Commissioner, but 

obviously the citizens of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — The Premier refers to the issue of 

personal health information as fearmongering. That‟s a new 

impression to give to the Privacy Commissioner because that‟s 

what he says. And to your comments that it isn‟t, that it isn‟t 

personal health information, here‟s what he says to you. Here‟s 

what he says to the Premier by way of this letter. He says, “It 

has been suggested that the information that would go to 

foundations would somehow not be „personal health 

information.‟ This is clearly inaccurate.” 

 

That‟s what he‟s saying about your statement that this isn‟t 

health information. It is. It‟s their information, not yours. And it 

should not be up to them to come to your office and tell you 

that they don‟t want the information given out. You shouldn‟t 

give it out, and you should change the policy. 

 

And then the public might trust and believe what you do in the 

future because right now they don‟t. They‟re concerned about 

this. They‟re concerned about the sensitive wildlife habitat. 

They‟re concerned about SCN and the selling off of that asset, 

and we‟ll go to that later because there was no consultation 

there either. 

 

But my question, Mr. Premier, finally: are you saying that the 

Privacy Commissioner is fearmongering when he refers to 

personal health information being given to the foundations? Are 

you saying he‟s fearmongering? 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. I would remind the 

Leader of the Opposition to direct his questions to the Chair and 

through the Chair. Mr. Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the answer, short answer 

is no. But when members opposite engage in the kinds of things 

that we‟ve seen them engage in in this Assembly, that‟s quite a 

different matter. Mr. Deputy Chair, do I believe, do I believe 

that members opposite are happy if people believe that yes, it‟s 

their personal health care . . . [inaudible] . . . about their stay in 

the health care system or their intervention in the health care 

system? Do I believe that that member would just as soon have 

them believe that? You bet I do, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

 

And that‟s because, Mr. Deputy Chair, history informs the 

future. And we‟ve seen how this member has treated matters 

like this in the past. In the very recent past, we‟ve seen how he 

treats the personal privacy, or at least his campaign would treat 

the personal privacy of members of the Flying Dust First 

Nation. We‟ve seen his concern for their decision whether to 

opt in or opt out. We have seen that. 

 

We saw it in the nomination campaign he engaged in in Regina 

Elphinstone when Mr. Blakeney retired. We saw how he 

conducted his affairs in the Shaunavon constituency when he 

avoided, he avoided a wipeout because he got a separatist to run 

and split the vote, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

 

These are the tactics of members opposite. Our debate on this 

regard, although we may not agree on every issue with the 

Privacy Commissioner, that‟s the nature of government‟s 

interface with privacy commissioners across the province. Our 

debate is not with him, but our debate is no doubt with that 

member and members opposite, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, if he 

were being truthful about the issue that we‟re dealing with . . . 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order. I would invite the Leader of the 

Opposition to rephrase his opening comment. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — If the Premier was being truthful about 

the information that we‟re . . . 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I would invite the Leader of the 

Opposition to avoid the use of that language and apologize for it 

twice. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that 

comment. But the Premier should talk to the Assembly, if he 

wants to talk about records, about the $3 million that he took 

from the Progressive Conservative Party that‟s before the 



5450 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

courts. And he laughs. He laughs about the $3 million that is 

now in the courts. 

 

And the member opposite will know, we should have an 

amnesty for the Premier. We should have an amnesty for him. If 

he paid back for the booze that he took while he worked here in 

the Assembly. If he paid back the $150,000 that he took for the 

guitar museum. If he gave the 3 million back . . . 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Chairman, the Leader of the Official Opposition is implying 

something illegal, Mr. Speaker. He needs to withdraw that 

remark unequivocally and apologize to this House concerning 

the Premier. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Official Opposition 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I would like to 

just refer that these items have all court documents supporting 

them. There have been newspaper articles about the alcohol 

saying there should have been charges laid, Mr. Chair. These 

are all things that are on the public record, and of the same 

nature as the comments the member made a few minutes ago in 

his rebuttal. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I would suggest, I would suggest to the 

member that any, any further suggestion that some illegal 

activity happened previously would be out of order — any 

suggestion. I would ask the member not to challenge the . . . 

We‟re dealing with this one right now. I would suggest that it‟s 

inappropriate to offer an indication that there is illegal activity, 

and I would ask the member to apologize for that. Stand and 

apologize, and we‟ll monitor the conversation going forward. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I would apologize for 

saying that the Premier had stolen $3 million from the 

Progressive Conservative fund. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — The member has to stand, the member 

must . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. The member must stand 

in his place and withdraw his comment unequivocally without 

explanation. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I would apologize and withdraw my 

comments. Mr. Speaker, I want to refer back to the issue of the 

Privacy Commissioner and words that he said in his report and 

to the Premier, I just quote: 

 

Our office has heard from a number of patients who have 

expressed dissatisfaction with the Regulation and who 

have declared that they will no longer contribute to the 

foundation in their community. 

 

This was in the Privacy Commissioner‟s report. Did the 

government and did you as Premier take that comment into 

consideration, and will you take it into consideration before you 

go forward with this idea to release health information on 

behalf of the public of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the official Opposition 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, I rise on a point of order. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — State your point of order. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, in the Premier‟s answer to the 

previous question, he made reference to the item of 

memberships in the Meadow Lake, in Meadow Lake during the 

leadership, and in his remarks were derogatory towards the 

Leader of the Opposition. I would ask that you make the 

Premier stand and apologize and withdraw the remarks. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 

Chairman, the Leader of the Official Opposition was named in a 

court case, Mr. Speaker. It was in the media, Mr. Speaker. He 

was named in the actual court documents. Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier‟s words were accurate. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I don‟t recall the exact context of the 

comments made by the Premier, but I would remind all 

members of the House that we must not impugn the integrity of 

other members. And it‟s been happening with a fair amount of 

consistency here today and it has lowered the level of debate for 

this important discussion. There are important policy items 

being considered and I think we need to pay attention and focus 

on the matters before the House and leave the personalities and 

the insinuations aside. 

 

I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — To the member‟s question: the regions are 

going, the foundations are going to be very sensitive to this fact. 

Again, because privacy of the patients is a grave concern to 

government, we want to provide the opt out provisions and they 

are provided here. We would be prepared to take note of those 

names now to make sure they‟re not part of any subsequent 

agreement with foundations and regions. I point out again that 

the regions do not currently have any agreements for 

foundations. 

 

[16:30] 

 

You know, Mr. Deputy Chair, it‟s interesting to note that there 

are other governments making this change as well. The reason 

for this change is to better enable foundations to raise money, 

which we know is crucial for a properly equipped health care 

system. Mr. Deputy Chair, the hon. Health critic opposite just 

said, fund it. Well foundations have existed for a long time in 

this province. It existed under the previous government, and 

those foundations were asking for this change in the past 

because they felt it would help. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, I point out that effective April 1, 2010, in 

Manitoba, in Manitoba the NDP government is going to make 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5451 

very, very similar changes in that province. The NDP 

government in Manitoba have responded to their health care 

foundations the same way that we‟re responding, Mr. Deputy 

Chair. We‟ll review the matter. 

 

As for my remarks, Mr. Deputy Chair, it was certainly not my 

intent, my intent to reference anything illegal, any illegal 

conduct on the part of the member. In fact, that is not what I 

said. That is not what I said. I was simply talking about the 

practices of nominations and leadership campaigns that have 

been a matter of debate. And, Mr. Deputy Chair, the hon. 

members opposite will say, you know, here‟s why you 

shouldn‟t believe government members based on X, Y, and Z. It 

strikes me that when we say, in opposition, here‟s why you 

might want to divide by two what opposition members say, and 

we go through a past record, that we would do that as well, Mr. 

Deputy Chair. That‟s part of the, it‟s part of the exchange. But 

let me be clear. I certainly didn‟t allude to any illegal conduct 

on the part of the Opposition Leader, only the practices he‟s 

used in different leadership campaigns and in the nomination 

campaigns. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order. I have taken a few minutes to 

review some of the past rulings of the Speaker. And the Speaker 

has indicated that as it concerns the PC [Progressive 

Conservative] trust fund, that this matter is before the courts 

and any questions related to this matter are out of order. Given 

that this matter is reserved therefore and still active, all 

questions on this matter are out of order. That‟s the ruling of the 

Speaker. If members wish to question that ruling, just say so. 

The Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to just say through 

you to members of the Assembly that in talking about the 

Meadow Lake membership or the PC fund, we‟re talking about, 

as the Premier says, we would talk about the 3 million in the PC 

fund. I‟m not asking questions about it. I‟m making reference to 

character. 

 

Because if you‟re talking about memberships in Meadow Lake 

as speaking to character, then money that is in the PC fund 

speaks to character of the member from Kindersley and the 

Premier. And so if we‟re going to talk about issues that speak to 

character, like the PC fund or distribution of alcohol to 

ministers while certain people worked in government, then we 

can . . . If it‟s good for the government to talk about those 

issues, then it‟s good for the opposition to talk about them. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. The Leader of the 

Opposition has made his point. Would you please move on? I 

just said to the Leader of the Opposition that he‟d made his 

point. We‟ll move on to another subject. I recognize the Official 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Based on your 

own ruling a moment ago, your statements moment ago about 

what‟s before the courts, you‟d be well aware that the issue of 

the memberships in Meadow Lake are before the courts. So for 

the member to make those comments, Mr. Speaker, would be 

out of line. You‟ve heard him repeatedly make those comments, 

Mr. Speaker. I ask once again, you ask him to apologize and 

withdraw the comments. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. 

Speaker or Mr. Chair, I would request that officials are here to 

give advice, not to heckle across the floor. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Chair: — Order. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, the 

Leader of the Official Opposition started to engage one of the 

staff members of the Premier in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

The Leader of the Official Opposition knows that he needs to 

direct the questions through the Chair to the Premier and not 

engage in debate with the staff that are here available. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I would remind all parties in the 

Chamber of their role respectively. Members have the right to 

participate; non-members have no right to participate. And I 

would ask that everybody be mindful of their respective roles. 

There‟s been a lot of conversation across the way, most of 

which I cannot define or hear. And I think that it‟s important for 

the success and the work of this committee to move on with the 

order of business now before us. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, the issue of the release of 

personal health information as referred to by the Privacy 

Commissioner, I just want to read part of his report in his letter 

from Gary Dickson, Q.C. [Queen‟s Counsel], the Saskatchewan 

Information and Privacy Commissioner. He said a new 

regulation that is referred to by the Premier: 

 

. . . is similar to the 2007 iteration. There is a significant 

change, however, in the new Regulation in the substitution 

of “personal health information” . . . 

 

He also goes on to say, “I had not seen the new Regulation until 

a copy was emailed to my office at my request on April 13, 

2010 at 2:47 p.m. by Saskatchewan Health.” 

 

My question to the Premier is: is he still believing that proper 

consultation had taken place on this issue with the Privacy 

Commissioner before this report was given to the Assembly? 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To the 

member opposite, to members opposite I would say that, and 

I‟ve said this publicly in the course of media interviews, that the 

government was certainly very aware of the position of the 

Privacy Commissioner. And I‟m sure the Government of 

Manitoba, as they‟ve made this exact same change, is aware of 

their specific privacy commissioner, perhaps, on the issue, in 

favour or against. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, I know the minister has now since said that 



5452 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

although we were very much aware of the position and moved 

forward, he has said publicly that there could have been even 

another specific consultation after the draft, though we knew 

the answer. But still, form follows function, and I think the 

minister quite rightly said that‟s something that could have been 

done and would do that if he had the chance to do it again. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Chair, it‟s important to remember that when 

. . . You know, the substance of consultation is, do you know 

the views of the person with whom you‟re consulting, the body 

with whom you‟re consulting? Do you know those and 

understand what that position is and why that position is held by 

that body — in this case, an independent officer of the 

legislature? And the answer is yes, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

 

Other provinces have moved forward with this, and again I 

come back to the reason. We want to better enable fundraising 

by foundations in the province of Saskatchewan. We want to 

make sure folks have the chance to opt out if they do not want 

to be a part of providing only their name and address to this. 

We‟re going to review it in a year to find out how we‟re 

achieving that appropriate balance, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

 

In the meantime, we know the foundations support this. It‟s 

something they‟ve been asking for for some time. We know 

how important they are to providing equipment in our health 

care system, the very latest equipment. We know how important 

they are to the children‟s hospital, which continues to advance 

apace notwithstanding communications from members 

opposite. We know how important the foundations are in 

tertiary centres and right across the province. And so we are 

going to move forward. 

 

But we were aware of the position of the Privacy 

Commissioner. We were aware of his views on the matter and 

made the decision. And the minister has said we could have 

checked one more time in terms of this specific regulation. But 

substantively, because of consultations between officials and 

the Privacy Commissioner, we were aware of his position. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, another area that we have 

had a lot of concern expressed about changes the government‟s 

making as a result of this budget is the changes to SCN and the 

shutting down or the announced shutting down. 

 

But I understand, and maybe the Premier can clarify, that SCN 

has now been continued out for a period of time. Is there a 

process of reconsideration by the government? Is it possible on 

this topic, even at the late date that we‟re at, that in fact SCN 

will survive and continue to play its important role in the 

economy of Saskatchewan in diversifying? 

 

We know we have wonderful resources in terms of mining and 

all of those areas, but what really keeps the economy going into 

the future, and the new economy of the next decade and the 

next century, are things like the film industry productions in 

Saskatoon and Regina, the films that are produced here, the 

thousands of jobs that come with it. We understand that in the 

past year that has diminished in part . . . There are many things 

that go into it that I think part of is a lack of commitment by the 

Government of Saskatchewan. Other provinces like Manitoba, 

they‟re actually picking up steam and growing very rapidly. 

 

But my question to the Premier is, can he see his way, at this 

point in time, to give new life to SCN, admit that a mistake was 

made — nothing wrong with that — but go forward with the 

blessing of the Minister of Finance and keep SCN in place? 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 

Committees. I want to say to all members of the committee that 

what‟s happening now, the evaluation of all of the proposals 

that have come in was always contemplated. In fact on budget 

day in the press releases that went out — members will know 

there‟s the broader press release for the budget, and there‟s 

some press releases around more specific initiatives — and the 

government quite clearly said on budget day that we would be 

open to proposals with respect to the ongoing operation of the 

assets as a broadcaster or the assets themselves. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chair, that proposal did unfold. There was a request 

for proposal, as members of the Legislative Assembly will 

know. We‟ve received 12 expressions of interest from parties. 

Some of them are about simply the assets, interested in just the 

assets of the former SCN, and some of the proposals are about 

the ongoing operation of SCN, of the former SCN in some 

form. Mr. Deputy Chair, it‟s important to point out here that the 

distance education function of SCN, it will continue with the 

help of SaskTel. 

 

[16:45] 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — The words are important as they always 

are. But is the Premier referring to requests for proposal or 

expressions of interest? Which? Because you‟re using both, and 

I think it‟s pretty clear that they‟re different, have different legal 

meanings. But is the Premier, when he says requests for 

proposal, meaning that? Or is he referring to an expression of 

interest? 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, what‟s 

specifically been asked for by the government is requests for 

expressions of interest. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I think that‟s what is important for the 

public and for everyone to know, that these are not proposals 

and they are different. And well the Premier has the strange 

look on his face as if to say, well no they‟re not, but the fact of 

the matter is, when he asked his officials, they‟re pretty clear 

that there is a difference between an expression of interest and a 

proposal because a proposal obviously would be detailed with 

financing. And again it keeps coming back to why we get into 

the problems financially in this province because we don‟t have 

an understanding of balance sheets and different expressions in 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5453 

business. And I‟m not going to go to the issue of the Premier‟s 

former businesses, Mr. Chairman, so you don‟t need to worry 

that at this moment. 

 

But the fact is that . . . Can the Premier tell me how many 

expressions of interest the government has at the present time? 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I believe I said that in 

the first answer. The number is 12. 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — When the questions were being asked in 

the Assembly at previous times, the minister has been clear that 

he was attempting to receive expressions of interest. And I 

mean, in fairness I think the minister is doing as good a job he 

can. And I don‟t believe that, as some would say, that it was his 

idea. I just don‟t think a junior minister would wake up one 

morning and say, well I‟m going to get rid of SCN. That isn‟t 

how it happens. 

 

I think what happens is the Premier‟s office and the Premier‟s 

staff outline this kind of a concept and then drive it down to the 

minister‟s office and to the department. But can the Premier, 

knowing that — and we all know how that works — can the 

Premier explain why it‟s a good idea at this point in time to sell 

or transfer the multi-million dollar federally-regulated asset? 

Where did the research come from, or what research did the 

Premier do that took him to that conclusion that, at this moment 

in time, transferring that asset was a good idea? 

 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of 

Committees. The decision with respect to SCN, as were as a 

number of the decisions in the budget, relate to the overall 

budget of the government, obviously, and objectives that we 

had set for actually reducing expenditures. The only province in 

the country that was able to reduce expenditures in the budget 

was the province of Saskatchewan. And the analysis of the 

government, when we were making those decisions, was about 

priorities. And as you saw in the budget, our priorities involved 

— even though we were reducing the budget — an increase in 

the Education budget, an increase in the health care budget, and 

the second-highest Highways budget in the history of the 

province. 

 

But decisions were made. On the chiropractic services, 

decisions were made. On whether or not the taxpayers should 

subsidize a television station, the decision was made. Mr. 

Deputy Chair, we knew there would be other sources of interest 

in that initiative that we undertook, that we would have 

proposals come forward from government. We knew that 

distance education could be delivered by SaskTel, which was an 

important function of SCN. And we knew that nationally 

governments, including the federal government, were looking at 

new methods of media, in terms of the development of the film 

and television industry. 

 

This is a 20-year-old technology that we‟re talking about now, 

Mr. Deputy Chair, and as we move forward, perhaps through 

some of the proposals that have been offered to the government 

but also through the government‟s initiatives — which I would 

point out have netted another television series being shot in the 

province of Saskatchewan — because of this, Mr. Deputy 

Chair, we‟re going to continue to work with the industry to 

grow the industry. It may not be the way that it‟s always been 

grown, but we‟re going to do that, Mr. Deputy Chair, together 

with the, Mr. Chair of Committees, together with the industry. 

 

And I would also say that, you know, the government made 

some other decisions in the budget related to expenditures that 

netted an overall reduction in expenditures. Like I say, that‟s 

the only budget like it in the country. And, Mr. Deputy Chair, I 

think the people of the province of Saskatchewan appreciate the 

prudence and welcome the fact that we can make this claim, 

with respect to expenditures, that no other capital in the country 

can make. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Can the Premier tell the Assembly, Mr. 

Chairman, whether or not there was consultation with the board 

of directors of SCN in advance to the decision being made to 

sell off this asset? And what is the structure now? Who‟s 

looking after the operation? 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I would ask 

that the members stop the banter going back and forth. We‟ve 

had a pretty good debate so far, and I would ask the member 

from Athabasca to come to order. Order. Order. I‟d asked the 

member, before, from Athabasca not to be yelling from his seat. 

I imagine he will have the chance to ask questions later. I 

recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the answer to the 

question is there was not consultation. Mr. Deputy Chair, it was 

a budget item. And typically with provincial budgets, they‟re 

released and because of the sensitivity of financial information 

in budgets with respect to taxation or expenditures, those things 

are not necessarily the subject of consultation. There are 

currently about 11 staff at SCN, including the CEO, that are 

operating it, Mr. Deputy Chair. 

 

I would say this, though. I just heard what the hon. member had 

to say about someone who has served the military in this 

country, and the member for Athabasca joined in. Mr. Deputy 

Chair, Mr. Chair, now would be a good chance for him to 

apologize. What about all of the other members of the Armed 

Forces who use public dollars to be trained and who are paid 

with public dollars to serve this country, some of them now in 

theatre, Mr. Chair? What are members opposite saying about 

the military personnel in this province? When they attack his 

record as a public servant in the military, are they also attacking 

theirs? That‟s what the people of the province have had enough 

of, Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Chair, and in 18 months, they are 

going to hear from the people of Saskatchewan because of 

tactics like that. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 



5454 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I have had 

many members of my family serve in the Armed Forces. I 

won‟t take anything from you, the little thief, the little thief 

from Swift Current. 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. I would ask . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Chair: — Order! Order. Order. Order, order. Order. Order, 

order. Order. This is starting, this debate is starting to 

deteriorate. I would ask the member, I would ask the Leader of 

the Opposition to withdraw the previous remark and apologize. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I withdraw and apologize. Mr. Chairman, 

I‟ll tell you this. I won‟t take any guff from that Premier about 

the military. I support the military. I support the military in this 

country as much or more than he does any day. So don‟t lecture 

me about support for the military. I‟ll tell you that. I‟ll tell you 

that. When members opposite . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Your mike is 

shut off. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I will ask the 

members to all cease from yelling from their seats. I know 

we‟ve been here for a while, and I know that tempers are 

starting to wear. But we‟re starting to get into personal attacks 

which is not . . . [inaudible] . . . of this House. I think the people 

that are watching it expect members from both sides to show 

respect for the process that‟s happening here. Why is the 

member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Belanger: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I think what‟s important here is 

that I wear with great pride the fact that my father was a World 

War II veteran. And I had my older brother, two older brothers, 

that one served in the military for a number of years, I would 

say maybe 25, 26 years. He retired several years ago, four years 

ago, maybe five years ago, as a warrant officer in the air force. I 

have a younger brother that just recently retired who served . . . 

 

The Chair: — I will ask the member to come to his point of 

order . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . He‟s coming. Let him 

come to his point of order. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Allow my story to be completed, Mr. 

Speaker. And I have a younger brother that also served 27 years 

and retired as a master warrant officer, Mr. Speaker. And third, 

I had a sister that also served in the army for four years, an 

older sister. And, Mr. Speaker, I had another brother that 

couldn‟t serve in the military because — he was so 

disappointed — because he had fallen arches on his feet. And 

that was his dream. He could not join the army because of that 

problem. And, Mr. Speaker, I also had a young daughter that 

served in the navy . . . 

 

The Chair: — I would ask the member to get directly to his 

point of order, not making a speech. 

 

[17:00] 

 

Mr. Belanger: — My point, Mr. Speaker, is exactly the point I 

made earlier, that the Premier has no right to attack my family 

or my dedication. Nor does he have any right, Mr. Speaker, to 

make any comment about our commitment to the Armed 

Forces, Mr. Speaker. Many families, on this side of the House 

and everywhere else, served their army with distinction or 

served their country with distinction. 

 

And my point is that that member from Wood River every day 

gets up and calls us communists, when my father and many 

other people fought for this freedom that we enjoy. And my 

point is he shouldn‟t be using the Armed Forces as a prop for 

his political purposes, Mr. Speaker. And furthermore . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Chair: — Order. I think the member has made his point of 

order. I think he‟s getting into adjourned debates. Why is the 

Government House Leader on his feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — To reply to the point of order. 

 

The Chair: — Make it brief. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Chairman, I don‟t know that there 

was a point of order even there. But the member from 

Athabasca was the one who raised the comments about our 

member, Mr. Speaker, who served for 20-plus years in the 

military, Mr. Speaker, insinuating that he had not had a real job 

and should not be given any respect. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we believe that all members who served in the 

Armed Forces, in the police and fire, should be respected by 

this House, Mr. Speaker. And I ask that the member opposite 

apologize for his insinuations. 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. We‟ve had a tradition of a 

little bit of heckling always being allowed in Committee of 

Finance, but it‟s starting to get out of hand. And this is what has 

happened, that we‟re getting into nothing but points of order. 

 

I had mentioned before that the people watching here I think 

deserve our respect. So I would ask that we get back to the 

debate, and I will step on anybody that‟s heckling. I hate to do 

it, but if we can‟t do it respectful, we‟re starting to get into 

personal attacks on both sides. 

 

So right now I would ask the members to stick with Committee 

of Finance, and we‟re on Executive Council vote. Up to this 

point, the debate was very good and I would ask the members 

carry on with the debate. I recognize the official Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, when it comes to SCN, 

the chairman of the board has clearly indicated that there was 

no consultation, no meetings. In fact, I understand that there 

was no meeting with the minister in the period running up to the 

announcement of the sell-off, even at any time during the two 

and a half years that this government was in power. 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5455 

My question to the Premier is: is this normal procedure for your 

government to have agencies of government where the minister 

or the Premier doesn‟t meet with them for up to two years? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. 

Ministers of the government — there have been two with 

respect to this file — have certainly met with the officials, have 

been briefed by officials on SCN‟s work in the province and the 

different kinds of programming that they provide. Certainly 

that‟s been a matter of course for the government and it‟s 

continued under the current minister. And of course then, other 

senior ministry officials will be in contact with SCN to 

determine the impacts, to be able to provide an analysis of some 

of the impacts of various decisions made on funding. But those 

meetings have transpired over the course of these two years 

with the minister obviously being briefed, the ministers being 

briefed by officials with respect to SCN. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I‟m not going to go in to 

all the detail of the things the chairman said about the lack of 

consultation and feeling of being slighted that people who work 

in government feel when they‟re not met with, when they‟re not 

talked to, when they‟re not shown appreciation. 

 

And it‟s one thing to celebrate workers on occasion here in the 

Assembly. And I agree when the Premier does that, but it‟s got 

to be more than that. It can‟t just be superficial. You have to 

take the time to meet with boards. You have to take time to 

meet with the Chair of boards. And especially if you‟re going to 

disband an organization, I think it would be proper and fitting 

that meetings would have taken place, that thank yous would 

have been said to those individuals, because they‟re doing it in 

most cases as volunteers. And my only closing comment is that 

I think the minister, the Premier, whatever, even at this late date 

should do the kind of consultation with that board that is 

expected. 

 

Mr. Premier, I want to turn to a moment to the services that 

many people in this province use on a regular basis. I think last 

year 125,000 people, Mr. Chairman, used the services of 

chiropractors in the province of Saskatchewan. Here again, I 

think, is an example of consultation gone wrong. There‟s two 

issues I think we want to talk to the government again about 

today: one is lack of consultation, and in the case of the 

chiropractors, consultation but ending up at a result that is 

actually the opposite of what the consultation was leading to. 

 

And the Premier will know that consultation had gone on with 

chiropractors for a year. Many meetings and promises made and 

signatures on documents, and then the deal ripped up at the last 

moment. And the patients most affected, the 125,000 in the 

province, many of them on low income who simply can‟t afford 

to go and do the visits that they‟re required, and many of them 

will now choose to go to regular medical doctors. 

 

And can the Premier tell the Assembly and the people of the 

province who and how was the analysis done on the cost 

saving? Because most people say, including the chiropractors, 

that the saving of 10 million may save it in one area of the 

Health department but actually the true spending will actually 

increase by the number of patients who don‟t go to see the 

chiropractors but go to see a regular doctor whose payments are 

totally covered by taxpayers. 

 

Can the Premier explain where this idea came from and at what 

point in time? Because obviously, the minister . . . Again I don‟t 

totally blame the minister because I think he was working in 

good faith. Otherwise he wouldn‟t have signed the arrangement 

or the staff wouldn‟t have signed the arrangement, and there 

wouldn‟t have been a press release talking about the conclusion 

of the agreement. 

 

So can the Premier tell me where the decision was made to end 

this program and de-insure chiropractic services? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, the member‟s questions 

early on, the Hon. Leader of the Opposition‟s questions early on 

were about consultation. You know, he‟ll forgive the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan if they have a few questions 

about his measure of accurate or effective consultations. For 

example, Mr. Chair, a lot of people out there listening to that 

member ask the question, a lot of farmers would ask who did 

that member consult when he ripped up GRIP [gross revenue 

insurance program], when his government ripped up GRIP. 

They didn‟t say that when they campaigned in the election. 

They said nothing in that election campaign about GRIP. They 

ripped it up. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Chair, if that member could tell members of this 

Assembly or the people of the province of Saskatchewan who 

they consulted with when they closed 52 hospitals in the 

province of Saskatchewan; when they closed the Plains 

hospital. I‟d expect they say it was a matter of the budget 

decision that we made, Mr. Chair of Committees. 

 

There‟s another long list of whether or not there was 

consultation, Mr. Chair, which we can get into. We can get into 

SPUDCO. We can get into Channel Lake. We could get in . . . 

And the member for Nutana is chirping from her seat. We can 

find out if the people of the province were consulted before they 

took their actions with respect to Murdoch Carriere. We could 

ask that question, Mr. Chair of Committees. 

 

I just want to say . . . Well the members opposite say, can you 

even engage in this debate about what that previous government 

did? I have some news for the member for Regina Rosemont. 

They were in power for 16 years. They did some good things. I 

say so public. Recently they did some good things around 

business taxes. We have lauded them publicly for that. I did it 

as recently as last week. They did some good things around the 

royalty situation, Mr. Chair of Committees. I lauded that. The 

government welcomes that and says good things about that. We 

did that even in this committee meeting. 

 

But they also have a record, Mr. Chairman, as a government for 

16 years in this province, their record of out-migration, Mr. 

Chair, the record of Saskatchewan for the most part as a have 

not, of our loss of population, of a woeful job creation record. 

Yes, the record with respect to Murdoch Carriere and SPUDCO 



5456 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

and Channel Lake. So we‟ll acknowledge the things that they 

did that were good and we will hold them accountable still for 

their record when they were in government, Mr. Chair, which 

by the way is half better than what members opposite do in their 

current function as the opposition of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Chairman, with respect to chiropractic services, I will say 

this. We made a decision as a part of the budget. It was not an 

easy decision. We made a decision that other provinces have 

made across the country. Some have gone farther in their 

decision. Some have eliminated any sort of a subsidy at all to 

chiropractic services. Some, like Saskatchewan, are still 

providing some services. In Manitoba it‟s universal coverage, 

but capped at 11 visits, 12 visits. Here in Saskatchewan we‟ve 

made a similar cap, but we‟ve limited to people who are 

low-income recipients, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The premise of the member‟s question is that health care costs 

will skyrocket now and, Mr. Chairman, that‟s . . . Well if I 

misunderstood that, I think he said that health care costs will 

increase. Mr. Chairman, I will say that this has not necessarily, 

as far as we‟ve been advised, not necessarily been the 

experience of other jurisdictions that have done this. I would 

say that. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Chair of Committees, I can also tell you that 

other jurisdictions will point out, while there is a drop in the use 

of chiropractic services early on after a change in the subsidy 

has occurred in those provinces, over time the amount of 

caseload builds back up again as patients begin to use the 

system. 

 

So we‟ve made the difficult decision. We‟re providing support 

for low-income people capped at, at the 12 visits a year, Mr. 

Chair, and we are obviously going to be watching that very 

carefully as it unfolds, Mr. Chairman. We note the experience 

of other jurisdictions. That factored into the government making 

its decision as part of a budget. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, the issue here is that 

negotiations went on for the better part of a year and 

conclusions were brought about, and the problem that many 

people have with this is that in this case, not that consultation 

didn‟t take place, but the consultation did and then the word of 

the minister, and, I might add, the word of the Premier, was 

broken. And that spreads very quickly. 

 

And there‟s just a letter here that I would like to read into the 

record from March 29th, 2010. The letter is to Max Hendricks, 

Assistant Deputy Minister, Saskatchewan Health: 

 

Dear Max: 

 

I reference your letter to Dr. Shane Taylor, March 24th, 

2010. Further to our letter of March 25th, 2010 to the 

Minister of Health, on which you were copied, the CAS 

has a request to make prior to our meeting with you 

scheduled for tomorrow to discuss the treatment of 

supplementary benefits, beneficiaries by chiropractors. 

There is no point in meeting with you unless CAS has, in 

writing, assurance from the Premier that you are 

negotiating with the authority of the Wall government to 

make a deal that will subsequently be honoured. 

 

[17:15] 

 

These are not insignificant people writing letters. They‟re 

between the highest levels in the profession, with the deputy 

minister, talking about you, Mr. Premier. And what it says, and 

I quote again: “The issue is with the Wall government to make 

the deal that will consequently be honoured.” Meaning that they 

are worried because you can‟t trust a deal made with your 

government. The letter goes on to say, and I quote: 

 

No respect to you, Mr. Hendricks, but the CAS negotiated 

in good faith for almost a year with officials of 

Saskatchewan Health who had a mandate to negotiate 

from the Wall government. And yet this same government 

chose to renege on the agreement negotiated on their 

behalf. Using past experience with the Wall government 

as our guide, we have no confidence that an agreement 

reached with you or any official of Saskatchewan Health 

will be honoured by the government MLAs. 

 

So you can see how trust is broken. It‟s not just that you need to 

negotiate and consult, but you have to do it in good faith. And 

what has happened here — on behalf of the 125,000 patients, 

and I believe 33,000 of them have now signed petitions — is 

that that trust and faith in your government has been broken. 

And to the Premier, again, because if this deal wasn‟t going to 

occur, why did he allow his minister to hang out on a limb 

while in another part of his government there was a decision 

being made to do something quite different? How does that 

happen in your government? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. You 

know, it‟s a situation where the contract was being negotiated 

with . . . potential contract was being negotiated subject to 

ratification, Mr. Chair, subject to the budgeting process of the 

province of Saskatchewan. And the government made a 

difficult decision. 

 

I‟ll remind members of the committee that the government 

managed to reduce overall expenditures of the government. 

There‟s no other jurisdiction in the country that was able to do 

that. Took some difficult decisions. This was one of them, 

certainly. 

 

Mr. Chair, there‟s much . . . there‟s a number of other highlights 

in the health care budget that are evident of the choices that the 

government made that relate directly to the chiropractic services 

situation. There was the $10.5 million for the surgical wait 

times initiative. Mr. Chair, there‟s the $7 million for the Patient 

First recommendations; 2.6 million increased in cardiac care 

volumes; operating revenues for the Irene and Les Dubé Centre 

for Mental Health increased $3.8 million. Mr. Chair, there were 

increases, overall increases in terms of health region funding. 

 

We as a government took decisions that were difficult to make 

and, in terms of the negotiation, they were happening at the 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5457 

official level, subject to the ratification of the government. 

 

I wonder if the hon. member will comment. He would have 

served in the very first cabinet after that election where the 

government ripped up GRIP. How did he come to his decision 

there? Was there consultation? When he campaigned out in 

rural Saskatchewan, did he tell farmers that this was what 

would happen if they elected the government or was that a 

product of a budget decision that they made after the election? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Official 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I don‟t want to spend a lot of time on this, 

but I will say to the member opposite, it had something to do 

with a record deficit left by his government, because he was 

working there at the time. And part of that deficit was the 

$150,000 that he took to set up the guitar museum in Swift 

Current. And that huge deficit, it was the largest in Canada per 

capita and historians write about it all the time. And not only 

that, if you look back to the ministers that he worked for and 

where they ended up, I think 15 of them were charged 

including, I believe, the minister he worked for doing the work 

that he did. 

 

So we can get into that period of time. And again, Mr. 

Chairman, I want to remind you of who brought up that era. 

And we‟ll get into it because I‟ve got some editorials from The 

StarPhoenix that talks about things that were going on at that 

time, and I think the headline is something about jail time for 

people who were involved. And I‟ll get into that if the Premier 

wants to go back there. He keeps coming to these topics and 

then running and hiding when we come at him. But we‟ll talk 

about it if you want . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . He laughs 

and wants to. Okay. 

 

Where‟s The StarPhoenix editorial? I just want to read, I want 

to read this because it deals with his actions as a staff member. 

It was allowed to talk about that period so I‟m sure it will be in 

order. This is the editorial and it refers to actions of our Premier 

while he was working in the government of Grant Devine. He 

wonders why there was a deficit and we had to make tough 

decisions. 

 

Here‟s the headline: “Cause for jailing.” “It‟s unfortunate 

Saskatchewan‟s public accounts committee doesn‟t have the 

power to throw people in jail.” This is referring . . . This isn‟t 

my words. This is StarPhoenix. I‟m going to read it again. 

“Cause for jailing.” 

 

It‟s unfortunate Saskatchewan‟s public accounts 

committee doesn‟t have the power to throw people in jail. 

 

That‟s where the bureaucrats [the Premier would take 

note of that, “the bureaucrats,” because he was one of 

them] and politicians responsible for the latest trilogy of 

horror stories to be uncovered by the committee belong. 

 

The former premier‟s office had 24 employees, most of 

whom were political operatives, paid by other 

government departments and Crown corporations. That‟s 

not secondment of personnel; it‟s fraud. [It‟s fraud.] 

 

The Saskatchewan Property Management Corp. paid 

$133,000, not for its own advertising, but to cover the 

government‟s overall advertising bill. That‟s not creative 

accounting; [Mr. Chairman] that‟s fraud. 

 

The Saskatchewan Liquor Board . . .  

 

This is the important article here, Mr. Chairman. And you‟ll 

want to listen to this little article. 

 

The Saskatchewan Liquor Board gave $15,000 worth of 

booze to board‟s ministers. That‟s not a gift; it‟s fraud. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, if you want to go there and talk about that 

era and make this political, I‟ll do it. And I‟ve got lots more. 

I‟ve got lots more. But remember who started it. Remember 

who started. I‟ve got many more of these quotes about what 

was going on at that time. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, I want to refer back to where I was when 

we were talking about the cancellation of an important program 

for 125,000 Saskatchewan citizens, and that was the 

negotiations that went on between the province, between that 

government, the Premier‟s government, and chiropractors to 

reach a contract. And he said . . . The Premier just said when he 

was standing up and led us to believe that it was negotiations 

between the department and chiropractors. 

 

Well I want to tell him it had gone far beyond that, and he 

wasn‟t telling the whole story when he said it was the 

department officials and the chiropractors doing the negotiation. 

Because I have here a press release that takes it considerably 

past the bureaucrats and staff. Here‟s the press release about the 

contract: 

 

The province and the Chiropractors‟ Association of 

Saskatchewan or CAS have reached an agreement for 

provincial coverage of chiropractic services for 

Saskatchewan residents. 

 

The three-year agreement includes a cap on a number of 

insured annual treatments a patient is eligible to receive, 

deregulation of the patient copayment, and increase of 2.5 

per cent each year in fees paid to chiropractic services. 

 

Under the treatment-capping provision, patients are 

eligible for up to 16 treatments per year with the 

government paying 100 per cent of its share of the fee, 

17-40 treatments will be paid at 66 per cent, and there 

will be no coverage beyond 40 treatments. 

 

Patients will continue to pay a copayment at a rate to be 

set by the chiropractor. Patients receiving provincial 

low-income benefits are eligible for up to 40 treatments 

paid at 100 per cent of the insured fee and continue to 

have no patient copayment.  

 

Now it goes on, and here‟s the important part, in a quote, “„I am 

pleased that we have reached a deal with the Chiropractors‟ 

Association of Saskatchewan,‟ McMorris said.” That would be 

the minister, not staff in the department, but the minister who 

was appointed by the Premier. So this negotiation wasn‟t 

happening with staff in the department. It had already reached 



5458 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

the political level at the minister‟s office and had been signed 

off. This is a press release we have. 

 

And I go on to quote: 

 

And McMorris said, “This agreement is one of the most 

generous in the country for residents who use chiropractic 

services, while allowing us to exercise some fiscal 

responsibility through the treatment cap and full payment. 

 

So the deal was negotiated in full light of what was becoming a 

tough budget. And everyone knew that the chiropractors in this 

agreement were giving up — the Minister of Finance will know 

the number — about 1.5 million. I believe that‟s the number 

that they had negotiated and were giving up in this deal. And 

they did it in good faith. My question to the Premier is this: 

after your minister agreed to this deal — not the staff but your 

minister — who was it, who was it who called the minister‟s 

office and told the minister to rip up the deal? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, we need to clarify that this press 

release was never issued. This is a draft release that officials 

were working — the same officials who were working with the 

association — drafted in the event that the decision move 

forward. I just said quite forthrightly to the member, the 

government decided not to move forward with the deal. Part of 

it was budgetary considerations, and you know, Mr. Chair, we 

made that case. So it was a draft press release. 

 

But you know, here‟s a document, a government document 

that‟s not a draft, that‟s not a draft at all. And it goes to the 

representation of things. He‟s talking about the chiropractics 

deal. Here is a deal from a letter signed by the current Leader of 

the Opposition to the then premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan. It says, “Pursuant to your request, attached you 

will find a briefing note which summarizes the findings and 

recommendations resulting from the comprehensive financial 

management review completed by CAC of SaskWater Corp‟s 

SPUDCO division.” 

 

Not a draft at all, Mr. Chair, but a letter to the premier of the 

province of Saskatchewan. And in it, in it the minister — the 

then minister, the current member — quite rightly points this 

out. He says — this is now the current Leader of the Opposition 

— saying, “There are lapses in obtaining the requisite 

legislative authorities necessary to permit SaskWater Corp. to 

proceed in certain areas of businesses they have undertaken.” 

Lapses in requisite legislative authority. 

 

The then minister, now Leader of the Opposition, who‟s talking 

about this arrangement, this deal and draft documents, wrote in 

not a draft but a letter to the then Premier Roy Romanow saying 

that there was no legislative authority for the decisions they 

were making. There was also, it goes on to say, there was also 

at least one instance in which the information provided to 

cabinet was not reflective of the transaction ultimately 

consummated. 

 

Mr. Chair, I don‟t recall in 1998 — after July 30, 1998 — that 

member bringing this information to the public, that member 

wanting to fully disclose not a draft document but the reality 

that legislative requirements had not been in place for the deal 

and that, and I quote, there is “. . . at least one instance in which 

the information provided cabinet was not reflective of the 

transaction ultimately consummated.”  

 

Mr. Chair, the document by the member goes on to say, “CIC 

recommends that any future investment requirements for 

Storco‟s be considered by agencies with the specific mandate 

and experience to provide such investment but only on the basis 

of private sector participation for a minimum of 51 per cent by 

the way of real equity risk and return.” That never happened, 

Mr. Deputy Chair. And we‟ll get into more of this, I guess, 

about the claims of the hon. member. And the hon. member will 

ask questions about this particular issue. I will say very directly 

again. It was a draft press release prepared by officials who are 

negotiating with the association. It was never released because, 

Mr. Chair, the deal had to be ratified by the Government of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And we made another decision in the budget process, not an 

easy one but a decision we made while we reallocated, invested 

in the surgical wait times, in investment in mental health, Mr. 

Chairman, in keeping our commitment with respect to funding, 

increasing funding in things like the Cancer Agency. Mr. 

Chairman, the last budget was about decisions. Some of them 

were more difficult than others. But, Mr. Chair, this release was 

never issued. It was a draft, and it was always subject to the 

ratification of the elected Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

[17:30] 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask a couple of 

questions about the cancellation of the kidney transplant 

program. And my understanding is that this occurred in 2008, 

and I wonder . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 2009, in July of 

2009. I wonder if the Premier can give an outline of . . . I think 

we‟ve gone through this many times in question period and the 

minister, I mean, obviously has done his best to defend the 

decision to cancel the program or to shut it down for a period of 

time. 

 

But can the Premier give an outline of the restart of the 

program? When will that occur and what date can the public 

expect the kidney transplant program to be back in operating in 

the province? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This is a very 

serious issue, serious matter facing patients and family 

members of those who are patients and who are in need of and 

waiting for a kidney transplant. The hon. member has 

highlighted the discontinuation or the temporary 

discontinuation of the program because of a situation involving 

the doctors involved there. The government is working very 

hard to get the program back up and running. 

 

Mr. Chair, since the program discontinued, 12 have moved to 

Edmonton for care. We know of a number of others who are our 

very top priority, who already have a live donor, who are ready 

and waiting. I believe that since the matter has been raised in 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5459 

the Assembly, we have two more who are at least booked — I 

believe is the number — who are ready to proceed with their 

transplant. 

 

It‟ll be extra-provincially though, Mr. Chair. We need to make 

sure we have the right complement obviously of doctors. That‟s 

been the recommendation of those who are involved in the front 

line of this from the very beginning, and the Ministry of Health 

and the region are working aggressively to make sure that‟s in 

place. We don‟t want to have people to have to travel outside 

the province for these transplants. We want them here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And we‟re working very hard to 

make sure that it‟s up and running in a timely fashion. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The issue here is 

the start time of when we think the program will be back 

operating. I think the program at St. Paul‟s Hospital in 

Saskatoon was probably one of the better and more successful 

programs in Canada while it was up and operating. And many 

people are baffled how it comes about that a program that is 

working well would be shut down under this administration, 

when all the promises made during the Premier‟s years in 

opposition that he would make the health care system better. 

 

But my question to the Premier: there was a commitment made 

that it would be up and operating in three months. That‟s a 

month ago. We‟re talking about a very short period of time. 

And I just want to ask the Premier, are we still in line and in 

place to have the program up and operating as promised on July 

1st? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, the health region believes the 

target that‟s been set by the minister of three to four months is 

very aggressive. Having said that, all the parties are working 

very hard to achieve this within the time frame that has been 

announced by the minister. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I guess because time is of the essence, 

and I know when the young woman from Moose Jaw, Ms. 

Simms was here in the building and did her dialysis in room 

255, we were told three or four months at that time. And for 

those of us not on that kind of a waiting list, time goes by. But 

for people — 106 families — who are waiting, every week 

means a lot and in some cases a lifetime. 

 

We‟re now a month out from where we were when these 

commitments were made, and I would hope the Premier isn‟t 

using the same language — three or four months — because 

this will resonate with the public because the words should be 

now two or three months. And I don‟t want to quibble over this, 

Mr. Premier, but the fact of the matter is, families watching and 

reading this dialogue will want to know that we haven‟t wasted 

a month and that we‟re a month closer to getting the centre up 

and operating. 

 

And I ask again: is July 1st still the date that we expect to have 

the theatres up and operating and have the transplants starting 

for kidneys? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the timeline the minister 

has already announced is what this government and the health 

region are working very hard to achieve. In the meantime, we 

are also working very hard to make sure that those who can, 

who are medically ready, and especially those who have a live 

donor who are ready for a transplant can have the transplant 

done. 

 

I think not very long ago that number would have been about 

six individuals waiting. We‟re down to about two now. Two is 

too many. Two is absolutely too many. But we‟re working very 

hard in a combination of the interim measure of out-of-province 

referral with the efforts of the ministry and the region to get this 

program up and running. We‟re trying to achieve the long-term 

result as well. 

 

I would say to the member this as well, Mr. Chair, that he 

highlights the program that was here in a favourable light, the 

program that was operating, and it should be because of the 

work that was being done by the doctors. But let‟s not forget 

that that system was reliant, in fact, that system had to be 

discontinued when one surgeon became ill. And I don‟t think 

that‟s the long-term solution. We need a longer term solution 

that isn‟t dependent on the health of one particular doctor. And 

that‟s what is informing the actions of the ministry and of the 

region, and we‟re working very hard towards that. 

 

In the meantime I repeat, Mr. Chair, we‟re not waiting for the 

program. We‟re providing as quickly as possible with those 

who are waiting who have live donors, who are medically ready 

for the transplant with out-of-province alternatives, and we‟re 

making some significant progress in that regard. 

 

The Chair: — Recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — The Premier, I think, is making strong 

points, that we have to get it up and operating. But what the 

people waiting for the transplants are most worried about is 

getting their transplants done and the need to get the theatres 

operating because we have, as taxpayers, invested in the 

hospital. The investment has been made. The patients are ready. 

They have donors. And the argument, I think, on behalf of the 

patients is they would want it up and operating as soon as there 

is a surgeon who‟s ready to do the work. And I‟m sure the 

Premier agrees that what we don‟t want is that red tape get in 

the way of getting on with getting the surgeries done. 

 

My question to the Premier is, on out-of-province surgeries — 

and I believe the process is that a certain level of patients who 

are able to make the trip and have a live donor can go to 

Edmonton — can the Premier indicate how many of these 

transplants have been done to date and whether or not that 

waiting list is shortening because we‟re getting the surgeries 

done in Edmonton, or are they finding other ways to find 

surgery? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well as I mentioned, 



5460 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

there are 12 procedures that have been done in Edmonton, and 

nine of those are cadaveric. Three of them were from live 

donors. Mr. Chair, I can also tell members of the committee that 

four of six currently ready, medically ready and with live 

donors, have been booked. The procedure‟s not done yet but 

have been booked. I can also tell members of the committee 

that we‟re working with Winnipeg as well now to try to make 

sure we‟re providing this in as timely as a way possible, Mr. 

Chairman. Our actions around this are similar to the actions 

we‟ve taken around the surgical wait times initiative, Mr. Chair. 

 

You know, for a very long time in this province, for years, we 

have had far too long a wait for people especially for . . . you 

know, as they say, hips and knees but for orthopedic surgeries 

in this province — not limited to that but those procedures in 

particular. We‟ve assigned extra resources in the budget to deal 

with that. 

 

The good news, Mr. Chair, is that we can keep up with the 

current demand for these surgeries with the capacity in the 

system. The challenge is this large group that we have . . . this 

cohort, this group of people that have been waiting for a long 

time, we need to direct resources specifically at them. We need 

to keep our options open with respect to using regional 

operating theatres if we have to, perhaps engaging private 

clinics and surgeons, surgeons that are involved in those private 

clinics. 

 

We hope members opposite will support that. Members 

opposite have been voicing concerns quite rightly about the 

kidney transplant situation, about the need to get patients their 

kidney transplants obviously. I hope they will also work with 

the government as we move to solve the wait times initiative 

and use all of the options within the public health care system, 

including the potential of private clinics to add to the resources 

of the province and the regional operating theatres. 

 

We know that these surgeries are important, but the transplant 

issue is right now at the top of the government‟s priority list. 

And so to summarize, nine are cadaveric of the twelve in 

Edmonton; three were from live donors. We‟ve had six current 

patients ready. Four of them have been booked. And we‟re 

working very hard, including expanding our talks, including 

now Winnipeg, to try to get people the transplant surgeries they 

deserve in our health care system, as a part of our health care 

system in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much for that, Mr. 

Chairman, to the Premier. The reason that I‟m interested in the 

number of surgeries that have been done in Edmonton is that in 

the committee — and I would ask you if you could check with 

your minister but — in the Hansard of committee, it was 

indicated that 21 surgeries had been done. And we had been 

told 12 and I just want to make sure. And it could be just a . . . 

Mistakes like this get made, and I‟m not casting any accusations 

at the minister. But I just want for the record whether the 

number is as was stated in committee, 21 or as stated here, 12. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, we‟ll double-check with officials 

and make sure we provide the member with the specific answer 

to the question. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — While the issue is very serious, and the 

minister is well aware of it and the Premier now, the issue of 

the patients who are on the waiting lists and are of a complex 

nature. Is there a process at this point in time where they can go 

to a different centre to get complex cases done? Or are those 

cases, and there are a number of them as I understand, are they 

just in need of waiting until the centre reopens? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The requirement for 

us to involve other jurisdictions on complex cases is not new. It 

wasn‟t new when the program was up and running in the 

province. But the member is right, some on the list will be those 

more complex cases. The ministry is specifically working with 

Edmonton to make some more progress with respect to these 

complex cases. 

 

[17:45] 

 

And I would also say this, Mr. Chair: one of the challenges of 

developing the new system, of getting it back up and running 

but getting it up and running in a much more sustainable way, is 

hopefully to increase the capacity to do these complex cases in 

the province. We have been moving those patients out now for 

some time, even when the program was up and running here. 

We would hope that when we have a new . . . when the new 

program is up and running, that at least we‟re beginning to 

build capacity to deal with these. In the meantime, we‟re 

working with other centres to try to address this specific issue 

the member has raised. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, the one area that there‟s a 

growing concern when we travel around the province of 

Saskatchewan, the obvious question many people are asking is 

that before the last election there were two big health issues that 

the public was most concerned about. One was doctor 

vacancies, and the other was waiting lists. And as the Premier 

will know, it was a very big debate going into the last election. 

Commitments were made, and I think both parties spoke to the 

issue. 

 

But the doctor vacancy is I think still a troubling issue, 

especially in rural Saskatchewan, has increased by 20 per cent. 

And the members from Saskatoon who may not have as much 

issue with this problem, but in rural Saskatchewan especially, 

we hear it in many centres that doctor vacancies, which have 

actually increased by 20 per cent since the election in ‟07, is 

still a very big issue. 

 

My question to the Premier is, has he had an opportunity other 

than announce programs, and I think there‟s been two or three 

of them, but does he have any more confidence that his most 

recent announcement will actually bring the doctor vacancies 

down, or will it stay at the level, or in fact what people worry 

most about, actually get worse under his administration? Where 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5461 

are we at and can you give us an update? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well Mr. Chair, I‟m happy to engage in this 

discussion with members opposite, with the Leader of the 

Opposition, with the New Democratic Party, because he‟s right. 

There was a couple of big issues going into the next election on 

health care. One was doctors, absolutely. One was the surgical 

wait times for people, absolutely. And the other was nurses. The 

member conveniently forgot to mention nurses because I think 

because the government‟s record was woeful in this regard. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the other matter the member didn‟t raise, there 

was another health care issue in Saskatoon and that is that 

because of the neglect of members opposite, ministers of Health 

and others, the Academic Health Sciences centre was actually 

under probation, Mr. Chairman. That‟s where the system was 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member‟s right, the 

medical college. I misspoke. The medical college, Mr. Chair. 

 

This was because of, I believe, a fundamental neglect of health 

care. I think the New Democratic Party felt, well health care is, 

quote unquote, our political issue and so neglect of these issues 

will somehow pass for public policy. And so we inherited a 

situation where there was a shortage of nurses; SUN 

[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] would tell you, I think, 1,000. 

 

Now we identified 800 as a plan to get to. When we announced 

that our government in office would work towards 800 new 

nurses, members opposite said it couldn‟t be done. It couldn‟t 

be done. They laughed at it. I think the current Health critic was 

one who laughed at that. Well we‟re already, we‟re two and a 

half years through and we‟re closing in on 600 more nurses 

today in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The member talks about doctors. You bet there was a doctor 

shortage then, during the election and when we took over, Mr. 

Chair. I was involved, many members on this side of the House 

were involved in local health care recruitment and retention 

committees while that member was in the cabinet. We were 

trying to get more doctors into southwest Saskatchewan, into 

communities around the province. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I‟ll tell you there‟s more work to be done in this 

regard, but here‟s the results after two and a half years of our 

government. There are 164 more, more doctors practising today 

than when the NDP were in office, 72 more GPs [general 

practitioner], 92 more specialists, Mr. Chair. Since we came 

into office there are now, we‟ve increased the training seats at 

the medical school to 84, Mr. Chair. Residencies are up to 108, 

I think from a number of 60 when we took office. 

 

The best chance we have to recruit doctors in the province is if 

we train them here and keep them here. And then, better yet, if 

they do their residency here and we can keep them here from 

that. But in order to do that, we‟ve got to fund the training seats 

at the College of Medicine, and then we‟ve got to fund the 

residency positions. Mr. Chairman, there are more vacancies in 

the province. You know why that is? Because regions are now 

advertising for more doctors to a greater extent than they have. 

 

The bottom line is this — and I invite a debate with any 

members opposite, those chirping from their seats or the Leader 

of the Opposition — because the fact of the matter is there are 

164 more doctors in the province practicing today than there 

was when we took office. There‟s more work to be done. We 

have to do better. That‟s why there‟s a physician recruitment 

initiative and agency established by the Ministry of Health 

which will be properly resourced. That‟s why we continue to 

fund seats at the College of Medicine. That‟s why we continue 

to fund new residencies in the province. That‟s why we 

continue to work towards the goal they said was impossible, of 

800 new nurses, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Because we understand, perhaps unlike members at least at the 

end of their term, that the system, that the issue of doctor 

recruitment, of nurse recruitment needs more than press 

releases. It needs objectives, goals set, and then a plan to get 

there and resources to deliver on the plan. That‟s what exists 

today in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, again the spin is good. I don‟t 

blame the Premier for spinning the . . . [inaudible interjection] 

. . . yes, spin. No, if you travel Saskatchewan, and I‟m sure the 

Premier does, he will know that the issue of doctors and the 

lack of doctors, they‟re not cheering. 

 

If you went, if you went and gave that speech anywhere in 

southwest Saskatchewan, you‟d get booed out of the hall 

because they‟re concerned about health care. Yes, believe me, if 

you gave a speech about how great health care is under your 

management, they don‟t agree. The Facebook in southwest 

Saskatchewan that was set up a few months ago to save health 

care is a lot of people who are concerned. And in the Premier‟s 

own area, in the Cypress Hills Health Region, the waiting lists 

have gone from 148 to 305. That‟s from their website . . . not 

today, but at the end of ‟09. The waiting list is up by 100 per 

cent. And when you can come here and cheer that there are so 

many doctors in southwest Saskatchewan in the Premier‟s own 

health region, and the waiting lists have doubled, well keep at 

it. Keep cheering about it because . . . But it is shocking to the 

public because they simply don‟t understand. 

 

And again to the Premier, the promise was made and the 

commitment was that he would make it better. And the people 

in Moose Jaw do not know why the Union Hospital hasn‟t been 

dealt with that issue. They have a hard time understanding why 

the 13 nursing homes promised haven‟t been delivered on. 

There was a commitment made to build a free-standing 

children‟s hospital in Saskatoon that the members say we are 

going to build. But for three years now, we have not had any 

action. And someone‟s looking around to see where it can be 

built. 

 

But we have seen things in Saskatoon go the other way — 

Station 20 for example. And I understand certain members on 

that side of the Assembly . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Pardon? Oh, the member wants to yell from his . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I would 

remind members that we were having a good debate for awhile, 



5462 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

and then all of a sudden they have to start wanting to join in 

from the floor. I would ask . . . Order. Order. I would ask 

members to be respectable of the people that or the person that 

has the floor. And the person that has the floor right now is the 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you for that ruling, Mr. Chairman. 

To the Minister of Advanced Education, we were talking about 

the children‟s hospital And the fact of the matter is, it hasn‟t 

been built in the first two and a half, going on three years of this 

government‟s mandate. And the promise was to build a 

free-standing children‟s hospital in Saskatoon. And people are 

waiting for that to take place. 

 

But on the issue of waiting lists, can the Premier explain why, 

in his own health district, his own health region, the waiting list 

has gone from 148 to 305 — 100 per cent increase in the 

waiting list in his own health region. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. You 

know, you know there‟s a lot of work to be done in health care 

in the province. We inherited a situation that was completely 

neglected by members opposite. That member that just asked a 

question closed 52 hospitals. 

 

That member opposite that just asked the question ignored the 

plight of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. Members in the 

back row will know that their government ignored the need for 

nurses in the province notwithstanding that they had a former 

SUN president in their caucus and in their government. 

 

Members opposite will know about the doctor shortage. And so 

the member then says, well why would you stand up and 

answer the question the way you did it? Spin, he said. Mr. 

Chairman, I‟ll tell you, the fact of the record is, and I‟ll slow it 

down for the member, the fact of the matter is that 

notwithstanding that more work needs to be done, in two and a 

half years there are 164 more doctors practising today in 

Saskatchewan than there were under the NDP: 72 GPs and 92 

specialists. There are 570 more nurses practising at work today, 

delivering health care for Saskatchewan people, than ever were 

under the NDP. 

 

And you know, the member talks about southwest 

Saskatchewan. I was just there. I was across the southwest and 

in Rosetown, Elrose, and in Cypress Hills. And you know, Mr. 

Chairman, the communities there, they have a health care 

concern. You bet they do. 

 

They understand they need doctors in those communities, and 

they understand that in Maple Creek they need a new health 

care facility. They understand that. They understand that the 

government needs to continue to move forward with the nurse 

practitioner support we provided, which is so important in that 

Beechy area. 

 

Here‟s what else they understand, Mr. Chairman, because they 

told us as much. Community leaders will tell you down there 

they understand that there‟s a lot of catch-up to do because of 

members opposite for 16 years ignoring the . . . I was in a 

hospital in Maple Creek, Mr. Chairman. That‟s not a new 

situation. The need for a new centre which has now been 

approved by our government, that was not a new situation. 

There has been a need for that centre in Maple Creek for a very, 

very long time. 

 

It took the election. It took the defeat of that government and 

the election of this side to do that project and countless others 

like it across the province, to do more than issue press releases 

about doctors but actually to make sure they‟re practicing, to 

recruit more nurses in the province of Saskatchewan. And in 

two and a half years, with this Minister of Health, I‟ll put his 

record up in two and a half years over what they did in 16 any 

day of the week, Mr. Chairman. 

 

I would also say this to the member. He asks a question about 

wait-lists which are still too long in the province. I ask him this. 

It‟s now 18 months from the next election. And so now we need 

to hear, if what we‟re doing is not enough— and fair enough, 

that‟s part of the debate — I think we need to hear what 

members opposite would do. I think we need to hear why 

members opposite would oppose, within a public system, a 

single-payer system. We need to find out why that former 

free-enterprising capitalist from Alberta would oppose the use 

of private clinics to come into the province and deliver, within a 

public system, on surgeries for Saskatchewan. 

 

We need a lot of orthopedic surgeries in the province. Well the 

member is kind of smiling. He‟s kind of grinning. Maybe he 

wants to get up in the next question and tell this House and tell 

the people of the province why he would object, why he would 

object to the use of private clinics who will come in, in the 

public system, operating in operating theatres to reduce the 

wait-list. 

 

[18:00] 

 

Because you can‟t suck and blow at the same time. You can‟t 

decry the wait-list, Mr. Chairman, and then not offer any 

alternative, especially if your record is closing 52 hospitals, not 

having an adequate complement of nurses, not dealing with the 

doctor situation, almost losing our medical college where Dr. 

Roger Pierson, a medical professor, said of that government, to 

recover from a decade of very serious cuts that have happened 

to the college, Mr. Chairman, is no small feat. That‟s the record 

of members opposite, and the people of rural Saskatchewan 

know it. 

 

And I would challenge . . . I would make this offer to the 

member opposite. If he wants to campaign on rural 

Saskatchewan in the Cypress Hills constituency on the 

government‟s record, on his when he was the MLA, and that 

member‟s record as the MLA fighting for health care, I think 

he‟s going to find out he‟d come out on the wrong side of that 

contest, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — This Premier would know the term suck 

and blow, that‟s for sure. He‟s the guy that does it every day. 

He talks to The Globe and Mail and says he‟s going to get rid of 

the debt in the province of Saskatchewan, and his own 

document says he‟s going to double it. That‟s sucking and 

blowing, Mr. Premier. You know how to do that. There‟s no 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5463 

doubt about that. 

 

I haven‟t heard that term used by Premiers Blakeney or 

Romanow. It‟s a fine expression for the Premier of the 

province. Even Grant Devine I don‟t remember using those 

terms. But when it comes to sucking and blowing, that boy 

knows how to do it. There‟s no doubt about that. He‟s done it 

many, many times. Anybody who can say in the Southwest 

where the waiting lists have doubled, that‟s a great record; 

that‟s sucking and blowing, Mr. Premier. You‟d know what the 

heck that means. Any premier who cancels the children‟s 

hospital, that‟s sucking and blowing. Anyone who de-insures 

chiropractic services in this province, contrary to his promise, 

that‟s sucking and blowing. 

 

I could go on and on about your term that you used, but the fact 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well you used it. Yes, you used 

it. You know why I like it? Because it fits you so well. That‟s 

why. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order, order. Order. 

Order. I would ask the member to direct his remarks through 

the Chair. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you for that, Mr. Chair. And I 

want the Premier to know that when it comes to sucking and 

blowing, he‟s the master at it. And that‟s why I like that term, 

and I think that we‟re going to use that a lot more. And thank 

you very much for laying it out, and thank you, Mr. Chair, for 

allowing it to be used because I like it. I think that‟s a great 

term to be used because there are many, many examples. There 

are many . . . 

 

The Chair: — I would ask the member not to include the Chair 

in his debate. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I will try not to refer to you in the future, 

Mr. Chair. I thought I was supposed to. But the fact of the 

matter is, Mr. Premier, is when you talk about doubling the 

waiting list in the Cypress Hills health region and spin that as a 

positive thing . . . I almost said, Mr. Chair. But I want to say to 

the Premier that this is a very, very important issue. 

 

And when you talk about cancelling 13 nursing homes in the 

province when you promised to deliver on them, that‟s sucking 

and blowing, Mr. Premier. That‟s a good description of that 

member from Swift Current. And so we want to talk about other 

things too. And I know that it speaks to character when we talk 

about the issue of spinning a waiting list that is increased by 

100 per cent. You got to be pretty good at spin to sell that one. 

 

But when it comes to understanding where this Premier‟s 

coming on health care, he can celebrate, and they can cheer and 

laugh and think they‟re doing a great job on health care, but 

that‟s not what I‟m hearing. I‟m hearing that when it comes to 

chiropractic services, when it comes to waiting lists, when it 

comes to the cancellation of the kidney program, all of these 

areas, they are very, very disappointed in this Premier including 

the cancellation of the promise to have a health ombudsman. Do 

you remember that promise? Yes, we were going to do that. 

That was going to be one of the first things we would do. 

And when it comes to sucking and blowing, boy, Mr. Chair, this 

Premier knows that term. He was going to do all of these 

wonderful things. The fact of the matter is there‟s still 20 per 

cent more doctor vacancies than when he became Premier. 

That‟s a fact. There‟s no children‟s hospital. That‟s a fact. 

There is no kidney transplant program that was in place when 

he became Premier. 

 

Now I wonder if the Premier could tell me, on the waiting list 

— which is where we started — how do you manage to double 

the number of people on the waiting list in your own health 

region, in your own district? How do you manage that? How 

hard do you have to work every day as Premier to double that 

list? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Chairman, the reason that 

the member‟s struggling with respect to his connection with 

Saskatchewan people is that they don‟t believe him. They don‟t 

believe him. 

 

We know, Mr. Chairman, the record of the government. The 

last general election that he . . . I think it was the last general 

election that he contested, 1999, the first election that I ran in. 

The NDP promised in their campaign platform . . . He would 

have signed off on it. I think he was one of the masters of 

strategy behind the campaign. And he signed off on a platform 

that promised Saskatchewan people the reduction of wait times 

by 30 per cent. They said, just elect us one more time — we‟re 

tired and we‟re old, but we‟ve got it left in us — just elect us 

one more time, he said to the people in Regina Elphinstone, and 

we will reduce your wait-list by 30 per cent. 

 

What happened, Mr. Chairman? Well what happened under the 

NDP after they continued to ignore the need for more nurses 

and the need for more doctors, after they continued to 

rationalize health care in rural Saskatchewan, is that wait times 

actually increased by 60 per cent. That‟s his record. That‟s his 

record. He promised a 30 per cent reduction, Mr. Chair. That‟s 

what he promised. The net result of his last time in government 

was a 60 per cent increase. 

 

Now you might say, Mr. Chair, and those watching might say, 

well but really you‟re the government. You‟re the opposing 

party, so is there anything that others have said about the NDP 

record in health care or even about their current tactics in 

opposition that might be from the NDP itself? 

 

And the answer is, yes there is, Mr. Chair. Yes there is. Here is 

a recent quote from Lewis Draper, the former NDP MLA and 

physician from southwest Saskatchewan, a former NDP MLA 

and physician. Here‟s what he said, and I quote, “It is sheer 

hypocrisy for Judy Junor to carp about health care. She and the 

present leader of the NDP were both part of the cabal . . .” 

 

Not my words but a former NDP MLA. I don‟t think cabal is 

very good, by the way. I‟m thinking cabal is probably not a 

good description of a group of people. But it‟s not us saying it, 

Mr. Chair. It‟s Lewis Draper, a former colleague of that 

member because he‟s been here a long time, and so you could 

pretty much pick any rural New Democratic member back to, 

well, when I was in about grade 8 and he was a colleague of the 



5464 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

member opposite. Well maybe not any more. The member for 

Kindersley points out, maybe not any more. He goes on to say, 

so let‟s repeat. He says: 

 

She and the present leader of the NDP [That‟s him right 

there; the man with all the answers, the present leader of 

the NDP] were both part of the cabal that spent 15 years 

shredding rural Saskatchewan service centres, SaskTel, 

SaskPower, rural highways depots along with 52 hospitals, 

firing 600 nurses and leaving 52 rural doctors no place to 

work in. Dozens [of other doctors] left the province. That 

caused overcrowding in our cities and we all suffer. 

 

That‟s not the Sask Party. That‟s a former New Democratic 

MLA and, Mr. Chairman, that‟s why those guys are sitting over 

there now, and they will sit on that side of House for years to 

come, Mr. Chair. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chair, the Premier likes to reminisce 

about the 1990s and periods that he can recall. That would be 

about the period of time he was making videos. He was a movie 

star. Now you remember that period. We‟ll flip that up on 

YouTube tonight. But it‟s the video of that Premier mocking 

Ukrainian people, and people will remember that. Oh, it‟s 

funny. They think that‟s funny. 

 

The Chair: — I would ask the Leader of the Opposition to . . . 

We are discussing Executive Council estimates, and we are to 

stick with that and ask questions along them lines. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chair, I was referring to the 

comments made by the Premier about a member, Lewis Draper, 

who he enjoyed reading a letter about. I want to talk about 

something the Premier was doing about that same time, that was 

as a movie actor. And I understand why SCN is being cut, Mr. 

Chair, because he never made his career, his movie acting on 

SCN. He‟s a little bitter about that because this little movie he 

was doing at that time. 

 

And, Mr. Chair, I know why members don‟t want to hear about 

that period, but we didn‟t want to hear about Lewis Draper 

either. But we want to talk about his movie career because it 

was an interesting one. He was making a video, a rap . . . 

 

The Chair: — I would ask the member to make his remarks 

relevant to the Executive Council estimates that we‟re 

discussing right now. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — The Leader of the Sask Party, the 

Premier, has a great memory about things the New Democratic 

Party was doing. But when it comes to remembering what he 

was doing, he has selective amnesia. He just doesn‟t want to 

remember that. But I can tell you there were many people not 

impressed with that little period of time. 

 

But the fact of the matter is that a Premier who can get up and 

brag about how well he‟s doing at reducing wait-lists, when in 

his own area it‟s increased by 100 per cent, that‟s a pretty 

credible spin doctor. He learned that while working for Brian 

Mulroney in Ottawa and Grant Devine here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Yes, he laughs about it. But the truth of the matter is he had a 

great time down there. He was making videos, and he was a 

busy boy, Mr. Chair. He led a hectic life. He was busy at that 

time, doing important work. He was a movie actor. He did 

videos. He took certain quantities of liquid supplies from office 

to office. He was a busy man. 

 

And I want to ask the Premier: how, when you spin your story 

about waiting lists, do you reconcile that with increasing 

waiting lists by 100 per cent in your own health region? How 

does that work? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, there are, I can report to 

members of the Assembly that the numbers — because the total 

numbers are small, the percentages are large — the total 

numbers are small and they fluctuate from region to region, 

especially rural regions like Cypress Hills. For surgeries 

performed in Cypress through July through December 2009, 98 

per cent were performed in the first six months — 98 per cent 

were performed within six months. Of the 305 cases that are 

waiting for surgery, only 20 have waited six months. 

 

Mr. Chairman, part of the reason for success — and we‟re not 

where we need to be yet in health care — part of the reason for 

success is that we have done what members opposite failed to 

do. We have put in place 570 nurses in two and a half years on 

our way to a goal of 800. We‟ve actually, instead of just giving 

speeches about it in the legislature, Mr. Chairman, we‟ve 

actually made sure there are more doctors practising. 

 

[18:15] 

 

And that‟s why, when that member goes to rural Saskatchewan 

. . . Well he shakes his head. This is the truth of the matter — 

164 doctors practising. And that‟s why, if that member went to 

rural Saskatchewan and wanted to have an honest debate with 

our members from rural Saskatchewan — I‟m from southwest 

Saskatchewan — he‟d come out on the short end of that debate, 

Mr. Chairman, because the people in those regions in southwest 

Saskatchewan have had quite enough of the NDP‟s plan for 

their health care which has meant fewer doctors, not enough 

nurses, and hospitals that have been shut down by the members 

opposite, Mr. Chairman. That‟s the record of that government. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the hon. member, he does . . . He likes to talk 

about the past. My quote about Lewis Draper by the way, that 

he is so offended by, was from 2009. This was Mr. Draper‟s 

assessment of him and his current Health critic, that they really 

didn‟t have a leg to stand on in terms of their health care 

position. But you know what, Mr. Chairman? I think I know 

why he — notwithstanding the fact that Dr. Draper wants to 

talk about today — why he wants to talk about the past. He 

wants to talk about the past because of his record in 

government. 

 

Mr. Chairman, one of the worst job creation records in all of 

Canada presided by members opposite. And he was one of the 

captains of industry that was the Economic Development 

minister. SPUDCO, one of the biggest train wrecks in the 

history of this province, that was not fully disclosed in a 

transparent way when he was the minister, though he knew the 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5465 

truth about it. That‟s his record, Mr. Chairman. That‟s part of 

the reason why the past is a little hurtful to him. 

 

But he especially wants to avoid the present and the future 

because the present Saskatchewan is a place that is a have 

province in Canada. The present Saskatchewan is a place that is 

creating record jobs across the country. The present 

Saskatchewan is a province that forecasters are saying will lead 

the country in economic growth, that‟s leading the country in 

building permits, that‟s leading the country in wholesale trade, 

that has the highest level of business optimism. We know that 

growing economy in terms of the growth will pay for a quality 

of life the likes of which we never had under them. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we have seen that member‟s record when he was 

an Economic Development minister. We‟ve seen his focus on 

the past. We‟ve seen his focus on a past in our province where 

we were losing some of our best and brightest . . . 

 

The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I know that we‟re 

getting near the end of the debate and all people want a chance 

to join in, but I would remind members that the more time I 

interrupt, the less questions that will be answered or asked. So I 

would ask that members not holler from their seats and not 

interrupt the speaker that‟s on this floor. I recognize the 

Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, that‟s the Saskatchewan 

today and that‟s the Saskatchewan of the future, and this 

gentleman is a stranger to that Saskatchewan. The 

Saskatchewan he left in the rear-view mirror was a place where 

people were leaving, where we weren‟t living up to our 

potential. 

 

And I‟ll tell you what, Mr. Chairman. The people I talk to in 

this province have concerns about health care, to be sure. They 

have concerns around education. But here‟s a concern that I 

hear from people: that we never, ever, ever go back to the dark 

days when someone like that was sitting on the Executive 

Council with a negative, frankly, a negative outlook on the 

future of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair. 

 

Well I hear members opposite say it‟s a trust thing. That‟s 

unbelievable. I actually have seen some surveys, both of our 

own and a public survey where, Mr. Chairman, the people of 

the province are weighing in even today on the issue of trust, 

Mr. Chairman. I think it‟s about a 30-point deficit they have to 

overcome as a party. The hon. member‟s got about 40 more 

points to make up, Mr. Chairman, and if he doesn‟t start 

connecting with the new Saskatchewan, I‟m worried about him. 

I‟m worried that they‟re going to get fed up and dump him 

before we have a chance to have an election, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chair, I wasn‟t finished reading the 

editorial from The StarPhoenix. And the Premier raises the 

issue of SPUDCO and all those wonderful things. Well I‟ve got 

to finish, I‟ve got to finish reading the editorial. This editorial, 

Mr. Chair, is titled, “Cause for jailing.” “Cause for jailing”. And 

it referred to a period of time when the now Premier was 

working for the Devine government. Here‟s what it says: “It‟s 

unfortunate Saskatchewan‟s public accounts committee doesn‟t 

have the power to throw people in jail.” 

 

And it goes on to say: 

 

Is it too much to ask that government employees be paid 

by the department in which they work? Or that 

government agencies not pay for advertising services they 

don‟t receive. Or that cabinet ministers not be given rivers 

of free liquor when the rest of us are asked to pay? 

 

That would be referring to the Premier‟s job of taking rivers of 

liquor around to ministers‟ offices. Then it goes on to say: 

 

These cases are despicable, not just for their scale but for 

their intent. They were concocted, at great effort, to 

deceive the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

That‟s what you were doing, Mr. Premier. You were part of 

that. You were part of what was called, “. . . or that cabinet 

ministers not be given rivers of free liquor when the rest of us 

are asked to pay.” That‟s what the good Premier was up to in 

those days. 

 

And, Mr. Chair, we can go on and many more things about 

what the Premier was doing at that time: “That makes them 

fraud and that‟s why the perpetrators, as well as those . . . 

watched and did nothing, [and] deserve to be behind bars.” 

 

Deserve to be behind bars. That‟s pretty strong language for the 

Premier to have to deal with. And what the Finance minister has 

to understand, that this is who his boss is. This is the editorial 

that was being talked about at that time. About during that 

period when the Premier is now talking about what our 

government was doing. 

 

And it‟s true that we had a hard time after the Devine era. And 

maybe I can just go back and talk for a few moments about the 

Devine government. Because it was known as the most corrupt 

government, the most corrupt government in the history of 

Canada. And while we were sitting here in opposition, the 

Premier was working in the department . . . 

 

The Chair: — I would ask the member to, on his preamble, to 

start to relate his preamble to the question, to the question. I 

gave you plenty of time. Relate it back to what we‟re 

discussing. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chair, I want to say that during that 

period when the Premier was a member of the Devine 

government, he worked here in this building. His job, as stated 

in the editorial and I want to refer to it. “Is it too much to ask 

that government employees [that would] be . . .” He would be 

one of them that is referred to in this editorial. “. . . be paid by 

the department in which they work? Or that the government 

agency not pay for advertising services they didn‟t receive. ” 

 

And you were there during that period. I think you were one of 

the bureaucrats working in the building who was scheming on 

how to pay for advertising, political advertising, political 

advertising paid for by tax. But any of you, you‟ll know about 

that. And then it goes on to say, “Or that cabinet ministers not 

be given rivers of free liquor when the rest of us are asked to 

pay?” 



5466 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2010 

Now I can get the letters. Have you got the letters that the 

member from Swift Current signed, what he signed asking for 

the booze to be sent over to the Legislative Building and 

referred to in this article of cabinet ministers not being given 

rivers of free liquor when the rest of us are asked to pay? 

 

So, Mr. Premier, you can talk about mistakes made in the past 

by NDP governments, and I‟ll talk to you about mistakes that 

your government made when you were a part of the Devine 

administration. Now when we defeated the Devine government 

in 1991, the public will remember in horror the deficit, the 

deficit that was left by that member and his government that 

was the highest per capita debt of any province in Canada— the 

highest per capita debt, even higher than Newfoundland. And 

there were very, very tough decisions that had to be made. 

 

And the Premier will know that history because he was part of 

it although he had flown the coop. He headed down to Swift 

Current to open up the guitar museum. One of my buddies said, 

the Premier of the province, the Premier of the province is such 

a bad salesman he can‟t even sell country western music in 

Swift Current. That‟s how bad it is. And the museum went 

broke under his design. 

 

Mr. Finance Minister, you will know this, and you‟ll know that 

you‟re under a lot of pressure when it comes to doing up the 

finances of the province because the fact of the matter is, is that 

the instructions you get and that led us to the design and the 

failure of the budget in ‟09 came from that individual, from the 

Premier. And it‟s no wonder that at the end of the day the 

economy didn‟t grow by 2 per cent. It didn‟t grow by 1 per 

cent. It didn‟t grow by half a per cent in ‟09. It didn‟t shrink by 

2 per cent or by 3; it shrank by 6.3 per cent. 

 

And that is because . . . And I don‟t blame the Minister of 

Finance, and I know we‟ve asked him lots of tough questions 

about that. But the fact of the matter is, it‟s the Premier‟s job to 

oversee. And he even made comment, the Premier made 

comment that how he phoned on a weekend when he was busy 

doing other things and asked the Minister of Finance to transfer 

tens of millions of dollars. 

 

That‟s sort of how it works in the way he runs his private 

business and the way he runs government. And I say this 

editorial is not going to be well-received by the people of 

Saskatchewan, but it‟s going to be repeated. And I say to the 

Premier, the question I want to ask you is, how is it that the 

waiting lists in the Swift Current Health Region have doubled? 

How did you manage that? 

 

The Premier hasn‟t answered it, and I need to get an answer 

because many people are asking us, how is that you doubled the 

waiting list? You said you got more doctors, this is your 

answer. Now listen to this carefully. There‟s a doubling of the 

waiting list in the health region because we have more doctors. 

Now does that strike you as a little bit ridiculous? We have 

more nurses, we have more doctors, and that‟s how the waiting 

list doubled. My question to the Premier: how did you manage 

to double the waiting list in the Swift Current Health Region? 

 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Chair, I don‟t care, I don‟t 

care what anyone says. I‟m glad he‟s back in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve talked a lot about the health 

care record of the Government of Saskatchewan, about new 

health care facilities in rural southwest Saskatchewan. We‟ve 

talked about finally making investments we need to at the 

University of Saskatchewan in terms of the Academic Health 

Sciences centre, making sure that our College of Medicine is 

never at risk like it was under the NDP. 

 

We‟ve talked about, Mr. Chair, our health care record when it 

comes to nurses, when it comes to doctors, Mr. Chairman, and 

you know, our wait times initiative. And we know we‟re at the 

early stages of our wait times initiative, and again we had a 

chance for a debate here about what the NDP believe with 

respect to wait times and whether or not we should be using the 

private sector surgeons in the public system or not, but they 

didn‟t get into that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, we‟re nearing the end of estimates. And I note, 

now this is the member‟s first effort and we had, you know, a 

good exchange, and perhaps on some issues. But I notice that 

the issues of First Nations were not raised in estimates, neither 

social services, neither housing, neither labour, nothing on Bill 

80. Not a question on Bill 80 from the Leader of the 

Opposition. Nothing on education, and nothing on agriculture, 

which is less of a surprise, which is less of a surprise. 

 

But, Mr. Chairman, we‟re glad the hon. member‟s joined the 

influx from Alberta. I‟m personally happy he‟s back. I hope he 

hangs on to his job over there, notwithstanding approval ratings 

because things can turn around. And that could happen for the 

honourable member, and we wish him well. 

 

In fact I would say, we wish the Leader of the Opposition better 

than his own NDP wish him. I would like to, for example, read 

a quote from John Conway. John Conway is a well-known New 

Democratic supporter. And John Conway had this to say. He 

had this to say. And I don‟t agree with this, by the way. This is 

too strong a language. But I don‟t agree with what John 

Conway has to say. But here‟s what he says. “The NDP has 

sought „renewal‟ by resurrecting . . .” I don‟t even want to say 

that part. 

 

I‟ll just keep going: 

 

Not only that, but having learned of the dirty tricks of the 

Lingenfelter campaign [and I didn‟t say that], the party 

membership still elected him. So the party membership 

decided to elect a guy whose campaign team submitted 

over a thousand forged memberships with ten thousand 

dollars in cash?  

 

The quote continues. This is John Conway now, a New 

Democrat supporter: “More than that, after losing the election 

Lingenfelter will go . . . back to being a highly paid oil 

executive in Calgary.” 

 

Mr. Chairman, I don‟t think that‟s going to happen because the 

oil industry is not very excited about his plan to nationalize the 

oil business in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 



May 10, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5467 

Mr. Chairman, well, the members are all upset. It‟s John 

Conway that said it. It‟s their friend in the New Democratic 

party. This is a quote from the prairie dog. 

 

[18:30] 

 

I would also want to end this session as we began. The member 

was up on his feet early in his first question period in the fall. 

And I congratulated him on his job, and I noted that I thanked 

him for the advice that he‟d given me in the past, offers to 

advice. That leader went out into the scrum and said, I didn‟t 

give that member any advice at all. But I‟ve got a letter from 

when he was vice-president of Nexen where he says, call if you 

ever need any advice. And that‟s handwritten by the Leader of 

the Opposition. 

 

So I know at the time he said that his best buddy, the member 

for Kindersley, that was the guy he had provided advice to, but 

not me. I want to let the record show that he did make the offer. 

I appreciate it. But given his record in government and given 

the great state of the province of Saskatchewan and our bright 

prospects for future, as to his advice, we say, thank you, no. 

 

The Chair: — Is subvote (EX01), central management . . . 

Time‟s been . . . We will report progress then. The clock has 

been called. So I‟ll invite a member to rise and report progress 

and ask for leave to sit again. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I move that 

we rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Chair: — Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committee.  

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m instructed by the committee 

to report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that the 

House do now adjourn for committees this evening. 

 

The Speaker: — In order to facilitate the working of 

committees, the Government House Leader has moved that the 

House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 18:37.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5423 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5423 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5423 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5424 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5424 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5424 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5424 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5424 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5424 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5424 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5425 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5425 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5425 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5425 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5425 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Women of Distinction Awards 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5426 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5426 

 Autism Services Spring Gala 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5426 

 Member’s Participation in Debate 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5426 

 Physician Recruitment Strategy 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5427 

 Globe and Mail Interview 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5427 

 Positive Economic Outlook for Saskatchewan 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5427 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Agriculture 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5428 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5428 

 Long-Term Care Facilities 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5429 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5429 

 Treatment for Multiple Sclerosis 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5431 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5431 

 Efficiency in Government 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5431 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5432 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5432 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Saskatchewan Government Insurance Celebrates Saskatchewan Roughrider Centennial 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5432 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5433 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Private Bills 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5433 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 904 — The Orange Benevolent Society Amendment Act, 2010 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5434 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5434 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5434 

  D’Autremont (point of order) .................................................................................................................. 5439, 5450, 5451, 5454 



 

  Yates (point of order) ......................................................................................................................................... 5439, 5450, 5451 

  The Chair (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................... 5439, 5454 

  The Deputy Chair (point of order) .............................................................................................................................. 5450, 5451 

  Belanger (point of order) ........................................................................................................................................................ 5454 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


