




















































Hansard: November 02, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 4B  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 2010, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5795 

 November 2, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Gantefoer, seconded by Mr. 

Wyant, and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved 

by Mr. Broten.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — I’m asking leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy Speaker has asked for leave to 

introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Deputy Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Brkich: — To you and through you I’d like to introduce 

my sister, who has come up from Davidson. She’s taking a 

couple days course here in Regina so she wanted to come to the 

legislature and see how hard I’ve been working today and how 

hard I’ve been representing the constituents. And I think she has 

been here before but she hasn’t been here for a few years. So 

I’m hoping she will enjoy the proceedings tonight. And I hope 

that . . . welcome her here and I hope everybody in the 

Assembly welcomes her to her Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Gantefoer, seconded by Mr. 

Wyant, and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved 

by Mr. Broten.] 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted 

to continue my response to the Throne Speech that I started 

before dinner. And actually I’m hoping that maybe I have a 

chance to see that some of my grandchildren might be watching 

tonight. So I’m going to say hi to my family as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before dinner we talked about Social Services and 

the children that are under the control, under the care of our 

government and my ministry, and we talked about the tracking 

system that we have for children at risk. The member . . . I 

talked about the investment of $15 million for the automated 

tracking system and I’m pleased to see that the members 

opposite were listening carefully because they’ve admitted that 

we’ve actually spent $18 million on that tracking system, and 

I’m very pleased that we have . . . [inaudible] . . . recognized the 

importance of children in our system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve responded by increasing funding to 

children and family services by 106 per cent in our first three 

budgets as government. In 2000, the Children’s Advocate 

indicated a serious gap and a major disconnect in the way child 

welfare was being delivered, being delivered under the previous 

government who had actually done nothing to this system for 

16 years. And we responded last year by initiating a 

comprehensive child welfare review system. The 

recommendations are being brought forward right now. And 

this review panel actually did a more comprehensive system 

review than has ever been done in Canada, and I’m sure that the 

members opposite and the general public are looking forward to 

the recommendations. 

 

The foster family homes in Saskatchewan has been an issue for 

as early as 1986, but it had never been recognized and never 

been dealt with under the previous government. They left foster 

homes . . . The crowded foster homes ballooned to as many as 

having 21 children in one house. Our government has reduced 

the number of children living in foster homes with more than 

four children by over one-third in the last three years. We’ve 

also reduced the number of homes with more than four children 

by one-third since the NDP [New Democratic Party] left office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s rewarding, as the Minister of Social Services, 

to deal with children and to deal with the system when we know 

that there are vulnerable people and that we have a chance to 

actually help them. The members opposite had ignored this file 

for a very long time, and I think it’s time that they recognize 

that there is a responsibility as government to deal with people 

who need help. 

 

I’m going to give you a list of some of the investments we’ve 

made in the system since we’ve become government. We’ve 

invested $5 million to hire 60 new child protection workers. 

We’ve increased foster family rates by 21.5 per cent. We spent 

$1.6 million to enhance respite for foster families. And we’ve 

invested $8.2 million in the last two budgets to fully fund the 

operating cost of 144 new residential spaces for children who 

are at risk. Mr. Speaker, we’ve also increased funding for 

extended family caregivers by 41 per cent. We dedicated $1.3 

million in annualized funding to Family Finders program, 

enhancing our commitment to kinship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it really isn’t enough that the NDP ignored 

vulnerable children, but it’s also curious that a party that really 

professes to be the champions of the poor so effectively ignored 

people that were actually in poverty. During their time in office, 

the NDP failed to increase shelter rates for 13 out of 16 years, 

despite inflation of over 30 per cent. Mr. Speaker, apparently 

trying to . . . [inaudible] . . . themselves, they failed to increase 

the seniors’ income plan for all 16 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our records on the issue could not be more starkly 

different. Since November of 2007, our government has 



5796 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

committed over $40 million for enhancements to income 

support programs. In 2008 we became the very first jurisdiction 

in Canada to index shelter rates. We adjust them twice a year to 

the cost of living. And we did the same for rental supplements. 

Taken together, the shelter rates and the rental supplements give 

eligible clients up to 100 per cent of the average market rent. 

They actually get 110 per cent for those with permanent 

disabilities. 

 

We increased benefits for the Saskatchewan employment 

supplement and increased income threshold for those to quality. 

It was the largest income increase in the program’s history. We 

doubled the seniors’ income plan and nearly doubled the 

number of seniors eligible. But most importantly, Mr. Speaker, 

the government understands that reducing poverty requires 

more than just a one-dimensional approach. 

 

To reduce poverty, we have to grow the economy and to put 

more money back into the pockets of everybody. We’ve 

increased the minimum wage. We’ve taken 80,000 people off 

the tax roll. We’ve doubled the low-income tax credit. We 

doubled the caregiver tax credit. We’ve doubled the infirm 

dependant tax credit. We doubled the supplement to the 

disability tax credit. We’ve increased the disability tax credit. 

And we’ve decreased property taxes. We’ve introduced the 

active families benefit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our approach is working. More people are 

working in Saskatchewan now than ever. We have the second 

lowest unemployment rate in Canada, and wages are up 5 per 

cent in the last year. Saskatchewan has jumped from eighth to 

second in the nation in the rank of best performing labour 

markets. 

 

Mr. Speaker. The Globe and Mail reported on October the 21st, 

and I’m going to quote, “Under Premier Wall’s leadership, 

Saskatchewan has amassed an impressive record of economic 

growth during difficult times.” 

 

Of course, growth creates both opportunity and challenges. But 

rather than forgo the opportunity of growth like the previous 

government, we’ve chosen instead to rise to the challenge. We 

understand that growth and economic opportunity for all our 

citizens can put some pressure on the housing market. At the 

same time we’ve acted to bolster income supports, as I 

mentioned earlier. We’re investing in affordable housing. 

We’ve increased funding for our housing programs by 45 per 

cent since the NDP left office. 

 

And since November of 2007, we’ve completed over 700 new 

affordable housing units across our province and have 1,250 in 

various stages of development. 

 

To put this in context, the NDP completed only 58 units in their 

last full year in government. As former Social Services minister 

Bob Pringle said of affordable housing under the NDP, this 

issue was not addressed. When the NDP finally got around to 

dealing with the issue in 2007, they actually did conduct a 

housing task force but they kept the findings a secret. 

 

Our emphasis is on action. While the NDP pays lip service to 

affordability, we’re building more new units. In the coming 

weeks we’ll be coming forward with even more. And we’ll be 

announcing details of our new Head Start on a Home program, 

which we expect to create over 1,000 new home ownership 

opportunities for struggling families. We expect this program to 

take the pressure off the rental markets as these families move 

into their first homes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to my responsibilities as Minister 

Responsible for Social Services, I’m also responsible for the 

Public Service Commission. We have a number of initiatives 

coming forward from PSC [Public Service Commission] that 

I’m extremely excited about. 

 

As it was mentioned in the Throne Speech, in the very near 

future we’ll be introducing the public interest disclosure Act. 

Our party first brought forward this whistle-blower Act in 

opposition in 2001. We expect these efforts to culminate in the 

introduction this fall of an effective and thoroughly designed 

Bill that will increase the public’s confidence in government. It 

will be a major step to protecting public servants who selflessly 

put our province’s best interests first in the execution of their 

duties. 

 

I’m also excited about two more initiatives we have under the 

Public Service Commission. One of them is the lean initiative. 

It’s engaging the ideas of public servants on how to make 

government more effective and putting those ideas into action. 

This initiative is not about job reduction. It’s about practical, 

common sense improvements to the way we do our work in 

government. 

 

And complementing this is our workforce adjustment strategy. 

The Premier has committed to a leaner government and that’s 

exactly what we’re working towards. Saskatchewan’s citizens 

expect us to manage their money responsibly. The workforce 

adjustment strategy gives us an opportunity to manage 

vacancies created as a result of retirement or other voluntary 

circumstances. And through this process we’re able to achieve 

efficiencies without impacting services and without mass 

layoffs. 

 

We’ve challenged the public service and they’re already 

delivering. A 4.4 reduction in FTEs [full-time equivalent] 

towards the overall goal of 15 per cent will be achieved this 

year, the first year of a four-year plan. And of course we’re 

going to be sensitive to the fact that some vacant positions need 

to be filled quickly, especially when it comes to the front-line 

workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these initiatives, all the initiatives that we have as 

government, work well together. We’re working to ensure that 

we have a more efficient government, that we’re listening to the 

people in the province, and that we’re accountable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite decided to spend money on 

initiatives like SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company] instead of the wait-list. They decided 

to spend money on mega bingos instead of the money that we 

spend on things like Habitat for Humanity. On the old road, Mr. 

Speaker, there was no connection made between government 

waste and government neglect for the people that they 

represent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a commitment to the people that have 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5797 

elected us. We’ve committed to ensure that we spend their 

money wisely, that we look after the people that are entrusted 

into our care, that we look for growth, that we give people an 

opportunity to work towards a job that they’re enjoying in 

government, and to make sure that the growth happens in all of 

our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely proud of the Throne Speech that 

was brought forward, and I will not be supporting the 

amendment. I will be supporting the Throne Speech. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to enter into this debate. It’s one I always look forward 

to. We are getting back to work in Regina, though much of our 

work, Mr. Speaker, happens in our ridings as we talk and visit 

with our constituents, both in our own neighbourhoods, our own 

communities, but across the province. And we had an 

opportunity to do that this summer. 

 

I do want to take a moment to welcome the new member from 

northwest Saskatoon, congratulate him on his win. We want to 

make sure he has a good time here — not a long time, but a 

good time. You know, it is a privilege to be elected. It’s one 

that people vie for and work hard to achieve that place in our 

society, and it’s one that we can’t take for granted. All of us 

here work hard all the time to make sure we bring honour and 

dignity to the Chamber and also to our communities, that we 

represent them well and we don’t get too comfortable. 

 

I do also want to take a minute to welcome the new cabinet 

ministers. There was a shuffle in June and I know I am a critic 

now of a new minister in Social Services. And it is a pleasure to 

listen to what she has to say and to correct her the odd time, you 

know. And I had pleasure in correcting the former minister. I 

won’t say the old minister, but the former minister. But it is one 

that I think the people of Saskatchewan take very seriously, the 

area of Social Services. It is the area of social safety nets and in 

Saskatchewan we think we do it well. And if there’s an 

opportunity to do it better, we do it better. And if we’re not 

doing as good as we can, we should make sure that something is 

done about that. 

 

So I will be talking to the minister and making sure, holding her 

accountable and making sure she’s forthcoming with 

information because I think what’s really important in Social 

Services — right across the board but particularly in Social 

Services — because those who are vulnerable also feel they 

don’t have a voice and they don’t have easy access to ways of 

getting information. It’s very difficult for them, both because 

they feel not good about where they’re at but also they’re not 

familiar with the same channels that many of us are familiar 

with. And so it’s very important that this minister strives to be 

as transparent and as accountable as possible, and forthcoming 

with accurate information. 

 

[19:15] 

 

I do look around and I do see some that have been moved 

around. I was particularly surprised, particularly around the 

Environment minister, but as we said today in question period, 

maybe she’s in Ottawa. She was a good link to the former 

government, the government in Ottawa. And if she can make 

those connections, that would be good. We all hope for a 

positive outcome and the BHP Billiton that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Just to remind the member that a member is 

not to refer in any form to the presence or absence of members 

of the Chamber. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize for my 

error, and I will go forward from there. But I was surprised 

about the movements of different cabinet ministers, particularly 

the Environment minister who lost that position. We know that 

the work around the wildlife habitat was particularly difficult 

for this government, but it was a government initiative. It 

wasn’t just one minister. It wasn’t just thought of as one 

minister, and yet she did pay a price for that. 

 

I also want to take a minute and thank my family. The 

volunteers in Saskatoon Centre work so hard to make sure that 

the people’s voices are represented. And as well I want to thank 

my staff, and particularly my constituency assistant, Leslie, who 

works so hard to make sure that people have access to the 

government programs and that their voices are heard and that I 

make sure that every voice is heard and nothing is overlooked. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a moment and review the 

Throne Speech, and there’s some reviews and some other 

comments I want to make. But I find this interesting. The theme 

this year is “The New Road.” And last year it was called 

“Moving Forward.” But you know, I see a similarity here, and 

there’s not much new. And what is new is recycled and old 

promises. 

 

And in fact, you know, The StarPhoenix in 2009 had this to say 

about last year’s Throne Speech. It said . . . The headline was, 

and I quote: 

 

Throne speech sets the stage to repeat history. 

 

For a party still so relatively new at the task, the 

government’s speech from the throne spends an inordinate 

amount of attention looking back. 

 

Well you would have thought that these folks would have read 

the reviews from last year, paid a little attention, and said, you 

know, they got a little flak because they spent too much time 

looking backwards and not enough time looking forward. 

There’s a question of vision here. But they didn’t pay attention, 

and here we have the same, same, same issues. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, I like what some of the members 

on this side were saying. The member from Saskatoon Eastview 

talked about road signs and that the folks in the government 

really don’t seem to be paying attention to some of the road 

signs along the way about some of the things that are going on 

in Saskatchewan. And they don’t seem to really care, and this is 

really, really unfortunate. 

 

And the member from Saskatoon Meewasin talked about the 

high road and the low road. And it seems that this government 

has taken the low road, not the high road, when it comes to 

dealing with people in Saskatchewan. 



5798 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, what I would say that this new 

road, this new road really is a toll road. It’s for those who can 

afford things in Saskatchewan. But there are many, many 

people who cannot afford all that this government is putting out. 

And I have some real, real deep concerns that these folks are 

excluding too many people in Saskatchewan. For example right 

off the bat, you know when they talk about some of the 

achievements . . . And we are all proud when more people come 

to Saskatchewan. We want to see this province grow and the 

population grow. That’s a very good thing. 

 

But one of the most startling statistics I never hear this 

government talk about — and I did not hear the Minister of 

Social Services talk about this in her opportunity to talk about 

some of the challenges this ministry has, this department has — 

and that is the continuing growth of the Social Services 

caseloads. 

 

Now I don’t know what’s happened between March and 

September of this year, and we will find out through written 

questions. Has that gone down? But we saw prior to that, 18 

months of continuous increase in the caseloads — 18 months. I 

don’t know when you could go back in Saskatchewan history to 

when that kind of growth was happening in Social Services. 

Was it in the ’80s? I don’t know. There was a peak in the ’90s, I 

know, when the federal government downloaded some of their 

programs to the provincial government, and the provincial 

government had to pick it up. But 18 months of growth — not a 

word though, not talking about those kind of challenges. So 

when I say this seems to be more like a toll road, those people 

are feeling very excluded. 

 

Now the other . . . And I’ll go through this; I’ve got some 

bookmarks here. But, Mr. Speaker, it talks about the average 

wages are going up. And that’s great to hear, that average 

wages are going up for many people. But you know what? I was 

shocked this summer when I saw that this government has 

decided that they would freeze the minimum wage. Now it will 

be until 2012 before we see the next increase in minimum 

wage. We’re talking about the vulnerable people at the lower 

end of the wage scales, facing all sorts of challenges, and this 

government’s not taking this very seriously at all — not at all. 

And they say, wait three years until your next increase. 

 

And in fact the irony of this, Mr. Speaker, was in 2007 when we 

were in government and we laid out a plan to increase the 

minimum wage to 9.25 an hour, and it would reach what I call 

the low-income cut-off that we all felt, if it was indexed, there 

would be small increases every year so it’d keep pace, and you 

would never see those huge increases again. And in fact we had 

members from the government saying, good idea; we’re with 

you on that. Nobody wants to see these huge increases again. 

 

Well here we are in a three-year wage freeze. And it will be 

three years before anybody sees any kind of increase. And this 

is deplorable. And I think that this is proof that this is, the new 

road is the toll road. 

 

They talk about their 100 long-term addictions recovery spaces 

in the province. Well, Mr. Speaker, this is déjà vu from the 

2007 Throne Speech in December. In fact some people were 

just in my office asking about this campaign promise. What 

happened to the 100 beds for addictions? 

Well what happened in 2008 was, apparently there was a study, 

a study done. Quietly there was a way they had to figure out, 

how are they going to get around this 100 beds for addictions? 

Well they had to have a study. In 2007 there wasn’t a need for a 

study. They were just going to do it. But in 2008-2009 there 

was all of a sudden a need, but really what the need was, they 

needed a way to figure out how to dodge the cost there. 

 

They make a big deal, and we have the minister taking credit 

today again about the Saskatchewan seniors’ income plan and 

how they doubled that. And we thought that was a fair idea. But 

how can you make it sustainable? And last year we saw a cut of 

over $2 million from that budget. Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

know if that’s a record cut. They may have done a record 

increase, but I think they also did a record cut. And we know 

the year before, over 3,000 seniors were cut from that program. 

We don’t know what happened this summer, and we’re waiting 

to hear from the written questions how many seniors were cut 

from that program this summer. But you know, to cut $2 

million from a budget of some 20 million, it’s got to have an 

impact. It’s got to have an impact. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they talk about the home safety audits, work 

also continues. Well you know what? I’ve got to ask you, Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t think work has started on providing home 

safety audits because we know many low-income seniors have 

asked about that and they’ve not seen anything actually, 

actually done about it. 

 

Now the one that I think . . . And we all stood in the House, and 

I remember the day the minister announced this. The assured 

income for disability was a very good program, had lots of 

potential, but we’re seeing a program stalling here. Now they’re 

talking about, how can they get more people enrolled? But 

people are having some real questions, because the original 

intent, the original intent for many of the people from the 

community was this was going to be a way to ensure that 

people living with disabilities had some way to for sure to be 

living with an adequate income. And all we’re seeing is a name 

change at this point. 

 

And we hope and we really demand of the government they 

take this seriously, that somehow they have to do something 

about how much money is provided for people living with 

disabilities. The idea was this was going to be some way of 

getting adequate income into the hands of people living with 

disabilities. And it’s just sad to see that it’s starting to stall out. 

It’s got a name change, but it’s got to be much more than that, 

and we’re imploring the government to do much more than that. 

And this will be something that people remember a year from 

now when we talk about . . . You just can’t change the name of 

the program; you really have to deliver the goods. And we think 

the government’s failing on this mark — failing, and failing the 

people most vulnerable here in Saskatchewan. 

 

But one other area that I have deep concerns about is the Head 

Start on a Home. Now they talk about 1,000 new homes, and it 

was interesting to hear the new minister talk about her stats and, 

you know, I really have to challenge her on some of the 

numbers that she used about how, when we did our home start 

program, we had 2,500 homes over five years. Now some were 

not finished, and we can think about the Monarch Yards in 

Saskatoon that were opened by the new government but were 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5799 

started by us. And so we have some questions about how 

accurate the numbers are. 

 

But I have a real issue about this Head Start program because I 

hope that there’s more to it than just 1,000 homes over five 

years. That’s nice for home ownership, but what about rental 

units? There’s got to be something about rental. There’s got to 

be something about seniors’ housing. There’s got to be a very 

full, complex housing strategy because this is a complex issue. 

And it’s just not going to be solved with 1,000 homes over five 

years. That essentially works out to 200 a year. And while that’s 

a nice start, it’s got to be much more than that. Housing is a 

much bigger problem than that. And I will talk more about that, 

about what’s missing. 

 

Now I want to talk about the legislative agenda, and I’m glad to 

see that many of the ministers are here because there was one 

that I was looking for around The Residential Tenancies Act. 

This government has made a big deal out of some of the 

response to the Pringle report, and one was that to get a notice 

for a rent increase, you had to give six months notice. It came to 

our attention that there is a way around that. There is a loophole 

in the legislation. 

 

And I’ve asked the minister about that in committee last year, 

and the ministry and the minister both acknowledged that there 

is a loophole. And there’s only one way to plug that loophole, 

and that is for a legislative amendment. And so I am looking for 

this government to do something about that. And I hope that we 

will see that in the next few weeks so that we can all go back 

and tell our constituents that the government has listened. They 

didn’t realize there was a loophole. They thought that it was six 

months notice and that was straightforward. But as was brought 

to our attention, I’m reminding the minister across the way that 

we are looking for a legislative amendment to that. 

 

Now I do want to go on. And I know the member from 

Meewasin did a very good job talking about photo ID 

[identification]. And that has been raised very well, and I see 

that the government is rethinking their intentions on this. And I 

really do hope they think about rethinking their intentions. But 

they do come clean on this because too many people have too 

many questions about what are the real intentions. Are they 

going to do it through regulations? Is it going to be legislation? 

You can’t put in legislation, then say we don’t really need to 

enforce it. You either do or you don’t. You know, what is it that 

you’re really going to do? 

 

I do have some serious concerns when the minister says, we’re 

going to be doing active consultation. This government is very 

well known for the types of consultation it does behind closed 

doors. And they don’t really get out and talk to people in a 

public setting about what are the challenges around ID. ID is 

becoming more and more of a bigger issue, bigger challenge for 

people right across this country. And we’re seeing that as an 

issue. 

 

And in fact we see this in Alberta when they had their, I think it 

was a 20-point plan to end homelessness — it was announced 

two years ago — one of their points was around ID and 

providing ID for those less fortunate. Interestingly, just a couple 

of weeks ago, Alberta now has issued ID. There is an Alberta 

ID card. Now I’ve not seen it. I don’t know what it looks like; I 

don’t know the details. But they’re being very proactive 

because they’re looking at the whole issue, not just the issue 

around elections, and this is very important. 

 

I did ask the Minister for Corrections about this issue around 

people coming out of jails. I was shocked, shocked to hear that 

people were coming out of jail without ID. I did not know that. 

The minister didn’t know that either. We assumed that anybody 

coming out of jail would have ID. It’s in all our best interests 

that when somebody comes out of jail, one less barrier that you 

can have to getting a job, getting a place to rent, getting back 

into society, is to have ID. Well you know what? That is not the 

case. And the Minister for Corrections was going to look into 

this and so I think this has to happen. 

 

The other issue is, for example, when you’re going to vote, we 

understand that people can be sworn in to vote that we know. 

For example, I know the member from Regina Lakeview; I 

know him to live in a certain place. I can swear him in if I’m at 

the same place. But if you’re in a hostel or a shelter where there 

may be 10, 20, or 30 people, only one person gets to be sworn 

in. So at the Salvation Army hostel or shelter in Saskatoon, this 

was a real concern because we were hearing complaints that 

only one person could swear in another person. They could not 

swear in the whole group. I think we have to look at issues like 

that when it comes to voting and making sure we have full 

participation in voting. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Now it was very interesting when I first started to become more 

familiar with this issue around ID. It was around the last civic 

election in Saskatoon. And I know the member from Northwest 

may find this interesting, that it was easier to vote for the mayor 

of Saskatoon than it was to get a library card in Saskatoon 

because you had to have more complex ID for your library 

books than you had to to vote. Now I’m not sure if that’s 

necessarily the best situation. I think you should have better 

access to library books. There should be a balance in this. 

 

But I hope that the government takes some time and does some 

full consultation over this. And I think what’s very interesting 

in this, Mr. Speaker, is that we have the Minister of Social 

Services who is familiar with Information Services Corp, ISC 

[Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] and some 

of the challenges they have, and particularly around the birth 

certificate and how long it takes. And I know we’ve had 

challenges. People have come to talk to me about the issues of 

how long it takes to get a birth certificate so you can get photo 

ID. And they were really incensed when they found out that if 

you paid money you could jump the queue to get your birth 

certificate that day. Now the person said, well listen, can I find 

out where I am in the queue? If I’m number 40 then maybe I’ll 

pay, but if I’m number 1 and I’m going to get it today, why 

should I pay? They would not be told where they were in the 

queue, which seems to me not the best customer service. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m hoping, and I’m looking forward to this 

government looking at this more fully around the whole issue of 

ID and what does it mean to all people in Saskatchewan. Those 

who have issues of being able to afford ID, those who didn’t 

have access to proper ID, like birth certificates, that type of 

thing. 



5800 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I look at the conclusion — and this is 

definitely not the conclusion in my words — but I look at this 

and this just proves how when you talk about two roads, and 

you talk about the toll road, here you have . . . They come to our 

province in search of prosperity that’s entrenched and 

opportunities available to all. Well I’m not sure, when they talk 

about photo ID and some of those things, that there really is 

opportunity for all. When we talk about the housing shortages 

here in Saskatchewan and we’ve seen people in Estevan and 

Weyburn and North Battleford, that is not opportunity that is 

available to all. 

 

There are voices of the most vulnerable in our society now 

more able to live in independence. I have some real question 

marks over that, Mr. Speaker, both for the seniors, with the 

senior income plan who are being cut off, the disability income, 

the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 

program, the assured income plan, where we see the lack of 

attention to adequacy — really some huge issues there. And of 

course the ever growing caseloads in social services. The voice 

of our seniors now being afforded dignity and the respect they 

deserve, and again the whole issue of housing and the seniors’ 

income plan. 

 

And the voices of children who will travel the furthest on this 

new road. And they don’t talk about the children and the 

challenges of children, that children are actually facing here in 

Saskatchewan. And I’ll talk about some, some of the 

commitments I was looking forward from this government that 

has not been kept. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about and I want to quote 

from . . . I did quote from last year’s StarPhoenix editorial the 

day after the Throne Speech. And this year’s editorial is pretty 

much the same, giving this government pretty much a failing 

grade. The headline, this is October 28th, 2010: “Wall’s new 

road pothole-ridden.” 

 

And I quote, “Wall’s new road pothole-ridden.” And it goes on: 

 

Too much of the throne speech, which is meant to outline 

the government’s legislative actions for the coming year, 

is devoted to boasting about its accomplishments over the 

past year [and we heard the minister do that], while there’s 

little that tells Saskatchewan residents what awaits them in 

the near future. 

 

It goes on, and I quote: 

 

Yet, even some of the actual new initiatives the 

government proposes are real head-scratchers, leading to 

question whether these actually are the priorities of 

citizens or vague tidbits meant to appeal to small segments 

of the electorate important to the Saskatchewan Party. 

 

And they go on, and I quote: 

 

Similarly, what exactly is the all-fire rush to implement a 

photo ID requirement to vote in provincial elections and to 

empower municipalities to do the same, when even 

Elections Canada is yet to adopt such a measure? Other 

than raising some hackles . . . 

 

It goes on and talks about the Great Sand Hills and the debacle 

that happened last spring over the land, the wildlife protection 

land. Clearly there’s a lot of damage control here that needs to 

be done. But I think that one that really seems to be 

disappointing, and I will quote here: 

 

Particularly disappointing is the government’s 

commitment merely to review the recommendations from 

the independent panel that examined Saskatchewan’s 

broken child welfare system, instead of a pledge to act on 

the recommendations quickly. 

 

And I end the quote there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps that’s the one that’s most telling of all, 

and the minister just skated over that one. We know that this 

has been a big issue. A huge issue. And what’s important is that 

we serve the families and the children of this province well and 

we make a commitment to get on with this. And I am concerned 

that when this government gets the report that they’ll sit on the 

report and we won’t see the recommendations till next spring. 

This is really a shame. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget amount for this report was $800,000, 

nearly $1 million. And this is too important that this 

government fails, but the record is of this government to fail 

and to ignore. And if this minister sits on this report until March 

and then comes in and expects action right away, we have some 

real problems with that. And I think that she has really failed 

the people of Saskatchewan immensely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to continue. You know, there was another 

interesting story in here and the minister, the current minister 

and the past minister and many of the members will point to 

pre-2007 as some sort of . . . how they have made great gains 

since that time. But clearly this government has failed and 

continues to fail the people most vulnerable in Saskatchewan. I 

want to quote from another article, just on the flip page of The 

StarPhoenix, Thursday, October 28th. And this is a column by 

Mark Lemstra and the headline is “Actually addressing health 

disparities vital.” 

 

Now we know . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, it’s drawn a 

response. Here we have a minister who called some of the work 

by Lemstra and Neudorf kind of blue-skying, blue-skying. But 

here we have I think a pretty damaging report about what’s 

been happening in health care, what’s been happening in social 

services, what’s been happening with this government. I’d like 

to quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

I wrote last week about a report produced by the 

Saskatoon Health Region in 2008 concerning the vast 

differences in the length of hospital stays of patients, 

based on their level of income. 

 

For example, when residents in the city’s six low income 

core neighbourhoods were admitted from our hospitals for 

suicide attempts and mental disorders, they received an 

average of four days of hospital care. 

 

When residents in the five high income neighbourhoods 

were admitted for the same disorders, they received an 

average of 44 days of in-hospital care. 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5801 

These specific statistics were never released to the 

community . . . 

 

Here is the concern: 

 

And I’m continuing the quote: 

 

What would our reaction be if we replaced the words “low 

income” and “high income” with some other demographic 

indicators? 

 

For example, if we produced a report that women in 

Saskatoon were receiving four days of hospitalization for 

the same medical disorders for which men received 44 

days of care? 

 

How would we respond if we produced a report that found 

some residents received less than one-tenth of hospital 

care in comparison to other residents based on if they were 

rural/urban or Catholic/Protestant, English/French or 

white/black. 

 

What would the reaction be from politicians, community 

leaders and advocacy groups? 

 

And it goes on: 

 

If we were talking about any group other than low income 

residents, action would have been taken in days or maybe 

weeks, certainly not years. 

 

And this is where this government is failing. This has all 

happened within their term. This is not 10 years ago, not 20 

years ago. This has been happening now, within the last two or 

three years. They have an opportunity to do the right thing, but 

they’ve chosen not to. They’ve chosen the toll road. You have 

to pay in Saskatchewan. 

 

He goes on. And these are quotes. These are another epidemic 

we’re seeing here in Saskatchewan that I think we’re all very 

concerned about: 

 

In 2004 [in our time], Saskatoon had 16 residents who 

tested positive for HIV. In 2005, we had 39 new cases. In 

2006 . . . 53 new cases. In 2007, 57 new cases were 

diagnosed. In 2008 . . . 77 . . . In 2009, Saskatoon had 94 

residents testing positive for HIV. 

 

We are seeing an epidemic of HIV [human immunodeficiency 

virus], and we’re seeing it particularly bad in Saskatchewan 

because it’s coupled with malnutrition, poor housing, and 

poverty. Those are things that just don’t give people a chance to 

heal. 

 

And it’s something we can do something about. Housing is 

something we can do something about. Nutrition we should be 

able to do something about. Poverty we should be able to do 

something about. And this is something this government has 

failed and continues to fail the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s much I want to say, and of course I 

do want to talk about potash a bit because we know that we are 

deeply concerned about what might be the outcome tomorrow. 

We are worried that the leak in the papers is accurate, that in 

fact the Harper government will approve the sale and that there 

may be conditions. 

 

But we have some deep, deep concerns that yet again the 

Premier has failed the people of Saskatchewan. He was too late 

in getting his position out there and that while . . . And he didn’t 

go to Ottawa and he didn’t make the case strong enough. And 

clearly we have some deep concerns, and I know many people 

in Saskatchewan are not at ease tonight because they thought 

this Premier could have done a better job, a better job. And this 

is something that we see a track record, whether it’s 

equalization, the $800 million that the government failed, the 

Premier failed us on, whether it’s the CO2 carbon capture 

project, another failure. The dome, clearly another failure. We 

have some real issues, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about some of the things that I was 

looking forward to seeing in the Throne Speech, and I know 

that many people wanted to speak, but we wanted to see a 

comprehensive poverty elimination strategy. And the minister 

got up and made a big deal about goals and how that 

government over there operates by goals and benchmarks, but 

yet the one benchmark they won’t talk about is poverty 

reduction. And I think we see people in Saskatchewan wanting 

something to be done about that. 

 

And we know we see the food banks’ usage growing right 

across the province, whether it’s Regina, Yorkton, Meadow 

Lake have all reported that. And we see a report that just came 

out last week, Let’s Do Something About Poverty! — people 

calling for a provincial-wide poverty reduction strategy. So we 

need the vision and the commitment. We need the government 

to step up and do the right thing and get to work on this. This is 

a real missed opportunity. 

 

We need a comprehensive housing strategy, something more 

than the Head Start program, something that’s comprehensive 

and meets everyone’s needs. We saw a campaign on October 

19th, the Red Tent campaign, that called for a national housing 

strategy. We know that any one level of government cannot do 

it all alone. We need all the levels of government to get on 

board and do the right thing. We need the federal government to 

say, let’s get housing for Canadians right across Canada. We 

need the province to do the right thing. We need the cities to do 

the right thing. We see cities like Saskatoon having a 

comprehensive housing strategy, but we just don’t see the 

province at the table. 

 

And we see seniors having real challenges. And you know, Mr. 

Speaker, I have raised this an awful lot about rent control. We 

need to have a discussion, a real frank discussion about stronger 

rent regulations that prevent rent gouging. We see across 

Canada 80 per cent of Canadians living now with appropriate 

rent regulations that allows seniors, young people, young 

couples a chance to plan their futures because they know what 

kind of rents they’ll be facing — not the kind of rent gouging 

that’s been happening here in Saskatchewan. 

 

[19:45] 

 

And as we talked earlier, the foster care issue that we’re looking 

forward to the review. And we hope that’s not delayed and 



5802 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

delayed and we don’t get to see it until it’s too late, and that 

there’s some opportunity for the public to be involved. As I 

said, this did cost $800,000, and it would be a shame to see it 

just sitting on a shelf like so many other reports, gathering dust. 

The children of this province are worth much more than that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wanted to talk a bit about this report here. And 

you’re familiar with this report, and the minister’s familiar with 

this report. And all members opposite would be very familiar 

with a promise that they would reconvene the Special 

Committee to Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children 

Through the Sex Trade. That was a promise made in 2007, and 

that has been a promise that has not been kept. It has been 

broken. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I had just taken over the 

supper hour . . . I just wanted to double-check, because the 

former minister of Social Services told me last year that it went 

actually over to the Minister of Justice. But the Minister of 

Justice would be happy to know that I looked in his mandate 

letter, and it’s not there. So it’s fallen between the cracks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is too important, too important that we allow 

this to fall through the cracks. This is just not another promise. 

This government made this promise in good faith to the people, 

and they should not let this go. They should not let this go. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I was at a conference just a few weeks 

ago for people living with disabilities and the abuse that they 

suffer. Three words that do not appear in this document, Mr. 

Speaker: gangs, Internet, and people living with disabilities. We 

need to update this work. It’s too important to let it fall through 

the cracks, and I challenge the government. This is where they 

have failed. They need to do something about this. It was too 

important to let go. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to close, and I want to close . . . I’ve 

quoted from The StarPhoenix. I’ve quoted from different 

things, from Mark Lemstra, but I just want to close, reading 

from a letter from a mom who’s written a letter about how she 

feels about how things are going in this province. Now this is 

where I get the idea of the toll road. And it came across my 

desk today. And this letter has been given to both the Minister 

of Social Services . . . She wrote both the . . . She wrote the 

Premier, and I understand the letter’s been referred to the 

Minister of Social Services. I quote: 

 

Both my husband and I are well educated people. I’m 

trained as a youth pastor and my husband a heavy duty 

mechanic. We had hoped to stay in our own province but 

right now it’s a mess for renters, and a free-for-all for 

landlords. 

 

Please keep pressing the Wall Government to help their 

people out here in the real world — and hopefully as Mr. 

Wall ages he can mature into a man who actually listens 

— not assumes. 

 

Thank you for your time on this pressing matter. I 

appreciate you actually listening to the people — today we 

paid an extra $300.00 more on our rent for October 1st — 

a $300.00 that should have went to purchasing snowsuits, 

boots for our three children or could have been saved. 

Instead my husband works more and more shifts just to 

keep up. 

We pray you can make a difference with your position and 

voice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a person, this is a family that’s working. 

They have a job, a very good job. They are well-educated. And 

their rent’s gone up by $700 this year. That’s incredible. That’s 

incredible. We need to do something about that because this 

province . . . This is not just another road. This is a toll road. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment 

and voting against the main resolution. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley, the Minister Responsible for Government 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Ross: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to 

stand and give a reply to the Speech from the Throne. The 

Throne Speech outlined a new road, a direction set out by our 

government, a new road of reducing taxes while providing 

essential services and at the same time providing responsible, 

strong leadership for our province. 

 

Now I would like to take a moment and join with my colleagues 

and extend best wishes to our newest Member of the Legislative 

Assembly, the member from Saskatoon Northwest. I have every 

confidence that the member from Saskatoon Northwest will do 

an outstanding job representing the good people from his 

constituency. Now this summer I had the opportunity to speak 

with many of his constituents, and they said that they had been 

well served by him as a city councillor, and they believe that 

they will be well served by him as their new MLA [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly]. So congratulations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank my constituents in the great 

constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. Now I appreciate 

the confidence that they showed in me when they elected me to 

represent them in the Legislative Assembly. I would like to also 

take this opportunity to thank my constituency assistant, Kelly 

Zazula. Kelly does an absolutely incredible job in my 

constituency. It is her support and help that makes my job 

easier. And when I go and meet people, they tell me how much 

they appreciate the kind and helpful manner in which she treats 

their concerns. So I want to extend my gratitude to Kelly for the 

wonderful work she does day in and day out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank my ministerial office 

staff: Gary, Selena, Sally, and our newest member, Joette. Mr. 

Speaker, I would also like to thank my family for their support 

over the past years. My family has been there for me during the 

good times and they’ve also been there for some of the most 

interesting times in this journey of ours. And I couldn’t have 

done it without their unconditional support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to also thank the 

Premier for entrusting me with the responsibility of Minister of 

Government Services. It is a responsibility that I look forward 

to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I was campaigning in 2007, knocking on 

doors and talking to the residents of my constituency, they told 

me they wanted a fiscal, responsible government that would 

keep an eye on the spending and pay down the debt. 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5803 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in the summer of 2009, the Premier asked 

the members of the Assembly to reach out to the residents in 

our constituency and ask them what they felt we should do with 

the benefits of growth. In Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, we went 

and knocked on hundreds of doors. And the residents? Well 

they were surprised to see us at their doorstep because it wasn’t 

an election year, and here we were at their homes consulting 

with them, asking them what they thought. 

 

Now many of my constituents told me that it was the first time 

that a government had ever asked them what they thought. And 

this spring when our farmers were experiencing exceptional wet 

conditions, I talked to many of the farmers in my Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. And they shared their concerns with me, 

but they also shared with me the optimism of their crop year. 

 

In partnership with our federal counterparts, our government 

responded quickly to the concerns of our Saskatchewan farm 

families. An additional 360 million was made available to help 

those hit by flooded croplands, and the farmers thank us. 

 

I would also like to thank the residents of Regina Qu’Appelle 

Valley for sharing their ideas, their suggestions on issues that 

were most important to them. Now the message I heard over 

and over again as I talked to my constituents is, pay down the 

debt, more money for infrastructure, and careful spending so 

that the people of Saskatchewan can benefit from our strong 

economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new road our government has taken has 

resulted in a reduction of government debt by $2.7 billion. 

When our government took office, the provincial debt was at 

$6.8 billion. Now this is a reduction of close to 40 per cent in 

three years. This reduction will save Saskatchewan taxpayers 

millions of dollars in interest costs in the coming years. This 

reduction of 2.7 billion shows that we are a responsible 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the federal government decided to suspend 

the ecoENERGY program, our government allocated an 

additional 9.4 million to the EnerGuide budget. A new program 

will be developed when the EnerGuide program winds down in 

the spring of 2011. The new program will continue to 

encourage homeowners to make energy-efficient upgrades in 

their homes. This is what my constituents asked for, and that’s 

what the people of Saskatchewan have asked for when they 

elected us to office. The people of Saskatchewan spoke and we 

have listened. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the residents of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley have 

shared with me that they were concerned about the education 

and how upset they were that people from Saskatchewan were 

paying some of the highest taxes, highest property taxes in 

Canada. 

 

Now our government has paved a new road for the people of 

Saskatchewan, a new road where we as government introduced 

a historic property tax reduction plan. And along the new road, 

our government has introduced the largest single income tax 

reduction in Saskatchewan’s history. A total of 80,000 

low-income taxpayers are dropped off the tax roll. Those who 

pay no taxes will now benefit also from the new low-income tax 

credit which replaces and significantly increases the 

Saskatchewan tax credit. Again the people of Saskatchewan 

spoke and we listened. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in continuing down the new road for our province, 

we will ensure the needs and the rights of patients remain 

paramount by creating a health ombudsman within the office of 

the current Provincial Ombudsman. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the old road there were no targets set to tackle 

the serious nursing shortage in this province, and on the new 

road a target to hire 800 nurses was set. This target has not only 

been met but surpassed. There are 830 new nurses working here 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

When I was the legislative secretary to the Minister of Health 

for nurse recruitment and retention, I had the opportunity, along 

with health care professionals from across this province, to 

attend health careers across Canada. Now at these events it was 

my pleasure to represent our province. I was able to share with 

everyone the good news about Saskatchewan. Meeting the 

target and surpassing the target to hire 800 nurses has extreme 

significance and a lot of pride for myself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the coming years the number of registered 

nursing students beginning education in our province will also 

increase. A total of 130 seats has already been added. An 

additional 170 seats are on their way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the old road Saskatchewan saw a nursing 

shortage. Along with that nursing shortage was a shortage of 

physicians. Direct physician recruitment in Saskatchewan was 

largely responsible of the health regions, their communities, and 

individual physician practices. On the new road we have the 

physician recruitment agency of Saskatchewan. Now this 

agency will coordinate the many facets of recruitment and will 

be responsible for all of this. It’ll be responsible for 

coordinating recruitment and retention efforts between the 

health regions, community, and physician practices and act as a 

central point of contact for a physician seeking to practise right 

here in our wonderful province of Saskatchewan, improving 

communications between health regions and communities with 

graduates from the College of Medicine at the University of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

They will also be reducing competition for physicians between 

communities and health regions. They will also provide 

recruitment expertise to communities, physician practices, and 

health agencies, especially in those areas with less experience, 

collaborating with key stakeholders with respect to recruitment 

and retention programs and the services for physicians. 

 

We are being innovative. We are also succeeding in attracting 

more physicians to Saskatchewan, and we’re going to convince 

more of our medical grads to set up practice here. That is what 

we call homegrown satisfaction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is building a stronger 

Saskatchewan, a better life for Saskatchewan people. 

Saskatchewan’s economy is strong and growing. Chartered 

banks are predicting national leading growth for Saskatchewan. 

 

[20:00] 

 



5804 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

Now in my constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, new 

businesses are opening. New homes are being built each and 

every day. Regina Qu’Appelle Valley is the place to be. These 

are the signs of a strong economy, and this new road is marked 

by steady and continued growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a recent survey by the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business reported that business optimism in 

Saskatchewan hit a two-year high, leading all other provinces. 

Fifty-five per cent of the businesses rated the overall state of 

business as good, as compared to 36 per cent nationally. On the 

new road, a red tape reduction will increase the competitiveness 

of our province’s business environment, and this will grow our 

economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned before, in my constituency of 

Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, new homes are being built every 

day. Young families with children are moving into the area. Our 

government recognizes the importance of raising children and 

how physical activities and healthy eating promotes good 

health. 

 

Our government recently launched the Healthy Kids School 

Challenge. We recognize the good work of the schools across 

the province in providing children and youth opportunities to be 

physically active and offer healthy food options during the 

school day. The Healthy Kids School Challenge will increase 

awareness and provide additional support and encouragement 

for our students, teachers, and the schools implementing this 

daily physical activity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government recognizes the need for everyone 

to have the opportunity to participate in the workforce, thus our 

government has improved child care. Funding has been 

allocated for more than 2,900 new licensed child spaces since 

our government came into office. And by the end of March of 

2011, the number of child care spaces in Saskatchewan will 

have increased by more than 30 per cent. 

 

Now on this new road, our government has not forgotten about 

the low-income earners. As previously stated, our government 

introduced the largest single-year income tax reduction in 

Saskatchewan’s history with a total of 80,000 low-income 

taxpayers being dropped off the tax rolls. The amount paid to 

low-income families through Saskatchewan employment 

supplements, a supplement for low-income families with 

dependent children under the age of 18, was increased and the 

threshold for those who qualify has also increased. Our 

government has increased Sask rental housing supplement four 

times and indexed the benefit to the cost of living. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the new road, our government has not left out 

seniors. Our government is working to build a better life for 

Saskatchewan seniors. And we recognize that many seniors on 

fixed incomes may be struggling to deal with high costs, so we 

have increased the income threshold for seniors for qualifying 

for social housing. We have more than doubled the available to 

low-income seniors through the senior income plan from $90 to 

$190 a month for single seniors, and $72.50 to $155 each for a 

couple. This is the first increase for the seniors’ income plan 

since 1992. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as stated in the Throne Speech, our government 

realizes that a lack of affordable homes is creating a challenge 

across this wonderful province of Saskatchewan. In the near 

future, our government will be providing information on the 

new Head Start on a Home program. This new program will see 

our government working with the private sector in the 

construction of 1,000 new, affordable homes for low- to 

moderate-income families. Our government has already helped 

more than 300 low- to moderate-income families achieving 

home ownership. Mr. Speaker, since taking office our 

government has opened over 700 additional affordable housing 

units plus there are 1,250 more units in development and in the 

planning stages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, when speaking with my 

constituents from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, they wanted to 

see more money put into infrastructure. Our government 

listened and responded to those concerns. On the new road, our 

government announced in 2008 and 2009 budget the largest 

transportation budget in Saskatchewan’s history of 513 million. 

Efforts to improve and repair Saskatchewan’s long-neglected 

highways continue. In the past year alone, work on more than 

1129 kilometres of highways was tendered. And at the end of 

this summer, the Minister of Highways and Infrastructure will 

have completed 993 kilometres of maintenance and safety 

improvements to Saskatchewan highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I know. You did it 

all yourself, Jim. Oh, shouldn’t have said that. Sorry. I do 

apologize. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on October the 1st, 2007, Saskatchewan’s 

population was just over 1 million. In the past three years, we 

have increased Saskatchewan by 40,626 new residents, and they 

are calling Saskatchewan home. This year we saw the largest 

year-over-year increase since 1953. Saskatchewan’s population 

grew at the fastest rate of any Canadian province over the past 

year according to Statistics Canada. On the old road, 

Saskatchewan was actually losing people. Now our son, John, 

was one of those very talented young people that moved to 

Alberta. Now he was helping that province grow. On the old 

road, people couldn’t build their future here. On the new road, 

we are the fastest growing province in the country. People are 

looking for opportunities and a great quality of life. And that’s 

what we have right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can imagine nothing better than to have 

everyone in this House vote in favour of the Speech from the 

Throne that will continue to promote and move our province 

forward on this very new road. That is why, Mr. Speaker, I will 

be voting in favour of the Throne Speech. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture and 

the member from Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to be able to respond to 

the Speech from the Throne, but I want to start by 

congratulating our new colleague from Saskatoon Northwest. 

Mr. Speaker, I believe many of us going into a by-election three 

years, Mr. Speaker, into a term, I think we were all concerned 

because usually that’s an opportunity for the electorate to send 

the government a message if there’s something that they don’t 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5805 

like that’s going on in the province, if they don’t like the 

direction the present-day government’s going. But the message 

they seem to have sent here is there must be some satisfaction 

with the government because we increased our percentage of 

vote in that riding. 

 

Where I get the idea that a message is sent in by-elections, Mr. 

Speaker, I think of the member for Regina Douglas Park, I 

believe it was, and the former Finance minister, Harry Van 

Mulligen. And then when a by-election was called, the present 

Leader of the Opposition ran in that riding. And I believe Harry 

Van Mulligen won that seat by about 2,000 or more votes in the 

previous election. And when the Leader of the Opposition ran 

in the by-election, he won by I think it was about 500 votes. So 

a message, Mr. Speaker, I believe was sent in that case that he 

wasn’t quite as popular as the previous Finance minister, Mr. 

Van Mulligen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take a few minutes tonight to just talk 

about some of the good things happening in my constituency. 

And the one that comes to mind right away was I had the 

opportunity to go to an opening of a daycare centre in 

Langenburg the other day. And the present Finance minister, 

but the previous minister of Education, and I had gone out this 

spring — a very wet day out there — but they had the 

sod-turning to kick off this project out there. 

 

And there’s a group of young ladies out there, young mothers, 

that have done a tremendous amount of work in that community 

to raise money for this new facility — just a beautiful building 

out there. I think it has the capacity for about 60 daycare spots 

out there. There’s room for expansion into that. And they’ve 

done a tremendous job in that community with the help of local 

community residents but also the RM [rural municipality] and 

the town and surrounding RMs. They’ve done a good job out 

there to put this facility together — just a beautiful building, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Melville’s another example of good things happening, Mr. 

Speaker. We have the new Melville stadium going up as we 

speak. I believe in about March that building will be completed. 

We have the Crop Insurance building with the expansion going 

on that in Melville where there will be about 110 employees, 

when they’re finished hiring for that project, to add to the Crop 

Insurance building that’s already there to administer the 

AgStability program. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, some good things happening there. I honestly 

believe, Mr. Speaker, there’s good things happening right 

across Saskatchewan in small towns. You talk to many people 

in small town Saskatchewan where probably four or five years 

ago there was a number of houses in each community that you 

couldn’t give away, Mr. Speaker, or at least 10 or $15,000 

would probably have been top price, where now the biggest 

problem they have out there is finding serviced lots for new 

houses that are going up. And people coming from all over 

Western Canada, in fact for that matter even Eastern Canada, to 

buy houses in small town rural Saskatchewan because even 

though they’ve gone up in price dramatically, they find it’s still 

cheaper than many of the other areas in Canada and just a great 

place to live in small town Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to touch on a few other areas. I want to 

touch on the Minister of Highways for a few minutes. Been 

receiving a number of complaints about the Minister of 

Highways this summer, Mr. Speaker, and I noticed one of the 

members opposite was talking about it a few minutes ago. The 

biggest complaint I get, Mr. Speaker, is that he’s slowing down 

traffic right across the province because every time you go to go 

to Regina or Saskatoon, wherever you’re going, going west or 

going east, there’s construction going on out there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’ve taken that issue to the Minister of Highways and I 

complained, Mr. Speaker, and he insists on putting more money 

into highways. He won’t change the direction. He’s going to 

keep fixing those highways in spite of my concerns. So, Mr. 

Speaker, you know some of the problems we have with our 

colleagues on a day-to-day basis — and we get along very well 

— but they don’t always listen, Mr. Speaker. So I guess we’re 

stuck with construction on pretty well every highway in this 

province — until he gets them all fixed, of course. 

 

I want to talk about health care a little bit. And I really want to 

commend the member from Melfort on the STARS [shock 

trauma air rescue service] program, and the Minister of Health, 

Mr. Speaker. I’m a little biased and I’m from rural 

Saskatchewan, and I think the STARS program is one of the 

biggest things to help out rural Saskatchewan, whether it’s the 

oil industry or the potash industry or mining sector right across 

Saskatchewan, but I’m also thinking of the farming community. 

When we go out there and we see from time to time accidents 

with balers out there or, you know, at harvest time we have 

accidents out there, that program will be able to land a 

helicopter right out in the field, right . . . We hope it never 

happens again, but we know from time to time these accidents 

happen. 

 

I think this is such a great addition for rural Saskatchewan out 

there, and I believe in the long run it will save lives. Whether 

it’s a heart attack or an accident or whatever the situation, 

unfortunate situation is, I think rural Saskatchewan will 

definitely like this program and will benefit from it very much. 

 

So as I said, Mr. Speaker, I believe rural Saskatchewan, the 

attitude is changing out there. Where it was a few short years 

ago that people out there, I think, seemed to have that defeatist 

attitude where we can’t because the present day government at 

that time kept promoting that. They were planning for a decline. 

I think that was, you know, over the years we’ve had previous 

ministers even say, the more people leave Saskatchewan there’s 

more left for the rest of us. And that was the attitude over there. 

 

That’s changing, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think . . . I go back to my 

own constituency where we have potash mine expansion. We 

have seismic work going right across my constituency and 

many other constituencies in the province where people are out 

there working, making decent wages in most cases. And 

actually our biggest problem is we need more skilled labour out 

there. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, in your constituency with the Rocanville 

mine and mine with IMC, with K1, K2, with Mosaic, just great 

things happening out there. A tremendous amount of young 

families moving in. And again when I go back to a place like 

Langenburg and their daycare centre, young families moving in, 

I think it’s been a long time in this province since we’ve seen 



5806 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

such a positive attitude going on out there. 

 

I also want to talk about the previous Finance minister, and the 

Finance minister today for that matter, on the debt reduction 

because I think we all know when the debt was reduced and 

paid down from $6.8 billion to $4.1 billion, the interest saved 

alone on that $2.7 billion is going to health care, education, 

many of the programs, even some of the farm programs that 

we’ve come out with this summer. Those dollars partly come 

out of the savings because we’ve paid the debt down, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk somewhat tonight about agriculture. 

And I know the Leader of the Opposition will be interested in 

this because the difference between me and him is I’m actually 

going to talk fact and I’m not going to fabricate the numbers as 

he’s been doing for I don’t know how long. He puts out press 

releases every Friday afternoon, and some of the numbers he 

comes up with I have no idea where he gets them, but I believe 

probably he picks a number, puts it in a press release and 

figures that everybody’s going to believe these numbers. Well I 

have a problem with that, Mr. Speaker, and I’m going to deal 

with the facts here today. 

 

[20:15] 

 

It’s been a frustrating year for farmers and ranchers across this 

province, Mr. Speaker. And I know the member for 

Kelvington-Wadena, Canora-Pelly, Humboldt, Melfort, even 

touching in my own area, Mr. Speaker, where the worst of the 

wet area is . . . Foam Lake, up in Margo, up in that area we 

toured this spring up there. And I’ve seen wet when I farmed 

out there, Mr. Speaker, but I have saw nothing like these people 

had to put up with this spring. A large portion of their crops 

couldn’t be seeded. I know in some cases that we’ve talked to 

producers out there where they might have only got 10 or 15 

per cent of their crop, maybe 20 per cent, and the rest of it 

couldn’t be seeded. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they asked us for help and we came to the table. 

The first thing we did is contacted the federal Minister of 

Agriculture, got him to come out and take a look at how severe 

the problem was in Saskatchewan. And with that — and I felt it 

was one of the quickest reaction times the federal government 

has ever had was when they responded — and together we 

come out with a $360 million excess moisture program. Mr. 

Speaker, did it solve all the problems in the member for 

Kelvington-Wadena’s area? No it didn’t. Same in Canora-Pelly 

and same in all the other areas. It didn’t solve all the problems 

out there. But, Mr. Speaker, I think many of the producers out 

there were grateful that they got something to help them pay 

some of the bills and get through this summer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been an odd year in Saskatchewan for cattle 

producers also. And we started out this spring by a $20 million 

drought payment in the central-northwest part of the province, 

Mr. Speaker, where in 2009 producers had had a drought in that 

area, where they had no feed, no pasture all summer, and had 

additional expenses just to be able to keep their cattle. And I 

believe it was a $19 million program that we came out with for 

a number of areas out in the west-central part of the province to 

help producers there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the one hand there’s some optimism, I believe, 

in the livestock sector. Provincially we have about 180 per cent 

of the normal hay crop that we would have. Now the quality 

naturally is not near what we would like to see it when there’s 

been so much rain out there, and it’s not in a lot of the areas that 

I previously talked about here where it was so wet. But overall 

there is a pretty good supply of feed even though it’s lower 

quality. 

 

The other optimistic thing I think we’re seeing, Mr. Speaker, is 

the calf prices and cattle prices are improving gradually. And I 

think that’s probably a really good sign rather than having them 

jump quick and then drop back down. In spite of the high 

dollar, cattle prices are increasing. Calf prices this fall are better 

than they’ve been for a number of years. That’s the good side. 

The downside, of course, is we have areas out there short of 

feed and had a tough summer finding pasture for their cattle and 

things like that. So, Mr. Speaker, as I said, it’s been a very 

frustrating year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the crop insurance program, where we tried to 

make some improvements to the program over the first three 

years we’ve been in power, has paid out about $250 million to 

this point — a quarter of a billion dollars. Most of that was 

through unseeded acreages and establishment benefit, the part 

of the program for crop insurance. As I said before, the excess 

moisture program has also paid out to date about a quarter of a 

billion dollars. 

 

So when you add those two together knowing, Mr. Speaker, that 

AgriStability is going to be up this year, the cost for the 

provincial government, the cost for the crop insurance claims 

that are still coming in, Mr. Speaker, for yield claim and quality 

loss and things like that, Mr. Speaker, we know this is probably 

going to be a record amount of dollars in the province of 

Saskatchewan that’s gone into the agriculture sector from the 

provincial government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, have we solved all the 

problems? Not for a minute. We hope we have made a 

difference out there, especially with some of the changes we 

made to some of the programming, and of course there’s more 

changes that we need to make. Especially after a year like this, 

Mr. Speaker, where it tests the mettle of every program we got 

right now to see if they work. AgriStability is going to be a 

good example to see just how responsive it’s going to be and 

whether more changes need to be made there to make 

improvements for the industry right across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another program that we brought in the first year 

we were in, of course, was the FRWIP [farm and ranch water 

infrastructure program] program for drilling wells and dugouts 

and pipelines and things like that. And of course the Southwest 

at that point had gone through four years of drought and really 

had no response from the previous government whatsoever. 

 

We brought this program in. We put, between us and the federal 

government, we cost shared a $15 million program. The 

problem we had, Mr. Speaker, was that the uptake was so great 

that the applications that came in were actually closer to $30 

million. So we went back to the federal government, Mr. 

Speaker, got their okay, and we cost shared on that $30 million 

program. 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5807 

That program, because it went over so good in the Southwest, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve made it province-wide right now and 

there’s, between the federal government and provincial 

government, there’s a $53 million program over the next four 

years to drill on farm wells, dugouts, and pipelines and things 

like that. So over the long haul I think this is a program that will 

help producers out there over, you know, the years to come. If 

your well goes dry or it starts to go dry and you’ve got to drill a 

new well, well there’s a 50 per cent cost sharing with the 

governments and I think that’s a help, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Of course remembering a year ago that we paid the $71 million 

to 18,000 cattle and hog producers across the province in 2009, 

Mr. Speaker, that I think was very much needed out there and I 

hope, I believe it was appreciated by many in the industry. We 

come up, Mr. Speaker, with something that had been asked for 

for many, many years where there was an 80 per cent wildlife 

damage compensation. And I guess the complaint that most 

producers had out there was if you insure your house and you 

happen to have the unfortunate thing happen to have a fire out 

there, you insured it for 100 per cent; that’s what you were 

hoping to get back. Where in this situation with the 

compensation program for wildlife, you were only ever covered 

to the point of 80 per cent. We’ve topped that up to 100 per cent 

and that additional 20 per cent is entirely provincial dollars that 

went in to do that. That was something that producers had asked 

for many, many years and hadn’t got to this point. 

 

The livestock predation compensation program, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s a program where last year we had the coyote program of 

course, and we have so many coyotes in the province and we 

still do have many, many coyotes in the province even though 

we did take out a great number of the coyotes. We still have a 

number of calves being killed or sheep or whatever it is out 

there that the livestock producer are raising, from time to time 

predators are killing some of these animals. Well right now this 

program will pay you of a portion of the value up to so much 

for a calf, $400 for a calf out there, Mr. Speaker. And if you 

have to take an animal to the vet, we’ll pay a portion of the vet 

bill out there. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that was long overdue because as we 

know everyone in the province likes the wildlife, but on the 

other hand farmers are being asked to pick up the tab when 

something happened out there. It was their loss and nobody was 

sharing them with that compensation. So I think that was a 

program that was long overdue and we’ve tried to help 

livestock producers right across the province with this program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, swath, bale, and corn grazing damage 

compensation — just one more part in addition to the crop 

insurance program and the wildlife damage compensation 

program that we have out there to help producers with some of 

these new ways of feeding their cattle in the winter, whether it’s 

swath grazing, things like that. 

 

Gopher control rebate program. The Southwest had a real 

problem here a few years ago. That’s an ongoing, 

province-wide program right now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also brought in the Crown land sale program 

where we tried to help producers out there buy Crown land 

leases where they’d been leasing for years, and we feel that it 

would just be probably a better situation if they owned many 

acres of this land under their name. And it would help, whether 

they’re passing this land on to their son or somebody else in 

their family, that they would have more equity to go out and 

borrow money to be able to expand their operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have the voluntary livestock traceability 

rebate. And I think that was a fairly big issue at one point here 

where the federal government and some of the other provinces 

wanted to do a deal with the traceability issue — but not on a 

voluntary basis, making it mandatory. And we certainly weren’t 

for that. We’re working with the industry and trying to get them 

into the traceability program themselves at their own speed, and 

I think that’s starting to show results right across the province. 

 

We’ve had principal payment extensions on cattle and hog 

loans, Mr. Speaker, where producers weren’t getting very good 

prices for either the cattle industry or the hog industry. So we 

put off the principal payments in that case where they pay the 

interest, but the principal will be carried over. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another area that I think we’ve made 

improvements out there and we’ve had producers respond to is 

expanding extension services right across the province. As we 

know, the previous government I believe cut 31 rural offices 

across the province, 22 of them being rural service centres out 

there, but at the same time took away some of the specialities 

that we had out there and the specialists that actually were still 

in offices out there. But the government of the day wasn’t 

promoting the knowledge that they had and to let them go out 

and work with producers right across the province. So I think 

that’s an improvement out there. 

 

One of the other areas, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve committed to 

— and we did it in the first year we got into power, and we’ve 

done it consistently through — is fully funding the 

programming, fully funding AgriStability and the AgriInvest 

programs. And we’ll do that again this year, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we know the cost for AgriStability is going to be much 

higher this year, and we’ve made that commitment already that 

whatever it is, wherever it goes, we will honour our 

commitment and help our farmers and ranchers across this 

province get through a pretty trying year. 

 

I just want to take a minute before I close, Mr. Speaker, and talk 

about the Leader of the Opposition, who happens to be the Ag 

critic. And boy, that’s kind of an odd situation considering the 

help that producers got over the last 16 years before we got here 

and how they ignored rural Saskatchewan. 

 

You know I think of, Mr. Speaker, a number of situations where 

the Leader of the Opposition actually for a short period of time 

was Ag minister. But in the early ’90s when they cut the GRIP 

[gross revenue insurance program] program for producers and 

broke contracts with farmers across this province — me being 

one of them at that time, I remember, Mr. Speaker — where the 

GRIP program was a good program at that time. We relied on 

it. And when the NDP came to power in 1991, one of the first 

things they did was break that contract with producers. 

 

And I remember it well, because the Leader of the Opposition 

was the deputy premier at that time, Mr. Speaker, and I presume 

he sat at the cabinet table and okayed that cut. In fact he maybe 



5808 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

initiated it; I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. But he was certainly in a 

pretty high position at the table when the NDP were in power 

when they cut that program. 

 

The other area, Mr. Speaker, in the early ’90s . . . And we all 

know this, many on this side. I know the member for Rosetown 

was involved with an RM out there. Many others were involved 

with RM councils when they cut municipal funding. Early ’90s, 

Mr. Speaker, Leader of the Opposition was sitting as deputy 

premier at that time. Again a pretty high portfolio he carried, 

and must have okayed cutting funding to municipalities, or 

maybe even again he initiated those cuts. I’m not sure, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Revenue sharing again for municipalities we’re going to deal 

with, Mr. Speaker. We’ve made the commitment this year to go 

to 1 per cent of the PST [provincial sales tax] and we’re 

honouring that commitment. And I think municipalities right 

across this province, whether the urban or rural, are looking 

forward to that commitment being kept. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think as the Leader of the Opposition quite often 

on a Friday will put out a press release and say we should be 

doing more for agriculture, well yes, I guess it doesn’t matter 

what you do. You could always do more, Mr. Speaker. But I 

find the hypocrisy amazing coming from that member, because 

for 16 years, producers across this province had absolutely no 

faith in the NDP government of the day. We saw our hospitals 

being closed out there. I think the Minister of Health talked 

earlier today or yesterday about the 52 hospitals being closed 

across the province. The Leader of the Opposition sat as deputy 

premier when every one of those 52 hospitals were being closed 

in just about every constituency in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And did they stop there? Did the deputy premier stop them 

there, of the former NDP government? No, they come back in; 

they closed the Plains hospital. And you know, Mr. Speaker, 

why that’s important to rural Saskatchewan? Because that 

hospital was utilized by everybody in rural Saskatchewan from 

every rural community and every farm, and it was accessible. 

You could drive in from eastern Saskatchewan and see that 

hospital. It wasn’t hard to get to, and it was actually . . . parking 

was very good out there. It was just a very good hospital, 

especially for people coming in where they didn’t know where 

they were going and went to that hospital And never forget, the 

Leader of the Opposition was deputy premier when those 

decisions were made to download on rural Saskatchewan. 

Never forget that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when I hear the new saviour of rural Saskatchewan, the 

member for Regina Douglas Park, the Leader of the Opposition, 

telling me and every MLA on this side that he’s going to be the 

new saviour, well I don’t believe it. We don’t believe it. But 

even better than that, there isn’t one person from rural 

Saskatchewan that believes one word that he says, Mr. Speaker. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to join in the debate, and obviously I will not be 

supporting the Speech from the Throne. And, Mr. Speaker, 

about the only thing I’m happy about when it comes to this 

Speech from the Throne, it’s the last Speech from the Throne 

we’re going to hear from that Sask Party government, Mr. 

Speaker. And people are rejoicing throughout Saskatchewan. 

It’s the last Throne Speech you’ve got to hear from that 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one more year, 12 more months, and they’re out of there, 

Mr. Speaker, because of their incompetence, their lack of 

leadership, and the fact that they have distorted the history of 

Saskatchewan to a point where now we’re paying the price, and 

we’ll continue paying the price. And, Mr. Speaker, people of 

Saskatchewan are waking up to the fairy tale called the 

Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. It is a fairy tale, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And let me refresh the memories of those people across the 

way, Mr. Speaker, when they talk about 16 years. It was with 

interest that I listened to the member from Lloydminster talk 

about Grant Devine in 1991. Well I don’t know how old that 

member was, Mr. Speaker, in 1991, but I can almost guarantee 

you he wasn’t paying attention to the challenges that 

Saskatchewan faced in 1991, Mr. Speaker. He was not paying 

any attention to the challenges that we had to face. And for him 

to get up there and have the audacity to talk about what’s wrong 

with Saskatchewan, well, Mr. Speaker, the reason he did that is 

because he is blindly told what to say in the Assembly, and he 

followed his orders, Mr. Speaker. He followed his orders. 

 

[20:30] 

 

And everywhere you go they’re told, this is what you say. And 

you only mention 16 years. Don’t mention past 16 years 

because guess what? Some of us were involved in government 

at the time. That’s the reason why they say 16 years of 

government rule, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And they stand up and they self-congratulate themselves and 

pat themselves on the back. And what they say, oh we did this 

in our first term. Well, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP took over in 

1991, thank goodness they did. In 1991 we were so broke we 

could barely pay the salaries of people that worked for the 

provincial government, Mr. Speaker. That’s how broke this 

province was. 

 

And if that party across the way wants to revisit history and 

only take 16 years out of it, well let me remind them what 

happened in 1991 when we took over. When the NDP took over 

this office, Mr. Speaker, took over as government, we paid 

three times more in interest than what you put in the Education 

budget, Mr. Speaker. There’s almost $900 million, over $900 

million that we paid in interest, and our budget for education 

was 300 million. And guess what? The education system had to 

pay a price for your mismanagement. That’s what happened. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, let me talk about the debt, the debt that you 

left us. And all of a sudden $15.4 billion, nothing in the 

Crowns. Everywhere you go there’s just bills and bills and bills 

and bills left by you guys. And you come along and say, 16 

years the NDP didn’t do this. Well my goodness, my goodness, 

to see grown men and women get up and propagate that story, 

get out and say to the world over and over — ad nauseam I 

think is the phrase — well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t expect that 

kind of leadership from the people that’s supposed to represent 

the people of Saskatchewan. And I say to all of you, shame on 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5809 

you — shame on you for propagating that kind of stuff to the 

people of Saskatchewan because people know the history of 

Saskatchewan. They know that you almost broke this province. 

You almost broke this province, and yet you come back and 

you say to us, oh we’re fixing the roads now. We’re fixing the 

roads now. We’re putting money into health care now. We’re 

doing this now. We’re doing that now. 

 

Well people don’t believe you for one second, not one second 

do they believe you. Not one second because we know, a lot of 

people know, especially New Democrats, they know that it’s 

not true. Why can’t you guys get up and speak once, once with 

facts in mind? Get up and speak once about facts in mind. 

 

And let me tell you one thing that’s really important I’ve told 

everybody where I go. You had the NDP who were in power for 

16 years, the last 16 years prior to 2007. And of that 16 years, it 

took us 14 years to clean up your mess, Mr. Speaker. Fourteen 

years to clean up your mess. And as soon as we started getting 

things moving, then the economy starts to move. There’s money 

in the bank. There’s people working. There’s optimism in the 

air. 

 

All of a sudden you guys come back, to what? Finish off the 

job. You come back to kill off Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And 

the only party that is going to stand up to your style of politics 

is this party on this side, Mr. Speaker. One hundred per cent. 

We’re going to stand up to you guys, and we’re going to tell 

you guys exactly what the history was.  

 

So none of this 16 years because there was . . . Saskatchewan 

existed 17 years ago. Saskatchewan existed 18 years ago. 

Saskatchewan existed 20 years ago. Why don’t you guys talk 

about that? You know why you won’t talk prior to 16 years? 

It’s because you’re ashamed of your history. That’s why. 

You’re ashamed of your history. And some of you guys, 

including your leader, worked for that administration and you 

know it. The people of Saskatchewan know it, and every New 

Democrat knows it, Mr. Speaker. Every New Democrat knows 

it. And I’m going to stand from every stage that I can stand, and 

I’m going to tell the people of Saskatchewan the truth. 

 

In 1991, Mr. Speaker, this province was almost broke, almost 

broke. And we had no choice but to take the tough stand and 

take the tough decisions made to recapture what 

Saskatchewan’s history was, and it’s glorious history, and you 

guys almost ruined it for us. And you can’t say for one instance 

that you guys weren’t part and parcel of that group because 90 

per cent of you were there, 90 per cent of you guys were there. 

So we’re not going to sit here and listen to your rant about 16 

years and your self-congratulatory message about we’re doing 

this, we’re doing that. We don’t buy it for one minute. We don’t 

buy it for one minute. And, Mr. Speaker, the more you say it, 

the more we’re going to tell people they are full of it, Mr. 

Speaker. And I’m not going to tell you what you’re full of, but 

you know exactly what I mean. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what’s important, what’s important is that 

nowadays, nowadays the people of Saskatchewan gave you a 

break. They gave you a break. Let’s try these guys out. Yes, the 

NDP had some tough rounds. The NDP did a lot of wonderful 

things and the NDP . . . maybe it’s time for them a break. And 

they trusted you guys. But you betrayed that trust. And how did 

you betray that trust? Well your Minister of Resources there, 

the guy that’s supposed to be a structural engineer, and we find 

out, as the member from Prince Albert said, he took a two-week 

welding course. Well he says, hold it. Time out. We can expect 

this much money from the potash corporations. The Finance 

people said oh, no, no. We’ve got to be careful here. No, no, I 

know what I’m doing. What happened, Mr. Speaker? He was 

$1.2 billion off the mark — $1.2 billion off the mark. And when 

it comes to you guys governing, oh what’s 1 billion or 2 billion 

here and there? And what is that? It’s chump change. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if this administration, given its history, has 

been off even 1 per cent in their projections, we would . . . there 

would be hell to pay from the media, from every corner of 

Saskatchewan. But these guys make a $1.2 billion error, hey, no 

problem. It’s part of governing. It’s part of what they are 

expected to do. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the people of Saskatchewan 

should expect that. They should expect more from this 

government instead of self-congratulatory messages that you 

keep harping on in this Assembly. You should be ashamed of 

repeating those lines: for 16 years the NDP didn’t do nothing. 

We’ve done more to rebuild this province than you guys will 

ever hope to do. And that’s the absolute truth. 

 

Thank goodness that the NDP were in power for 16 years 

because you, if you guys got back sooner, you would have 

finished off Saskatchewan like you are doing now, Mr. Speaker. 

And that why this Speech from the Throne is so refreshing 

because it is their last one. That’s the only thing refreshing 

about your Throne Speech is it’s your last one. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again I look at the whole notion of our 

Premier going off to Ottawa. He’s the one-time radio station DJ 

[disc jockey] from Swift Current. Well I think you need a bit 

more qualification than that to lead the province. And you’re 

going to go to Ottawa, and you’re going to go fight for potash. 

And that’s exactly our point today as New Democrats in this 

province, is that you ought to make sure you know what you’re 

talking about before you go off to your journey to Ottawa. And 

let’s look back at the Potash Corporation. Let’s look back at the 

potash issue. 

 

When you talk about what you guys, the debt that you put our 

province in, and the fact that your first full . . . your own 

budget, you’re $1.2 billion off the mark. And now we see, now 

we see over the next three or four years, they’re going to be in 

debt how much more? $4.2 billion more — $4.2 billion more. 

You guys are putting this province into debt, 4.2 billion. This is 

your document. These are your documents. And now we go to 

potash. And how much more are we expected to lose for the 

next eight to ten years? Between 2 and $6 billion. Two and $6 

billion, that’s what they’re losing in potash alone. 

 

So I think you need more than a welding course and running a 

radio station to make sure that Saskatchewan’s interests are 

protected, Mr. Speaker. We don’t have the leadership from that 

Premier and that party, Mr. Speaker, and that’s it. And about the 

only thing that you guys have been doing consistently since 

you’ve been in government is you’ve been out of government 

so long you didn’t know how to act like a government. You turn 

around and say, well that’s their fault. Well whose fault is it? 



5810 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

We’re in opposition. You guys are government. You’ve been in 

government . . . in opposition so long you don’t even know how 

to act like a government. 

 

And you know, I look at your leader’s, your leader’s record 

when he goes to Stephen Harper and talks to him about some of 

the Saskatchewan interests. When it comes to clean coal 

technology, how much did he get? Nothing. When it comes to 

the equalization? Nothing. When it comes to the dome stadium? 

Nothing. And now it comes to the single most important issue 

on potash. What did you get? Nothing. 

 

And you guys sit there, you say, oh but those guys were in 

power 16 years. Like, wake up, you’ve got to stop blaming the 

NDP for your lack of leadership. That’s the problem. You guys 

got to stand up on your own two feet and figure it out, you 

know, figure it out. Come on you guys figure it out because the 

people are saying to you guys, we gave you the opportunity, 

and all of a sudden they’re beginning to realize that you guys 

don’t know what you’re doing. You don’t have a single idea, a 

single clue what you’re doing as government, and that’s a 

fundamental flaw. It’s a dangerous flaw that the Sask Party 

government has provided, and certainly people of 

Saskatchewan are beginning to learn, Mr. Speaker. They are 

beginning to learn. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I look at some of the challenges faced by the 

municipalities, guess what? When we had to rebuild the 

credibility and the finance of this province, guess what? It was 

the municipality that sacrificed. And, Mr. Speaker, guess what? 

The business community also sacrificed, Mr. Speaker. The 

business community paid extra fees. They paid extra costs 

because they had to rebuild this province. Every single person, 

the unions, the working people in this province understood they 

had to do their share. Absolutely everybody that had to do their 

share stepped up at the time to make sure we rebuilt our 

financial credibility in this province. And as a province, we did 

that together, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we thank today, we thank today the business community. 

We thank today the labour movement. We thank today the 

municipalities that we simply . . . They knew and they saw they 

had no choice but to do exactly what needed to be done and that 

was to tighten our belts and to all rebuild this province together, 

Mr. Speaker. They know it. We know it, and everybody in the 

room knows it as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’ll say to this is what is really important is that for the last 

16 years that we had been in power, 14 of those first 16 years 

was spent cleaning up your mess. That’s what we did, Mr. 

Speaker — cleaning up your mess. We cleaned up your mess, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s the other thing. And nowadays the government . . . 

[inaudible] . . . have a new phrase. What do they call that? The 

infrastructure deficit. That’s the phrase they use —infrastructure 

deficit. Well guess what? Guess what? If you have no money 

you can’t buy new highways equipment. So we couldn’t buy 

new highways equipment. If you have no money, guess what? 

You can’t refurbish your power plant. If you have no money, 

guess what? You can’t do a lot of things you want to do in 

health care. And that, the fact of the matter is, no matter how 

you phrase it, the bottom line is you nearly broke the province 

of Saskatchewan. And now you have the audacity to stand up 

and say, for 16 years you guys didn’t do anything. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we had no money. We had no money. And 

you know why we had no money? Because you guys left this 

province on the brink of bankruptcy. Whether it was the 

Crowns or whether it was the General Revenue Fund, wherever 

there is money, you guys had the knack of finding it and 

spending it like a bunch of drunk sailors, Mr. Speaker. Let’s 

spend. Let’s spend and let’s spend some more. 

 

And guess what? Guess what? People are starting to realize 

that. Well we’ve seen this act before. We’ve seen this act 

before. And all of a sudden you guys are going to try and do it 

all over again — $1.2 billion off your mark the first budget. Oh 

what’s that, 1.2 billion? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m telling the people of Saskatchewan this 

one. This government and these people have betrayed your trust 

on many, many fronts. They have betrayed your trust on many 

fronts. Because why? They continue to propagate something 

that is not true at all and secondly they continue putting this 

province deep in debt and when they go off to Ottawa, we’re 

going to go fight for potash. My point to the Premier, the leader 

of their party, is you shouldn’t bite the hand that pats you on the 

forehead, on the head. You shouldn’t bite the hand that pats you 

on the head because what happens, Mr. Speaker, he might get 

angry at you. Harper might get mad at him. So let’s just keep 

toeing that line. 

 

And one of the most amazing things that I find too, which I find 

absolutely incredible, is that every time one of the Conservative 

MPs [Member of Parliament] had a fundraiser or had a dinner 

or had a gathering, who was up bellying up to the old food tray? 

Their Sask Party candidates, the Sask Party people. Right on. 

Come on down, come on down and have some food and give us 

some money for our old federal campaigns. 

 

So today now I want you guys, if you can’t get a darned thing 

out of Ottawa, if you can’t get a darned thing out of Ottawa, at 

least don’t go giving money to campaign. Please stay away 

from those dinners and those fundraisers because they don’t 

listen to you guys anyway. My goodness, you know. 

 

[20:45] 

 

And at one time, Mr. Speaker, I was really . . . When I was 

courting my wife, I went to visit at her mother’s place and her 

mother didn’t like me. And I sat at the table and I ate the food 

that was there, you know, and I was very polite. But guess 

what? I didn’t go back there. You know, I didn’t go back there, 

Mr. Speaker. And maybe you guys should stop going to these 

fundraisers for the federal PCs [Progressive Conservatives] 

because they’re not listening to you guys, you know. They’re 

not listening to you guys. 

 

So (a) let’s be factual here. You guys put us in debt, so stop 

claiming that the last 16 years you had nothing to do with. You 

put us in debt. Secondly, stop trying to pat yourselves on the 

back because everything that you’ve done or spent the last 

couple of years, the people of Saskatchewan, the working 

people, the business people, the municipalities in co-operation 

with the NDP, they gifted that to you guys. They gave that to 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5811 

you guys. 

 

And I can just see you guys on election day. You became the 

government. Oh my goodness, where in the heck did you get all 

this money from? Where did you get all this money from? And 

oh my goodness, everybody’s working; the economy is 

booming. How could we build on this? 

 

And a short three years later, Mr. Speaker, we’re now looking 

at a $4.2 billion deficit that these guys are going to have us over 

the next two or three years. And the numbers are starting to slip 

in terms of the employment and the Social Services caseload is 

going sky-high. 

 

Well you know, there’s something fundamentally wrong here, 

boys and girls. You guys are not thinking things through. You 

are not thinking things through. So it leads us to the conclusion 

is you guys don’t know what you’re doing. That’s very, very 

simple. You don’t have a clue what you’re doing. 

 

So anyway the Throne Speech talks about the two roads. So I 

can see the old Minister of Energy and Resources driving along 

with your leader saying, oh my goodness, there’s a fork in the 

road here. So what do we take here, left or right, left or right? 

Well we can’t take left. Well where in the heck do we go? Well 

you guys are so busy arguing which road to take you’re going 

down the centre. All of a sudden you’re stuck in some mudhole 

and the cows are around you mooing, saying, what are you 

doing in our field? And I think the road less travelled on that 

you guys talk about, well that’s a field, you know, full of 

manure, and cows wondering what the heck you’re doing in 

their field. 

 

So my point is, you guys couldn’t decide which road to take. 

You couldn’t decide which road to take, and what happens? 

That lack of leadership, the people of Saskatchewan are now 

paying for it and will continue to pay for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can’t afford these guys any more. We can’t 

afford them any more because they’re putting our Crowns into 

debt, they’re missing their marks, their targeted financial marks 

from potash by a billion or so here and there. No big deal as far 

as they’re concerned. And they keep patting themselves on the 

back. They keep talking about 16 years. Why don’t you guys 

talk about the real issues facing the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

When your leader tried to shake down BHP for an extra billion 

dollars, what did he ask for? Did he ask to help people with 

housing in the inner cities? Did they ask to try and train 

Aboriginal people in the Far North? Did they ask for some 

technology to help people become more competitive? Did they 

ask for any of the social programs that are important to the 

people of Saskatchewan? Did they pay down debt with that 

money? No. 

 

Do you know what they did? They said, oh we’re going to get a 

domed stadium. A domed stadium. Well my goodness, Mr. 

Speaker, there are a lot more pressing priorities when you have 

men and women and children in homeless shelters that can’t 

afford even rent. Maybe that money should have went there 

instead. How about that? How about that for an excuse? How 

about helping people develop . . . have a response to health 

care? How about that instead of a domed stadium? 

The Riders play 10 games a year; 10 games a year they play. 

How about we house our people? How about we provide proper 

health care? And how about we be fair to all people and all 

regions of this province once and for all? If you’re going to 

shake down a big corporate citizen, why don’t you do it for the 

right reasons? Then maybe the people would respect you. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it is very, very sad. It is very, very sad 

when you see grown men and women speaking like that and 

making up that kind of, propagating that kind of myth, that for 

16 years we couldn’t do the things that they’re enjoying to do 

now because the hard work was done during those 16 years. 

The hard work, the sacrifices, and the leadership was shown 

during those 16 years, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll tell the Sask Party 

another thing. Any day of the week, any day of the week I’ll 

compare our leader’s experience in business, Mr. Speaker, in 

agriculture, in leading this province, any day of the week 

compared to that leader from the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 

Speaker, because we have seen nothing from failure and failing 

to deliver. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Stephen Harper is not listening. He’s not 

listening. You guys should never ever go to any Conservative 

MPs’ fundraisers again. At least make that commitment to the 

Assembly tonight. At least make that commitment because 

these guys are not standing up for Saskatchewan. They’re 

standing against Saskatchewan because they’re all so afraid of 

Harper that even the Conservative MPs won’t stand up. And our 

Premier won’t stand up to Harper and say, you leave our 

resource alone for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

Not one mention of taking on Ottawa in the Throne Speech. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a shame. That is an absolute shame. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at the challenges of finances and I tell 

people of Saskatchewan this all over, all over, Mr. Speaker. 

This Saskatchewan Party government is putting us in debt. 

They are putting us in debt as we speak. And to hear some of 

the members talk about oh, when I was elected the debt was at 

six-point-some million; now it’s 4.2 million. No, no, no, that’s 

the easy part. Let’s look at the next year or two years down the 

road. How come you guys don’t say yes, we brought it down 

but we’re taking it up 3 billion . . . [inaudible] . . . where it was 

when we took office? How come you don’t say that? Why are 

you hiding that fact that’s marked right down in your finance 

documents? Why aren’t you telling people that? 

 

Sometimes the truth will set you free, you guys. Sometimes the 

truth will set you free. Don’t be telling people we reduced debt 

by 40 per cent. You’re not reducing debt by 40 per cent. You 

took that money, you paid down the debt, and guess what? 

You’re putting us $3 billion more in debt than when you first 

took over office. Why can’t you say that? Why don’t you tell 

the people that’s the challenge we have? But you guys won’t. 

You guys simply won’t. Do you know why? And people always 

say this to me. It’s because you’re not providing leadership and 

you have no experience, and you don’t know what you’re 

doing. That’s the bottom line. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at all these, this notion here of the 

Throne Speech, and they didn’t talk about the challenges 

financially. They didn’t recognize the work that the unions, the 

business community, and the municipalities and the school 

divisions and the health districts . . . They never talk about the 



5812 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

sacrifices those groups made. They just say, oh we were doing 

all these wonderful things. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that stood out in the Throne 

Speech — and this is a throw in from them because right now 

we’re so busy with potash, they thought they’d sneak this under 

the radar so nobody knows it’s there — this whole notion of a 

driver’s licence picture ID for voting. Like where in the heck 

did that come from? Where did that come from, you guys? Who 

stood up and said to you guys, which focus group said, oh we 

need photo ID to vote? 

 

You know what happened? Nobody told you guys to do that. 

And some of the backbench, the backbenchers are saying, oh 

my goodness. Oh my goodness. What’s that about? Well let’s 

not question anybody. Oh no, no. Let’s not . . . We’ll just 

simply follow. We’ll just simply follow. And I told a backbench 

last time, you should have a backbone and ask the questions 

why you’re doing this. 

 

You know from the senior citizens who many of them can’t 

afford to have their own picture ID, they’re going to ask you 

guys, why are you doing this? For what purpose? What is the 

reason? Where is the logic? It hasn’t been a glaring problem, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And from the immigration community, we’re trying to attract 

more people here as an immigration centre. Well they’re 

coming to Saskatchewan; they need a picture ID to vote. What 

are you going to tell them? They’re going to say to you, well 

where is this coming from? 

 

You know from the low-income families, some people don’t 

have a driver’s licence. You know they can’t afford to go get a 

picture ID or a passport photo. They’re going to ask you guys, 

well where is that coming from? You know? 

 

And then from the First Nations and the Métis community, 

they’re going to ask you guys, well where did that come from, 

too. And, Mr. Speaker, you know, from the students that have a 

struggle paying their tuition, there’s more cost to vote. They’re 

going to ask you, well where did that come from, too. Why are 

you guys doing that? What is the specific purpose of demanding 

photo ID for voting purposes? Where did that come from? 

 

The speech that I heard from the Minister of Justice on the 

reason why he had this photo ID concept, that could’ve came 

out of the 1940s or the 1950s or the stage where you guys . . . 

where people were denied the right to vote. And shame on you 

guys trying to circumvent the electoral process. Let these 

people vote. Why are you trying to stop them from voting? 

What is the purpose of that? My goodness. 

 

You guys can’t be discouraging people from voting, and that’s 

what this thing does. When you ask people for a picture ID, 

you’re discouraging people from voting. Because a lot of 

people are going to say, well I’m not going to get an ID to vote. 

You know? And that’s just plain silly to ask them to do — to 

get an ID to vote. They were born in this country. They’re part 

of this province. They’ve worked, they’ve lived, they played in 

this province, and they should have a right to vote. 

 

And I’m telling every one of these groups — the seniors 

groups, the immigration community, the low-income families, 

the First Nations, the Métis people — next election you guys 

come out and vote in big numbers, and remember those that 

tried to deny your vote are sitting right across the way there. 

And that’s called a Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. 

Speaker. They tried to deny your vote. It’s an affront to 

democracy. 

 

And again the question is, where did this come from? So it 

leads me to the conclusion you guys don’t know what you’re 

doing. You don’t know what you’re doing. And why would you 

do that? Because you don’t know what you’re doing. It kind of 

rotates, you know. People say, why are they doing that? 

Because they don’t know what they’re doing. Why are they 

doing that? Because they don’t know what they’re doing. And 

that’s how it works, you guys. That’s how it works. 

 

And when I see a couple of the ministers who are cloaked in an 

honour song or given an honorary title, when they stand in this 

House and vote for a Speech from the Throne that denies First 

Nations and Métis people the right to vote because they don’t 

have photo ID, I say to them, shame on them. And they ought to 

return that gift from the First Nations community if they’re 

going to deny them the right to vote because they simply don’t 

have photo ID, Mr. Speaker. They ought to return those gifts 

and those badges of honour, or those cloaks of honour, 

whatever they’re called, or their hope blankets. Turn those back. 

 

Because what you have done is you have taken the goodwill of 

First Nations, of Métis people, of the immigration community, 

of the low-income families, of the students, and of the seniors 

and all these groups that tried to reach out to you guys. And you 

have slapped them in the face saying no, guess what? Before 

you vote next time you have to have a picture ID, otherwise you 

don’t get to vote. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that has got to be the worst thing you can do 

in this day and age. This is not the States in the 1950s. This is 

Saskatchewan 2010, Mr. Speaker, 2010. And that kind of 

action, bringing that kind of action and making it part of your 

Throne Speech, like my goodness, what were you guys 

thinking? Why would you do that? Because you don’t know 

what you’re doing. And that’s the sad reality. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other thing we noticed from this side of 

the Assembly, and this ought to be a concern for many of the 

members there; ought to be a concern for many of the members 

there. I noticed the member from Martensville who had done a 

tough job in terms of her role as the Minister of the 

Environment — and she made some mistakes, granted, made 

some mistakes — and she was stripped of her ministerial 

responsibility and placed right in the back row, the furthest seat 

in the back row. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are many of us in the political lives 

that do a lot of work for our parties, for our government and for 

our people. And some of us will fall on swords and some of us 

will lose a lot of popularity for decisions we make — and that’s 

part of leadership. I’m not arguing about that. 

 

But when you do that, you shouldn’t be treated in that fashion at 

all. You should be respected for the work that you did and 

actually the sacrifice that you made for your government or 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5813 

your party. And what was done? She was moved from that area 

to the back row. And I say, shame on your leader and shame on 

the Saskatchewan Party for treating a member of your cabinet 

and your caucus in that fashion. 

 

And don’t forget there’s going to be other people paying that 

same price, because the fact of the matter is you guys still don’t 

know what you’re doing. And the people of Saskatchewan 

cannot, cannot take any more chances with you. And I go down 

the list of all the people whose trust you have betrayed, Mr. 

Speaker, every single one of them: the First Nations 

community, the labour movement, all the unions out there when 

you said you weren’t going to do any of the labour legislation 

and you did. You know, all the students that were asking for 

help, the low-income people that needed housing, you know, 

the chiropractors whose service you delisted — the list goes on. 

Bang, bang, bang, bang, bang, bang. 

 

[21:00] 

 

And all these groups have a long memory. And they say to you 

guys that it’s going to be our turn come 2011, Mr. Speaker. And 

they’re going to get up, they’re going to organize, and they’re 

going to speak out against you guys, because the fact of the 

matter is you guys don’t know what you’re doing. And these 

guys are going to teach you a lesson in politics, and the lesson 

is you should never, ever betray the trust that was afforded upon 

you by these groups and other groups in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to quote from the Seniors’ Voice. 

And this is a quote from their thing there: “The price that good 

people pay, for their indifference to public affairs, is to be ruled 

by evil men.” And that was Plato. Now if Plato was here he’d 

say . . . Well he would be told, I would tell this Plato guy, I 

would say, hey, Plato buddy, the people want to vote. The 

people want to vote, but they need a photo ID to vote. So you 

know this . . . They’re not indifferent to public affairs; they’re 

just not allowed to participate in public affairs. So can you 

make up another quote? Because this doesn’t fit. 

 

So Plato would say, well how in the heck does that work? I’d 

say, well you got to go back to . . . Because Plato’s a pretty 

smart guy. So I kind of put here, the price that good people pay 

for their indifference to public affairs is to pay their fees to get 

their photo ID and then be ruled by evil men. End quote. 

 

Now Plato has to come back and redraft that whole, that whole 

quote because 2010 he would see a party that’s so determined, 

so determined to deny people’s right to vote. Because why? 

That constituent of people — whether it’s First Nations, 

whether it’s seniors, whether it’s low-income families — don’t 

vote for the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 

they’re doing it. Loud and clear, that’s why you’re doing it. 

 

You know, and I’d tell Plato, take a new quote because I could 

sure use a hard-hitting one. And I think he’s going to give me 

one in the near future, Mr. Speaker. And I plan on using that in 

this Assembly quite often, Mr. Speaker, quite often. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would point out as well that in northern 

Saskatchewan, in northern Saskatchewan . . . The Minister of 

Highways was just chuckling away as his colleague made 

mention about the roads and the construction going on. Mr. 

Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan there’s dangerous road 

conditions that have claimed many, many lives. My colleague 

and I from Cumberland were in Stanley Mission speaking about 

some of the challenges that Stanley Mission people face, and 

there were some very compelling arguments, very compelling 

arguments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we talked with people in Stanley Mission. We 

talked to the people in Patuanak. We talked to a number of folks 

in Turnor Lake and, Mr. Speaker, these roads in Southend, 

these roads are very, very dangerous. They’re not properly 

fixed. They need to be repaired. And this Minister of Highways 

is chuckling at the fact that he’s doing a bunch of road work in 

some of his area. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m telling the Minister of Highways that I 

challenge him to a northern debate. I challenge him to a 

northern debate on highways. You pick the time and location, 

sir, and you come there with all your officials, and I’ll show 

you exactly what you’re not doing and the harm that you’re 

causing to the people of northern Saskatchewan and the damage 

and the dangerous road conditions that many of their vehicles 

and their families are subjected to. And then for once you will 

see that this is not a game. 

 

And the reason why, Mr. Speaker, I say it’s not a game is 

because there’s one section in our area that I announced three 

years ago, and we announced it’d be done. Well guess what, 

Mr. Speaker? They announced it twice already and it’s still not 

done. And this is not 150 kilometres worth of road. This is 

about a 12-kilometre stretch — 12 kilometres. And they haven’t 

done a darn thing to fix roads anywhere in northern 

Saskatchewan, anywhere in northern Saskatchewan. And they 

say, oh, we’re talking to the — what do they call those guys? — 

the area transportation committee. Well people in the area 

transportation committee system say we’ve given them their 

priorities and they’re simply not listening. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, again I’ll tell the Minister of Highways, you 

got to figure this out. Because the fact of the matter is the 

Pelican Narrows people, the First Nations people of Pelican 

Narrows, of Dillon, of Southend, of Stanley Mission, of 

Cumberland House, and the list goes on, of all the people in the 

North, don’t they deserve safe roads? Aren’t they important to 

this government and don’t they count? 

 

Now when we start telling people it’s time to get up and speak 

up and start telling the government what they need, we tell 

them, come to the Assembly. Come to the Assembly and fill up 

these balconies and tell the people of Saskatchewan that you’re 

tired of driving your loved ones, your children, your 

grandchildren, your family on roads that ought not to be driven 

on and roads that every single person should be ashamed of 

across the way, Mr. Speaker. You should all be ashamed of the 

conditions of the road and the fact that you subject 

Saskatchewan people to that kind of dangerous conditions, and 

shame on every single one of you. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out in my closing moment 

here that if you look at the future of Saskatchewan, it’s going to 

be bright. It’s going to be bright. But the fact of the matter is 

you got to have a government that reflects value. And I look at 

some of the experience we have on our side of the Assembly. I 



5814 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

look at our leader who has got international experience, that ran 

corporations, that ran a Crown corporation, that has a lot of 

experience in government, and I look at the member from 

Nutana, the member from Regina Lakeview, and you look at all 

these fine members of the NDP caucus and, Mr. Speaker, they 

have more experience, more vision, more planning in their little 

finger than the entire Sask Party caucus could ever hope to 

achieve. 

 

And that’s why the people of Saskatchewan in the next election 

need to say, we tried these guys; they failed miserably. They 

failed miserably and they betrayed our trust. And they run to 

Ottawa to get help, and guess what? They’re not getting any 

kind of help. They’re being told no. Why? Because people in 

Ottawa know who they can push around and who they ought 

not to push around. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again I’ll tell the people of Saskatchewan, 

we’ve seen what these guys have done. We’ve seen them 

propagate this myth that Saskatchewan never existed before the 

16 years we ruled the province. And, Mr. Speaker, they refuse 

to admit the fact that they’re putting this province into debt. The 

fashion in which they treat some of their most senior members 

that fall on the sword for them, Mr. Speaker, that denotes 

confusion. That denotes lack of leadership. That denotes 

absolute incompetence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why this Throne Speech doesn’t hold any water, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s why your 16-year argument is absolutely 

silly. It’s outlived its purpose. You won the 2007 election. 

You’re not going to win the 2011 election because people can 

see right through your system of propagating that whole myth, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I’ll point out again that, in my final moments here, I want 

to congratulate the member from Saskatoon Northwest on his 

victory. And, Mr. Speaker, he’ll soon find out, he’ll soon find 

out that sometimes when he gets up to say something we would 

encourage him, being a new member, not to follow the line 

unless they’re absolutely true. And the fact of the matter is, 

always use facts, facts to guide your words. If some of your 

colleagues came along here, they tried that for a moment and 

they’re slapped back into line. You will follow what you’re told 

to say, period. 

 

Now my final comment I’ll make is that, remember that fork in 

the road? Now you got these two guys stuck in this farm field, 

and don’t know where in the heck to go. And I say, well that’s 

typical, because they don’t know what they represent. I look at 

some of you guys. Some of you are reformers, some of you are 

Liberals, some of you are Conservatives. You know, like I keep 

saying to you guys, well what the heck are you guys? You 

know, you guys got to figure it out. Are you right wing? Are 

you left wing? Are you right of centre? Are you centre? And 

you know what, you guys are so confused. You’re so confused. 

You don’t know what you guys represent. You don’t know 

what you represent. So come on, you guys. As my neighbour 

would say, figure it out. Figure it out. Because you’re not 

playing with monopoly money here; you’re playing with the 

people of Saskatchewan’s future. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s going to happen very soon, very 

soon, is the people of Saskatchewan are going to wake up to 

some of the things that you guys have been trying to do. And 

they’re going to say, that’s it. That’s it. These guys betrayed our 

trust. They’ve been over-promising and under-delivering, and 

Ottawa doesn’t care what your Premier says. So at the end of 

the day we stand alone. We stand alone. And if we’re going to 

stand alone, it’s time the people of Saskatchewan elect an 

experienced, visionary, tough government, and the only place 

you’re going to get that is on this side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, not that side. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that I re-emphasize that I 

will not be supporting the Speech from the Throne for the 

reasons I’ve identified and I’ll be voting for the amendment. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It 

gives me great, great pleasure to stand in this Chamber and give 

my support to the Speech from the Throne. And I want to tell 

everybody they can put their headsets back on, because I don’t 

think I can quite carry the volume as the last speaker. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate our 

newest member from Saskatoon Northwest. He won a 

resounding victory with an even higher percentage than the last 

election. Kind of lets you know how the people really feel about 

the direction of this government — contrary to the last speaker 

— and the direction that our Premier is taking. I’ve found the 

member from Saskatoon Northwest to be a friendly, personable 

type of person, and I know he’ll do a good job of representing 

his constituents, although I didn’t realize, Mr. Speaker, that he 

and the member from Yorkton were twins and very hard to tell 

apart earlier on. 

 

Anyway there is one thing I do question about him though and 

that’s his choice of his seatmate. But however he will soon 

learn that sometimes his choice can be a little misguided. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank my wife Terry for her support. 

All of us here know that we spend a lot of hours, we spend a lot 

of hours being away from our family. Of course on the other 

hand there is that possibility I’m doing her a favour by being 

out of her hair. You know the old saying, out of sight, out of 

mind. 

 

I would also like to thank the . . . I would like to thank the 

people at Carrot River Valley constituency for the honour of 

being their representative. It is truly humbling to speak on their 

behalf and bring the concerns of all of the citizens in what I 

consider to be the most unique, forward-thinking, picturesque 

constituencies, not just in Saskatchewan but in all of Canada, 

and I feel blessed to live there. 

 

I also have to thank the CAs [constituency assistant] that do the 

yeomen work in the office. Shelley Meyer who has been the CA 

for 12 years is returned from maternity leave with a healthy 

baby boy named Jaxson. She will be work-sharing with Cindy 

Warner who has been with us a bit more than a year. These two 

women not only have great office skills, but have managed to 

put up with my antics which at time I am sure stretches their 

fortitude. Heck, they’d even learned to laugh at the appropriate 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5815 

time when I tell a joke. Well, most of the time anyway, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I would like to thank our executive for backing me up all the 

way through. We have a president who has been there for years, 

Carol Stewart. The executive is a great executive who stands 

behind both myself and the party all the way through. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m going to use a quote from Alice in Wonderland 

that was said by the Cheshire cat. And I quote, “[When] . . . you 

don’t know where you are going, any road will get you there.” 

Think about it. When you don’t know where you’re going, any 

road will get you there. Does this not remind you of the NDP? 

They had no idea where they were going. And I might add, still 

don’t. And they sure never fixed the road to get them there or 

anywhere else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, recently a vice-president with the NDP who used 

to have a blog called Humble Opinion . . . I’m sure you 

remember it, Mr. Speaker, as it was brought up last session. To 

refresh your memory, I will quote from it. And I quote, “Almost 

anybody can be a guest blogger. There are only a few 

guidelines. It cannot be scandalous unless you are talking about 

Brad Wall or Ralph Goodale.” 

 

Now this same NDP vice-president just came up with another 

good one, Mr. Speaker, in our local paper. The Nipawin Journal 

on October the 20th of this year, he wrote a dandy letter. And I 

will quote a portion of it. And I quote, “How come Fred 

Bradshaw never tells his premier to fix the roads in northeast 

Saskatchewan? Why has our area of the province not benefited 

from nurse recruiting efforts?” 

 

Mr. Speaker, kind of takes you back to the Cheshire cat, the 

NDP philosophy. Any road will get you there. Maybe it should 

be trail. 

 

[21:15] 

 

In the past year alone, there were more than 1100 kilometres of 

highway work tendered along with 800 kilometres of 

maintenance and safety improvements made. Mr. Speaker, 

since 2007, in Carrot River Valley constituency alone, major 

work has been done to Highway No. 23, also making this 

highway into a nine-month primary, which is a godsend for the 

farmers and the loggers in the area. Highway 55 between Carrot 

River and Nipawin, and then again on to Prince Albert. 

Highway No. 3 between Crooked River and Hudson Bay, and 

also between Tisdale and Melfort. Highway No. 35 south of 

Tisdale. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our highways under the NDP were the 

laughingstock of Canada. Now these highways are being 

noticed. The people that are moving back here from Alberta 

have told me this. Of course under the NDP this didn’t happen. 

For our colleagues across the floor, note I said, the people from 

Alberta that are moving back here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I give our Ministry of Highways a thumbs-up and 

our minister a thumbs-up for the tremendous work that they and 

he have done on this infrastructure boondoggle left by the 

previous administration. I would suggest that this NDP 

vice-president take off his blinders, jump off his soapbox, get in 

his Lada along with dear leader, and drive the roads of Carrot 

River Valley. Maybe, just maybe, he would agree there’s a huge 

improvement but I doubt it. His orange-tinted glasses would 

dim his vision. When you don’t know where you’re going, any 

road will get you there. This government is going the new road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other point brought up in that letter was that 

health care in the Northeast had not benefited from the nurse 

recruiting efforts. Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further from 

the truth. You have to realize that the NDP left rural 

Saskatchewan in a sinking quagmire, not just on their roads but 

also on the health care issue. The fix for the NDP health care 

system in rural Saskatchewan was to close 52 hospitals, two of 

them in Carrot River Valley — Arborfield and Carrot River. 

 

I have no doubt in my mind that, heaven forbid, had the NDP 

won the 2007 election, Nipawin Hospital would have been the 

next one on the list. Just look at the facts, Mr. Speaker. In 2007, 

the last year of the NDP — thankfully — Nipawin had 13 

registered general practitioners. In 2010 they have 20 registered 

practitioners, a 54 per cent increase since 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government, our Premier, and our Minister of 

Health have done a marvellous job to try to rectify a very 

serious lack of compassion on the part of the previous 

administration. When our government said they would go into a 

nurse recruitment strategy and hire 800 more nurses by the end 

of our first mandate, the NDP said, no way — pie in the sky. 

Mr. Speaker, after just three years that number is surpassed. 

Actually the last number I had was 830. This government also 

increased the seats for registered nursing students — 130 

already and another 170 coming. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s talk physicians. In 2007 under the 

NDP, there were 60 College of Medicine seats and 60 residency 

seats — the second smallest school in all of Canada. Mind you, 

at the rate people were leaving this province under the NDP, I 

guess you could see them shooting for small. Under our 

government, since we know we’re growing and will continue 

to, the College of Medicine seats will be raised to 100 seats and 

the residency seats will be raised to 120 by the end of our term. 

This, Mr. Speaker, is a new Saskatchewan, the new road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the addition of the STARS program 

announced in the Throne Speech, although not perfect, we are 

light years ahead of the NDP in providing decent health care to 

rural residents who have been sadly neglected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has taken the bull by the horns, 

so to speak, in the MS [multiple sclerosis] liberation trials. 

Saskatchewan has the highest number of MS cases in all of 

Canada. So we took the initiative to commit $5 million for these 

clinical trials. People who have MS are certainly pleased to 

have a government put their money and compassion where their 

mouth is. And I know, Mr. Speaker, that every one of us here 

knows personally somebody who has MS. They’re happy, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s a new Saskatchewan, the new road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP ran ads half the summer saying that the 

children’s hospital in Saskatoon was cancelled — this even 

though they knew the money wouldn’t be going out until it was 

decided where the hospital was to be built. Don’t let facts stand 

in the way of a good story, or an ad in this case. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, guess what? Contrary to the ads and the NDP rhetoric, 



5816 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

the Saskatoon children’s hospital is going ahead. I commend 

this Health minister and his staff on a job — although not 

complete — well done. This government is committed to a new 

road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for this NDP vice-president to question our 

government’s ability to manage roads and health care, he had 

better take a long, hard look in the mirror. And I feel sorry for 

the mirror. Mr. Speaker, what I’d really like to do is I would 

like to see that NDP vice-president, who comes from White 

Fox, challenge, challenge the election next time in Carrot River 

Valley constituency and see how he fared out. He would see 

what the people of Carrot River Valley feel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Carrot River Valley has some of the most 

productive farm land and progressive farmers, not only in 

Saskatchewan but probably North America. That said, these 

farmers were not immune to mother nature’s wrath. As good as 

these farmers are, some of them were caught with excess 

moisture, destroying crops and increasing the expenses. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, our Premier and Ag minister covered all of 

Saskatchewan to see the damage first-hand. 

 

This government understands farmers and understands their 

trials and challenges. This government immediately stepped 

forward with an acreage payment to help these farmers in these 

difficult times, not ignoring them as what happened under the 

previous administration. Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a new 

road, one of a responsible and proactive government. We have 

our Ag minister and his office to thank for this. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have often said the reason I got into 

politics is because of my children. And how could it be that 

with all the resources that we have in this province, our children 

had to move away in order to gain meaningful employment? No 

more, Mr. Deputy Speaker, no more. This is a new 

Saskatchewan, the new road. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the new Saskatchewan, our population 

is growing to an all-time high of 1,045,622 people, with a wage 

rate that is the third highest in Canada. Our school enrolments 

are up for the first time in 17 years. Let’s see. When did the 

NDP come into power, Mr. Speaker? This is great news for my 

daughter Gina who is in her fourth year of education with the 

University of Regina. The way things are going, she’ll pretty 

well be guaranteed of a job in this province, the province of her 

birth, not Alberta, not BC, or, worst case scenario, Ontario. 

This, Mr. Speaker, is the new road. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things that has made a big 

difference in this province is the education tax on property. The 

farmers and property owners of this province have been paying 

a disproportionate share of this tax for years. Now the NDP 

never denied it and always said it was something, something 

should be done about it, but they never got around to it. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, now this is being done. We will finish this 

commitment off this spring. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because we 

got around to it — not just talk and bluster, noise and posture, 

but actually getting around to it. It’s a new road, Mr. Speaker, a 

new Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Are you done? 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Not quite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, potash — I don’t know what I can say that hasn’t 

been said. This government and the opposition have both 

clearly said that the potash belongs to the people of 

Saskatchewan. We do hope that the federal government will 

come to the same conclusion; however, that decision is out of 

our hands. I will say our Premier made one of the most 

compassionate and compelling speeches that has ever been 

made, stating our province’s position. This speech resonated not 

just across Canada but around the world. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

our Premier is putting Saskatchewan on the map. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am basically running out of time. I would like to 

mention though one of the good things. I would mention one of 

the very good things that has happened in the Carrot River 

Valley constituency and that is that our mills are opening up 

even in these tough economic times. The Weyerhaeuser mill 

has reopened in Hudson Bay and C & C [C & C Wood Products 

Ltd.] or Edgewood Lumber, which has mills in both British 

Columbia and Alberta, have purchased the mills — the stud 

plant in Carrot River and the plywood plant in Hudson Bay. 

They are slated to be opened . . . The stud mill will be open July 

the 4th of 2011, and the plywood mill will be opened up on 

November the 1st of 2011. These are companies that are 

coming to Saskatchewan because they see a new Saskatchewan. 

They’re willing to put their business into Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have to talk about education. We have a 

commitment from this government to improve education in 

northeastern Saskatchewan. Cumberland Community College is 

getting a new facility worth I believe it is $7.2 million. This will 

help the people of northeastern Saskatchewan continue on their 

education, upgrade their education, and we have our Minister of 

Advanced Education to thank for that. And I know he worked 

very hard at getting these things done for our new 

Saskatchewan, our new road. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe the time has come for me to . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . And my colleagues agree with me. 

The time has come for me to sit back and say, I support, I 

support the Throne Speech. I do not support the amendment. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[21:30] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 

Hills. 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And like it’s 

been said so many times already this evening, this afternoon, 

it’s a pleasure to enter into the Throne Speech debate. This is 

one of the opportunities for members to outline some of their 

concerns, some of the highlights of their constituency, to talk 

about some of the things happening at home, and also to 

address the very important topics that have been featured in the 

Throne Speech which is common practice at this time of year. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s with some real pleasure and 

some trepidation, I suppose, that I enter into this discussion 

because there are some very important things I want to 

highlight. After having heard so many of my colleagues and 

members of the opposition, there are so many elements that I 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5817 

want to respond to. There are so many areas of identification 

that have happened as part of the Throne Speech that I’m not 

sure that I could get it into whatever little time we have left this 

evening. So I am going to struggle a little bit, I am sure, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to be as succinct as necessary. However if we 

run out of time tonight, I’ve been assured that I can have most 

of tomorrow afternoon to conclude my remarks. And I don’t 

hear anybody saying no, so I’m going to take that as general 

agreement. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the 12th Throne Speech that I’ve 

had the opportunity to hear presented in this legislature. And, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve heard comments from the opposition 

that they didn’t think this Throne Speech was up to the 

standards that they may have expected. Well I can tell them for 

a fact that of the eight or nine throne speeches I heard coming 

from them when they were the government, I can remember the 

pallid haze settling over the entire province, just disappointment 

in the people of this province with the lack of enthusiasm, the 

lack of initiative, the lack of drive that was evident in throne 

speeches presented by those men and women, the inertia that 

affected the economy and the society as a result of the pallid 

speech that would come forward from that government every 

year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was no enthusiasm in this province for 

anything that was undertaken by that government because their 

sole purpose in presenting the Speech from the Throne was to 

elaborate mediocrity. This was a government at the time that 

felt that you didn’t want to raise expectations too much because 

you may not be able to accomplish the very objectives you were 

setting out for yourself. And so we would belabour under this 

sort of neutral government that really just couldn’t get it into 

drive, that just couldn’t push the agenda forward too much. 

 

One of the things that has captivated the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that with a new 

government there is a new excitement, a new can-do attitude, a 

new determination, a new opportunity to see this province 

become what it was always intended to be. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

you look around this building, the wonderful architecture we 

have here, the size of this edifice didn’t happen by accident. 

This building, 100-and-some years ago, was created to meet the 

expectations and the dreams and the desires of the people who 

founded this province. They thought Saskatchewan would be 

the leader of the provinces in Western Canada. They saw the 

potential here. They saw the resources here, and they knew the 

people would come. This building was dedicated to a dream, 

and the dream has never been realized. We are just now, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, on the cusp of realizing the dream of the 

people who founded the great province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Throne Speech 

may not invigorate the members of the opposition. It may not 

motivate them as much as they would like. But, Mr. Speaker, I 

can tell you that this speech, by its content, is far and away 

superior to the mediocrity we heard from those men and women 

when they were the people writing the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to get too far into my remarks 

without backtracking just a little bit and to comment again 

about how great an opportunity and a privilege it has been for 

me personally to represent the constituency of Cypress Hills. I 

know everybody feels that they represent the finest 

constituency, the greatest people, the most beautiful part of the 

province, and if you didn’t feel that way, you probably 

shouldn’t be in this job. But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

really am privileged to be here. 

 

And as I said earlier, I’ve been in this job about eleven and a 

half years now. In fact I think it’s just . . . It will be 12 years ago 

on October the 30th that I won the nomination to be the 

Saskatchewan Party candidate in a by-election that was 

expected in that next spring. And so my public role has been 

limited to this 12-year adventure, but it’s been an outstanding 

adventure for me. And I’d like to thank the people of Cypress 

Hills for, over four elections, giving me the opportunity to 

represent them in this legislature. 

 

I had some time tonight, and I thought I’d just take a few 

minutes to do some quick calculations. And I’m just going by 

memory and estimates, but I think my constituency’s about 250 

kilometres from top to bottom — from the Montana border to 

the South Saskatchewan River north of the community of 

Leader. And it’s about 150 kilometres from just outside of Swift 

Current, where I buttress up against the Premier’s constituency, 

to the Alberta border. Now if you do the math, I think that 

comes to about, well, 34 500 square kilometres which would 

translate into about 14,700 square miles. 

 

And if you do the math, you see that I have about one voter per 

square mile, one voter per square mile. And you know, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that’s quite an outstanding fact when you 

compare it to large urban ridings, especially in huge 

metropolitan centres. But I’ve had the privilege of knocking on 

the doors of just about every one of those voters. I’ve driven 

hundreds and thousands of miles through large rural areas, 

knocking on doors and visiting with people in town and in vast 

open geographical areas where the ranchers and the farmers 

operate. And having had that privilege has allowed me to very 

clearly understand the needs and the desires and the aspirations 

of the people of Cypress Hills. It is, as you know, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, primarily a ranching and a farming constituency. But 

the growth in the oil and gas industry recently and the swell of 

tourism in the Cypress Hills area has been truly incredible. And 

so our economy and our lifestyle has been enhanced by new 

opportunities for employment and some great new business 

opportunities. 

 

And one of the other things I want to say about Cypress Hills 

right now is that on a weekly basis I have the privilege of 

sending a letter of congratulations to a new business 

owner/proprietor someplace within my constituency. And I 

think that that’s a real sign not just of the hopefulness of the 

people of Cypress Hills. It’s a real indication of how strong the 

provincial economy is, how it’s growing — not just in urban 

Saskatchewan but in rural Saskatchewan — and how people are 

benefiting in large measure from the policies of this government 

and the opportunities that have been provided to them through 

the province of Saskatchewan and its great natural advantages. 

 

So I’d like to put on record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my pleasure 

at being able to serve on behalf of the people of Cypress Hills. 

I’d like to recognize, though, some people who are very 

important in terms of my success in that endeavour of 

representation. I have three ladies working in the office. They 



5818 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2010 

job share as constituency assistants. And so again tonight I’d 

like to recognize Beth Humphrey, who’s been with me for 

about 10 years; and Glenna Gordon, who’s been in the office 

for six or seven years; and Carol Miller, who’s just into her 

second year now. And these three ladies work overtime, and 

I’m not saying that lightly because I’ll phone the office after 

hours and they’ll often pick up the phone. These ladies work on 

my behalf in a very diligent and thorough manner. 

 

And we have a little rule in my office, and that is that when 

somebody phones, if we can’t answer their question when they 

phone, we promise to have an answer for them within 24 hours, 

48 at the most. And so I put them under a pretty serious 

obligation to represent me personally and our office as 

effectively and quickly as possible. I think the one snag in that 

rule, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that I sometimes don’t get to those 

return calls quite as quickly as I insist my staff do, but 

nevertheless we have made a tremendous effort to respond as 

quickly as possible to the constituents of Cypress Hills. 

 

And that leads me to comment. I heard the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview, I believe it was, earlier today standing in 

her place and saying that she travelled all through rural 

Saskatchewan and she heard hundreds of people say that the 

MLAs on the government side never return phone calls. Well 

she can’t say that in my constituency. She cannot say that 

truthfully and honestly about my constituents because my 

constituents hear from my office within 24 hours or 48 at the 

maximum. And so if that’s the standard I have set in my office, 

I’m almost certain that every one of my colleagues has a similar 

standard, because they believe in serving their constituents. 

 

This is a job of service. You don’t just assume public office for 

the sake of a paycheque. You assume public office because you 

want to serve the people of your community, of your 

constituency. And I found that assertion earlier today quite 

insulting, frankly, because I don’t believe it. I don’t believe it’s 

true. And I know it isn’t true in the constituency of Cypress 

Hills because of the quality staff I’ve got and their dedication to 

public service. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to acknowledge the support 

of my wife and family. My wife has, as I’ve commented 

previously, been my biggest supporter. And when I feel a little 

bit grumpy or down in the dumps, she’s there to encourage me. 

And if I get a little bit too full of myself — and that has 

happened on one or two occasions — she reminds me of my 

need for humility and that I’m here as a public servant. So you 

know, there aren’t many good men in positions of leadership 

that don’t have the backing of solid wives who keep them in 

line. And I know that that’s also true if you reverse the roles. 

 

But nevertheless, my wife has been exceptionally good in terms 

of sharing me with my public responsibilities. She might be at 

home tonight watching this — that is, if hers wasn’t one of the 

many hundreds of TVs shut off after the bluster and volume we 

heard from the member of Athabasca. But nevertheless, I’m 

thinking that she probably hung in there just because she knew I 

was going to make this speech tonight. 

 

I have a daughter who just left Saskatchewan this summer, late 

summer, to attend university in Ontario, and that was pretty 

hard. And I guess the explanation I would give is that she found 

the program that she wanted to pursue in a different province. It 

wasn’t that we didn’t have the right schools here or the right 

quality of education or the affordability or any of those things. 

She was looking for a very specific program. But I’m confident, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when she’s done her education in 

Ontario, she will come back to Saskatchewan. 

 

And I have a son and a daughter and two grandchildren living 

in Alberta who I would desperately love to see come back to the 

province of Saskatchewan. And we never, never fail to recruit 

when we’re visiting them in Red Deer, but we haven’t made 

that argument substantially or substantively enough yet that 

we’ve accomplished our goal. But I’m sure that at some point in 

the future they will recognize Saskatchewan as the land of 

opportunity and return here as well. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know we are constrained by time 

tonight, but I do want to just read again the opening page of the 

Speech from the Throne because I think it really does speak to 

the changed dynamics in this province, the changed mentality, 

the changed attitude that we have seen in Saskatchewan over 

the last few years. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if there’s anything 

that is important in the success of any jurisdiction, any 

province, any company, any organization, whether it be profit 

or non-profit, it’s about attitude. And the attitude is so 

apparently refreshed and invigorated in this province that the 

people of our province are saying, the sky is the limit. We 

aren’t going to be handcuffed by the old attitudes. We’re not 

going to be restricted by pettiness and the petty jealousies that 

have afflicted this province previously. We’re not going to be 

held back because people don’t think we can be what we aspire 

to be. 

 

[21:45] 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if there is one thing that I like about 

this Throne Speech is that while it may not be the most 

grandiose speech, it talks about moving the province forward in 

a significant and important way in a few selected areas. And as 

I have more time maybe tomorrow, I want to address those 

areas of importance for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But if I may just have the indulgence of the House, I’d like to 

pick this up on page 1 where it says: 

 

Two roads diverged in the wood and I, 

I took the one less travelled by, 

And that has made all the difference; 

 

And now the Throne Speech goes into a few of the indicators of 

that difference: 

 

Today, in the new Saskatchewan, we are on the road less 

travelled. 

 

It is a new road for our province — and it [really] has 

made all the difference. 

 

This new road is marked by strong and continued growth. 

 

Our population hit an all-time high of 1,045,622 people, 

[that’s] 16,498 more than last year — [that’s] the largest 

year-over-year increase since 1953. 



November 2, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5819 

A recent survey shows Saskatchewan business owners are 

some of the most optimistic in . . . [the nation]. 

 

According to the most recent Financial Post/CFIB 

rankings, Saskatchewan has three of Canada’s top ten 

entrepreneurial cities — Lloydminster, Saskatoon and 

Prince Albert. 

 

Prince Albert. I thought that was a city that was going to shut 

down when the mill closed. The entrepreneurial spirit of that 

city has carried it forward in a very dramatic and exciting way. 

 

Saskatchewan recently set a record for the most people 

working in our province. 

 

There are now 6,300 more people working in our province 

than one year ago. 

 

Chartered banks are predicting nation-leading growth for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And the benefits of that growth are being widely 

distributed. 

 

For the first time ever, wage rates in our province are 

rising above the national average, with a percentage 

increase that is third highest in Canada. 

 

However, this growth [Mr. Deputy Speaker] is not an end 

in itself. 

 

Growth simply marks the way to a better quality of life for 

all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish I had written those words, but 

they’re very, very symptomatic and emblematic of what is 

happening in this province today. And it’s happening because 

of the fortitude, the good decision making, and the leadership of 

the Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would be happy tomorrow to elaborate 

on these comments, but for the time being I would move that 

we adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cypress Hills has 

moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The House Leader has moved that 

this House stands adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This House now stands adjourned 

until 1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 21:48.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5795 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5795 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5797 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5802 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5804 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5808 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5814 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5816 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


