




















































Hansard: April 26, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 50A  MONDAY, APRIL 26, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4991 

 April 26, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Members, before I go to members, I‘d like to 

introduce a number of teachers who have joined us today. It‘s 

my honour today to introduce to you a group of teachers who 

are here in the legislature to attend the 12th annual 

Saskatchewan Teachers‘ Institute on Parliamentary Democracy. 

 

The institute began on Saturday and will conclude on 

Wednesday. This group has already met with a number of 

people including members of the judiciary, the Acting Chief 

Electoral Officer and the Clerk. Earlier today, they met with 

caucus staff from both sides of the House, the 

Sergeant-at-Arms, and House Leaders. They are scheduled to 

met with caucus Chairs, caucus Whips, several MLAs [Member 

of the Legislative Assembly], cabinet ministers including the 

Minister of Education, the Premier, and the Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

I would ask as I introduce these teachers that they might wave 

as I mention their names, and I will do my best to pronounce 

their names appropriately. Ms. Marsha Barteski, Wynyard 

Composite High School in Wynyard. Mr. Devin Bernatchez, 

Senator Myles Venne School in Air Ronge. Mr. Perry Fehr, 

Punnichy Community High School in Punnichy. Ms. Laura 

Finnestad, École Vickers School in Prince Albert. Ms. Raquel 

Fusick, student, University of Regina. Mrs. Patty Herriot, 

Spruce Home School in Prince Albert. Mrs. Mari Knudsen, 

Punnichy Community School in Punnichy. Mrs. Darlene 

Parenteau, King George Community School in Prince Albert. 

Mr. Boris Okrainetz, Ministry of Education, the southern 

region, Regina. Ms. Maria Sparvier, Cowessess Community 

school in Cowessess First Nation. Miss Carrie Sutherland, 

student, University of Regina. Mr. Dean Turchinetz, Springside 

School in Springside. Miss Megan Van De Woestyne, student at 

University of Regina. And Mr. Rory Woroniuk, student, 

University of Regina. 

 

And with the students we also have our steering committee 

composed of three teachers who‘ve attended past institutes and 

officials from the Ministry of Education. From the Ministry of 

Education we have Mr. Brent Toles and Anna Schmidt. We also 

have with us Delores Syrota from Elfros; Larry Mikulcik, 

William Derby School in Strasbourg; and Paul Weiman, Holy 

Family School, North Battleford. I ask all members to welcome 

these teachers to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As the 

Education critic for the official opposition and on behalf of all 

of my colleagues, I want to welcome teachers from across the 

province to the Legislative Assembly. I know that they are 

going to have some enjoyable days today after question period. 

In the past, teachers have been able to observe the interaction 

with media after question period, and no doubt they will do so 

again. 

 

I‘m pleased that there are members of the legislature that you 

are meeting with. I‘m particularly pleased that you are meeting 

with the Minister of Education. And as the Education critic, I 

don‘t know if we‘ll have estimates any time this week, but that 

would also be an interesting experience for teachers — to 

observe Education spending estimates. So with that, Mr. 

Speaker, welcome to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of government it‘s indeed a privilege to 

again welcome teachers from across the province to join in on 

this very, very important professional development. I know I‘ll 

have the opportunity to meet with the group tomorrow morning 

over breakfast, and that‘s usually a very tough hour. Sometimes 

some people like the eggs poached; others like them soft. 

 

So I look forward very much to continued discussions. I think 

the professional development seminar is a great one and gives 

people the opportunity to see how the House actually conducts 

itself and the opportunity to ask many, many questions. So 

again, welcome to everyone from across the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‘d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, 31 grade 12 students from F.W. Johnson Collegiate 

in my riding. And they‘re accompanied by two of their teachers, 

Lorraine BarronWright and Donarae Deringer. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these are some of the wonderful young 

people from my constituency. And I‘ll have the opportunity 

later after question period to have them ask me some questions. 

And, Mr. Speaker, hopefully they‘re not going to be as tough on 

me as I want to be on the government today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, to you and through you to the Assembly, I‘d like to 

introduce, seated in your gallery, a very, very close friend of 

mine, Mr. Wayne McCord. Wayne, if you‘ll just give a bit of a 

wave. 

 

Wayne is from Markham, Ontario, but we had the opportunity 

to go to school together. And Wayne keeps very close ties to 

Saskatchewan yet, as he keeps his house still in the town of 

McCord. So Wayne is back and forth very often. 

 

And I‘ve had the pleasure of doing a bit of world travel with 

Wayne over the last numbers of years. So I would ask all 

members to join me in welcoming Wayne to the Legislative 

Assembly here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 



4992 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, in the 

west gallery, I‘d like to introduce to the Assembly filmmaker 

Robin Schlaht and film and TV editor Heather Malek who are 

part of a group working hard to help the government see the 

error of its ways in the closure of SCN [Saskatchewan 

Communications Network]. 

 

Heather just had the opportunity to return from the Directors 

Guild of Canada AGM [annual general meeting] this weekend, 

where they passed a motion in support of SCN as the DGC 

[Directors Guild of Canada] which represents 3,800 key 

creative and logistical personnel in the film industry, also 

recognize the benefit that SCN has here in Saskatchewan and 

abroad. So with that I‘d like us to welcome Heather and Robin 

to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn, the 

Minister Responsible for Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 

join with the member opposite and welcome Ms. Malek and 

Mr. Schlaht to the Legislative Assembly. We‘ll have an 

opportunity later this afternoon to meet with them, and I look 

forward to that discussion. And I would ask all members to join 

with me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to other members of the Assembly, it gives me great 

pleasure to introduce the Assembly to, reintroduce the 

Assembly to Tina Friesen who‘s in the east gallery today. 

 

Tina is a member of the Self-Advocacy Action Group helping 

advocate for herself and for her peers. She gives of herself in a 

truly Saskatchewan way in that respect. She‘s a successful 

advocate. She‘s also very successful at work and highly prolific 

on Facebook, many friends and communicates with them often. 

She‘s a friend of mine and she‘s a friend of this province, and 

I‘d like to introduce her and welcome her here to the Assembly 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I 

would just like to acknowledge one of the teachers that is here 

from the community of Sucker River but teaches at the band 

school Senator Myles Venne . It is an honour to have First 

Nations from the reserve taking part in this process to learn the 

political, democratic process that we have. 

 

So I would just acknowledge Devin Bernatchez with the Lac La 

Ronge Indian Band and just wish him all the best. I hope he 

gets a good learning experience, and today you‘ll make good 

friendships, continue those friendships. And I just welcome you 

to your legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‘d like to introduce to 

you, through you and to all members of the Assembly, a young 

man who is seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. He‘s not as tall 

as the other guests in your gallery today, and he has very 

distinctively coloured, wonderful hair. His name is Nolan 

Anderson. He‘s a champion with the Pee Wee Tier 1 Sabres 

hockey team in Regina. 

 

He is an amazing athlete, no matter what he attempts. He‘s 

amazing at gymnastics — as I can witness from his antics on 

my trampoline in my backyard — and he‘s amazing on the 

soccer field, as witnessed when he played for the soccer team 

that my husband and I coached last year. And he‘s a very bright 

young man who attends French immersion school, and I‘m 

really pleased that he could be in the Assembly today. 

 

And with him, seated beside him is a young woman who‘s had 

a very proud accomplishment recently in that the team that she 

plays on for volleyball, the U13 Regina Volleyball Club Rush 

team won the silver medal at the provincial championships last 

week. And she is also attending the French immersion school 

with Nolan. 

 

And before any of the teachers wonder if these two children are 

playing hooky today, that isn‘t the case. They actually have a 

teacher professional day at their day of school, and these two 

young people have decided to witness the democratic process 

that takes place in the Saskatchewan legislature today and be 

visitors in the gallery. 

 

So I‘d like all members of the legislature to welcome them to 

the Legislative Assembly today in witnessing how democracy 

takes place. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are 

concerned over the conditions and the safety of our highways. 

This petition applies to Highway 310, which according to the 

petition has deteriorated to the point where it‘s now becoming a 

potential safety hazard for the residents who have to drive the 

highway each and every day. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer of 

the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway 310 that the people of Saskatchewan 

need. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the good folks from 

Ituna and Hubbard, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of the protection of wildlife habitat 

lands. And this speaks to a number of concerns that have been 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4993 

raised that The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, which protects 

3.4 million acres of uplands and wetlands or one-third of all 

wildlife habitat lands in Saskatchewan in their natural state, and 

that the government is looking at repealing the schedule of 

listings of these designated lands in amendments currently 

before the House. And the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately and 

without delay recognize the importance of the protection 

of wildlife habitat lands and immediately withdraw 

proposed amendments that will negatively affect the 

protection of wildlife habitat lands; 

 

And in so doing, cause the provincial government to 

commit to meaningful and adequate consultations with all 

stakeholders that will be affected by future legislative 

changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of concerned citizens in 

Asquith, Moose Jaw, and Weyburn. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition in support of 

maintaining educational assistants in our public schools. Mr. 

Speaker, the Ministry of Education published a document in 

November that would drastically reduce the number of 

educational assistants in the province and replace them with a 

much smaller number of speech and language therapists and 

psychologists. And the view is that these people will not 

provide front-line service to children and young people in 

classrooms. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Cause the government to provide funding for the required 

number of educational assistants to provide special needs 

students with the support they need and maintain a 

positive learning environment for all Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

And this petition is signed by citizens from Tisdale, Sedley, 

Grenfell, Regina, and Glenavon. I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition calling for the reinstatement of the domestic 

abuse outreach program. And, Mr. Speaker, we know that this 

program provided a number of valuable services to women 

victims of domestic violence and their children, including 

helping women to find emergency shelter and accompanying 

them to their homes, courts, the hospital, or police station as 

needed. It was in fact a model for other family violence support 

programs throughout the province. I‘d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to reinstate the domestic abuse outreach 

program as a provincial government service and make it 

available in all parts of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition in support of financial assistance for the town of Duck 

Lake water project. The petition is being circulated because of 

the undue hardship caused to the residents of Duck Lake 

because the Saskatchewan Party government has failed to 

provide adequate funding for their water system. The prayer 

reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good folks from 

Saskatoon, Prince Albert, One Arrow, and Duck Lake. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 

support of an exemption for Furdale from ministry‘s directives. 

Furdale residents, in dealing in good faith with SaskWater for 

over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their domestic 

systems and in-home treatment equipment. And the alternative 

water supply being referred to them by a government ministry 

is a private operator offering treated, non-pressurized water at 

great cost with no guarantee of quality, quantity, or availability 

of water. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives, to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002, and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Furdale and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 



4994 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‘m pleased today to 

rise to present a petition in support of maintaining quality health 

care services. The petitioners note that the Government of 

Saskatchewan‘s heavy-handed essential services legislation is 

making a mockery of the collective bargaining process in this 

province. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

That the honourable Legislative Assembly may be 

pleased to cause the government to commit to negotiating 

a fair and just collective bargaining agreement with health 

care workers in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of Meadow 

Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of the Saskatchewan film and 

television industry. This petition is signed by citizens concerned 

that this government has let this industry languish the last two 

and a half years and has taken a short-sighted view with this 

particular budget and the closure of SCN. I‘d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to make changes to 

the film employment tax credit that will allow the 

Saskatchewan film industry to be more competitive with 

other provinces, to reverse its decision to shut down the 

Saskatchewan Communications Network, and to work 

with the industry to reverse the decline in film production. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Morin: — With a point of privilege please. 

 

The Speaker: — The member can state the point of personal 

privilege. 

 

PERSONAL PRIVILEGE 

 

Ms. Morin: — I‘ve never had to do this before, Mr. Speaker, so 

I‘m not even sure what the protocol is. But unfortunately when 

I was doing my introduction of guests, I inadvertently forgot to 

mention who the young woman sitting in the gallery was. And I 

just wanted to make a point of the fact that it happens to be my 

daughter, Morgan Morin, who‘s with us today accompanying 

Mr. Nolan Anderson. So my apologies to the House and my 

apologies to my daughter for forgetting to name her name. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — It‘s duly noted. 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently 

business excellence was celebrated in Moose Jaw with 400 

business associates, friends, and families gathering together to 

toast the successful stories of business. 

 

This event commemorates business achievements within this 

proud community that I call home. The Moose Jaw Chamber of 

Commerce presented 11 awards in a variety of categories. A 

total of 25 different businesses were nominated for Business of 

the Year. This list included nominees from every category.  

 

After a wonderful evening of speeches and presentations, it was 

Bryan Van Tassel from Boh‘s Cycle and sports who had the 

honour of taking home this award. Mr. Van Tassel described 

the surprise as such: ―I‘ve been in business for 20 years and I‘m 

proud that the citizens of Moose Jaw have supported a little 

independent business.‖ 

 

The Business Excellence Awards also handed out its first-ever 

Business Leader of the Year award which was awarded to Darin 

Chow. While I don‘t have time to mention everyone, I would 

like to congratulate the Moose Jaw Real Estate Board, Heritage 

Inn, Bloodline Tattoo, Boh‘s Cycle and Sporting Goods, St. 

John Ambulance, Vibe Graphics, Cardinal Construction, W.J. 

Jones & Son, and Cypress Paving for the award-winning 

service. 

 

Moose Jaw has a thriving entrepreneurial spirit, and the city is a 

better place for these businesses. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Saskatchewan Children’s Hospital Gala 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the honour of 

attending the Saskatchewan Children‘s Hospital Gala last 

Saturday in Saskatoon. In light of the fact that the Sask Party 

government continues to cut funding to the children‘s hospital, 

the commitment and hard work of many different people and 

agencies to put on amazing fundraisers such as this is really 

impressive. 

 

Nadya Keenan, a 10-year-old from Saskatoon attending Pope 

Paul School in Eastview, was honoured at the event as the 

champion child, a symbol of strength and hope. Nadya was 

diagnosed with segmantal hemangioma when she was only two 

weeks old. She‘s already endured several medical challenges 

but has never let her diagnosis limit her. Nadya represents just 

one of the thousands of kids who could be helped by the 

construction of a children‘s hospital in Saskatchewan. Despite 

the fact that the Premier and the Health minister never miss a 

photo op or the chance to take credit for someone else‘s hard 

work, neither one was at this monumental event. 

 

In 2008 the Premier said, ―This project remains a top priority 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4995 

for the new Government of Saskatchewan.‖ Yet two years later, 

the only results the Children‘s Hospital Foundation has seen 

from this government is cut after hurtful cut. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was $2 billion in the provincial coffers when 

the Sask Party took over, enough to build several children‘s 

hospitals in the province. Yet just more than two years later, we 

now sit with $1 billion deficit, a drained rainy day fund, and all 

profits stripped from all but one of our Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‘s time for this Sask Party government to quit 

stalling, immediately invest in the children‘s hospital so 

construction can actually start. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‘Appelle Valley. 

 

Population Growth Benefits Saskatchewan Businesses 

 

Ms. Ross: — Mr. Speaker, once again there is positive news 

about our great province. According to the Conference Board of 

Canada, the help wanted index has climbed 5.7 percentage 

points in March, outshining February‘s strong 4.8 point 

increase, to reach 99.6. In Western Canada, Saskatchewan 

jumped by an increased incredible 32.6 percentage points. This 

makes Saskatchewan one of three provinces in the nation that 

has seen a spike in the help wanted index. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is by far the largest increase in the nation. 

Quebec is a distant second with a percentage growth at 10.7 

percentage points. This is another indicator of the boundless 

business optimism that is growing in our province. Businesses 

feel confident investing in a diversified economy that has our 

province in the forefront of many forecasters‘ growth 

predictions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is incredible that our province has an 

ever-increasing population, and there is still a growing number 

of employers looking to hire Saskatchewan residents. There are 

jobs in Saskatchewan, and this is truly a great place for people 

and businesses alike to settle and plant their roots. Thank you 

very, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

rise and join with my colleague and the Minister of Enterprise 

who had an opportunity to attend the Moose Jaw Business 

Excellence Awards hosted by the Moose Jaw & District 

Chamber of Commerce. In total there were 25 local businesses 

nominated for the 11 awards presented. 

 

The Moose Jaw Real Estate Board received the award for 

community involvement. The Customer Service Award went to 

the Heritage Inn. The Young Entrepreneur of the Year was 

Bloodline Tattoos Company, and St. John Ambulance was 

named this year‘s healthy workplace. New Business of the Year 

is Vibe Graphics, and Cardinal Construction received a rather 

emotional award for job creation. The Pioneer Award went to 

W.J. Jones & Son Funeral Home who recently celebrated their 

70th anniversary. The Award for Business Innovation went to 

Cypress Paving, and the Marketing Award and Business of the 

Year recipient was Boh‘s Cycle & Sporting Goods who was 

speechless when he accepted his award but recovered in time to 

sing a bit of an advertisement into the microphone. And the 

first-ever Business Leader of the Year Award went to Darin 

Chow of Chow McLeod Barristers and Solicitors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was an emotional evening as the award winners 

were recognized for their commitment, hard work, and 

determination. And I ask all members to join me in 

congratulating the 2010 Moose Jaw Business Excellence 

Awards winners. Here‘s to Moose Jaw‘s continued success. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Saskatchewan Archaeological Society 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend I had 

the pleasure of attending and bringing greetings to the annual 

general meeting of the Saskatchewan Archaeological Society at 

the Westview Community School in Prince Albert. 

 

The Saskatchewan Archaeological Society is one of the oldest 

volunteer organizations of its kind in Canada. Through its 

network of regional chapters and volunteers, the archaeological 

society continues to contribute to the province‘s archaeological 

inventory, which contains over 22,000 records representing an 

outstanding 1,200 years of human history. 

 

Shared stewardship of the province‘s cultural heritage and 

building understanding to heritage experiences are key themes 

in the archaeological society‘s newest cultural policy. This 

policy is titled ―Pride of Saskatchewan: a policy where culture, 

community and commerce meet.‖ 

 

By playing a vital role in these areas, the society contributes to 

Saskatchewan‘s enviable quality of life. Mr. Speaker, I would 

be remiss if I did not take time to acknowledge keynote speaker 

Leah Dorian for her fascinating and informative speech on 

Métis history in Saskatchewan. 

 

2010 has been designated the Year of the Métis and will be a 

celebration of Métis cultural and heritage, so I‘d like the 

Assembly to recognize this dedication to the preservation of our 

province‘s cultural heritage. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Premier’s Business Record 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, can a woman be just a little bit 

pregnant? Can a Sask Party MLA be only half asleep in the 

back row? Are the Roughriders just kind of Saskatchewan‘s 

team? Well of course not, Mr. Speaker. But last week the 

Premier‘s legal counsel in the Chamber tried to argue that the 

Premier‘s business sense is just sort of pathetic — not entirely 

pathetic, just mostly pathetic. 

 

He argued that the Premier didn‘t preside over two businesses 

that went bankrupt. Instead the Premier presided over two 



4996 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

businesses that simply failed. The Premier has acknowledged 

that the country music hall of fame that he set up in and 

managed went into receivership and that the Last Stand 

Adventure Company wound down its operations. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I have yet to see a successful company wind down 

operations. 

 

The Premier can play with words all he wants. Whether his two 

businesses went bankrupt, bust, belly-up, or broke is semantics. 

What‘s clear is that the Premier presided over their failure, and 

his track record of failure continues in his current job as he 

mismanages Saskatchewan‘s finances. He inherited Canada‘s 

strongest economy and provincial finances, but he spent 

recklessly. He made a historical budget blunder. He drained 

cash from the rainy day fund. He took over a billion dollars 

from the Crowns to hide his mistakes. Now he‘s running 

another massive deficit budget. 

 

While the Premier complains about semantics, it‘s abundantly 

clear that he and his government are bankrupt in many ways, 

and sadly it‘s Saskatchewan people who are paying the price. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Opposition Leader’s Business Record 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, as we can see from the NDP 

[New Democratic Party], they never let facts stand in the way of 

a good smear. Now they‘re using taxpayers‘ dollars to run ads 

that are flat out false. Mr. Speaker, it is now well established 

that, contrary to the NDP‘s taxpayer-funded attack ads, the 

Premier did not launch two companies that went bankrupt. 

 

However, I can think of only one member who did. He 

launched two companies that did lose millions: Channel Lake 

and SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company]. The leader of the NDP was heavily involved in both 

these disasters. But he wasn‘t using his own money, Mr. 

Speaker; he was losing millions of hard-earned tax dollars. First 

the NDP lost millions of taxpayers‘ dollars on unauthorized 

natural gas trading, and then they lost millions more on a rotten 

potato deal. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, that‘s the current NDP leader‘s record — two 

failed companies that lost millions of taxpayers‘ dollars on 

unwise investments. And he was mixed up in them both. No 

wonder the current leader of the NDP is so desperate to try and 

weave a tall tale about someone else‘s record. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McCall: — With leave to revert to introduction of guests, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to revert to 

introduction of guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‘s a 

pleasure to to introduce two individuals seated in the western 

gallery. They are Chris Laplante, executive assistant with the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, and Vice-chief 

Lyle Whitefish with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations. 

 

We‘ve, on the opposition side, had a good meeting with the 

vice-chief and certain of his staff this morning on issues of 

common concern, and it‘s good to see the vice-chief here. He‘s 

a, you know, long-time educator, a home builder, you know, 

champion of the Cree language. Ta wow, I should say. And of 

course this last go-round in the FSIN [Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations] was elected by acclamation 

which, you know, I don‘t think any of us in this Chamber have 

had that pleasure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Anyway it‘s good to see the vice-chief and Mr. Laplante here in 

their Legislative Assembly. Please join me in welcoming them 

today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With 

leave, to make an introduction, please. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave for 

introductions. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations and Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We also 

warmly welcome the vice-chief and all guests from FSIN to this 

Assembly. We certainly appreciate our working relationship 

with those folks and certainly intend to do more in the future. 

Thank you so much for coming. Welcome to your legislature. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Police Investigation and Member’s Conduct 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, by refusing to release details about 

the expenses of legislative secretaries, the Premier has broken 

his promise to strengthen accountability and transparency in 

government. To the Premier: why does he not think that 

Saskatchewan taxpayers have a right to know how their money 

is spent? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member is asking 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4997 

questions that are currently under investigation by the Regina 

Police Service. I‘ve answered this before. We are prepared to 

continue to work with the Regina Police Service. If the member 

opposite wishes to bring his questions to Board of Internal 

Economy . . . They met earlier today. He did not bring them up 

at that point in time. 

 

Our intention, Mr. Speaker, and I urge all members to, is to 

co-operate fully with the investigation as it unfolds, and the 

members on this side are certainly going to be doing that. I 

expect the members on that side of the House to do that as well. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I urge them to be patient, let the matter 

unroll as it should. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We on this 

side weren‘t aware that all legislative secretaries were under 

investigation by the police, but that‘s good to know. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on Thursday the government refused to ask the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner to investigate several 

concerns related to the legislative secretary for Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing. To the Premier: is he not concerned 

that a long delay could impede the ability of the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner to investigate the matter? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to once again 

indicate that the matter is before the Regina Police Service. We 

will continue to do that. The members opposite have asked a 

number of written questions. Mr. Speaker, the written questions 

that they‘ve asked are quite proper and appropriate, and I 

understand that the answers to the written questions will be 

provided later today. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, we urge the members to continue to 

respect the good work that‘s being done by the Regina Police 

Service, co-operate with them. They‘ll have a chance to look at 

the answers to the written questions that will be provided, and 

the matter will proceed, Mr. Speaker, as we expect that it 

should. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In my first 

question I asked for those very answers to be released in open 

and accountable transparency, and I was told it was before the 

police. Now I hear I‘m going to get those answers later today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last week the Premier‘s legislative secretary for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing deleted key information 

off his personal website, including all of his past speaking 

engagements. Such information is necessary in order to 

cross-reference those speaking engagements with the 

individual‘s use of taxpayers‘ resources. But unfortunately the 

Premier has refused to release any information about his 

legislative secretary‘s travel or expenses, and now the 

legislative secretary has started to delete the evidence. 

 

To the Premier: does he not think that Saskatchewan taxpayers 

have a right to know whether they paid the bill for any of these 

trips? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member for Saskatoon 

Northwest, the former legislative secretary, will conduct his 

affairs as an MLA, and the rules of the House will apply to him 

as they do to everyone else. If there‘s an inappropriate mistake, 

inappropriate matter, the members opposite have the 

opportunity to bring the matter to the Board of Internal 

Economy. And as I‘ve indicated before, Mr. Speaker, the matter 

is currently before the Regina Police Service. It is not the 

intention of the members on this side to take any further steps 

until that investigation is complete, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, with the failure of the Premier to 

agree to jointly move it to the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner, later this day we will in fact be sending a letter 

to the Conflict of Interest Commissioner referring this matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, no one is buying the Premier‘s 

argument that everything else must wait until the police 

investigation has concluded. The police are investigating 

whether or not there were any violations of the Criminal Code. 

The Conflict of Interest Commissioner would investigate 

whether there has been a violation of the trust placed in the 

member by the people of Saskatoon Northwest. But the 

Premier‘s delay tactics are allowing crucial evidence to be 

destroyed. 

 

To the Premier: does he have something to hide? Or will he 

finally exercise some judgment and leadership and refer this 

matter to the Conflict of Interest Commissioner today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in the NDP matter with 

Glenn Hagel, the matter was referred to the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner who on receipt of it indicated that he was not 

prepared to deal with it until the police investigation was 

completed — dealt with it after that. Our intention is to allow 

the same type of events to take place and, Mr. Speaker, we will 

wait. We will watch what happens with the police investigation. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we will deal with it in an appropriate and 

timely manner. I‘d like to urge all members to do exactly the 

same. 

 

I would, Mr. Speaker, like to reiterate at this time that we 

expect all members to co-operate fully with the Regina Police 

Service. If more information comes into their possession, 

however it may be, it should all be turned over to the police 

service. And we expect that members on both sides of the 

House can and will do that, and we expect that all members will 

co-operate fully. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 



4998 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

Supply of Physicians 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During the 2007 

election the Sask Party promised to fix the rural doctor shortage 

problem. Over the last two years under a Sask Party 

government, the number of physician vacancies in the province 

has increased. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: the government couldn‘t keep 

their promise when things were booming and they had money. 

How are they going to keep their promise now when they‘re 

broke and they are forcing health regions to once again run 

massive deficits to make up for this government‘s chronic 

financial mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan 

have a College of Medicine like most every other province has 

a college of medicine. Unfortunately, under the NDP, for 

decades our College of Medicine only had 60 medical seats, the 

second smallest in Canada, Mr. Speaker, under the NDP. 

 

We are facing a bit of a doctor shortage right now and it‘s 

partially because they never increased the number of training 

seats to train more of our own grads. We rely more heavily in 

Saskatchewan than any other province on international 

medically trained graduates, Mr. Speaker. They do a great 

service but we have kids in our, students in our province that we 

need to train up and become doctors. That‘s why we‘ve 

increased the College of Medicine‘s seats to 84. That‘s why 

we‘ve increased the residency positions to 108 — right now on 

our way to 100 medical seats and 120 residency seats, Mr. 

Speaker. But more importantly, in the last two and a half years 

of our government, we‘ve seen an increase of 164 more 

physicians practising in Saskatchewan than under that previous 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, adding seats to the College of 

Medicine isn‘t going to fix the problem right now. The recently 

announced doctor recruitment agency is not helping 

communities like Kamsack who cut emergency services last 

week because of a lack of physicians, or Moose Jaw who just 

lost three more doctors. It‘s not helping Yorkton or Lestock or 

Outlook who all are in need of physicians too. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how does the minister expect to recruit doctors 

when he hasn‘t been able to negotiate a contract with the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association or with the Professional 

Association of Internes and Residents of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I take it from the 

preamble to the question that she‘s not in favour of increasing 

the College of Medicine. She‘d rather have it go back to . . . 

[inaudible] . . . It‘s not going to help. It‘s not going to help, Mr. 

Speaker. It is extremely important that we train more of our 

Saskatchewan residents to practise here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. That‘s what we are doing. 

Mr. Speaker, we have set up a physician recruitment agency 

that will go a long ways to help attract physicians into the 

province and retain the medical students and residents that we 

have in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The solutions aren‘t just one solution at a time, Mr. Speaker. 

It‘s a group of ideas that are going to solve this problem, Mr. 

Speaker. We have those ideas. They‘re being moved forward. 

And I think the number of physicians working in Saskatchewan 

will continue to increase under a Sask Party government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — The South Hill Medical Clinic in Moose Jaw is 

down to two doctors, and they‘re turning away 50 to 60 patients 

a day. It‘s not uncommon for people to have to wait weeks to 

see a doctor or drive an hour or more to another community. I 

don‘t think they can wait five years for the new graduate. 

 

The people of Outlook have started a Facebook group called, 

and I quote: ―So we have a new hospital. Big deal. Where the 

hell are the doctors?‖ In an attempt to get the attention of the 

government, they put this Facebook up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about a private recruitment 

agency being used to find doctors. What‘s the name of this 

agency, and is this funded as a part of his announced physician 

recruitment strategy or is this a parallel running program at 

extra costs? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I‘d just like to remind the member 

from Saskatoon Eastview, the members are not to say what they 

can‘t say directly, even through a quote; to be careful in your 

comments or the words used. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, in the last two and a half 

years, we‘ve seen the doctor complement in our province 

increase by 164: 92 specialists, 72 general practitioners, Mr. 

Speaker. We‘re going to continue to see those numbers 

increase. I think it‘s extremely important. 

 

There are times where communities will lose physicians and 

gain physicians back, Mr. Speaker. There is always a bit of an 

ebb and flow, but what is most important is we‘re seeing 

positive numbers as we move forward, unlike under the former 

government, when they closed 52 hospitals and actually chased 

thousands of health care professionals out of this province, 

including doctors, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, rural doctors are calling doctor 

recruitment a crisis. They‘re in a crisis. In fact they‘re calling 

the situation the perfect storm. Dr. David Ledding from 

Rosetown says, and I quote: 

 

You [the minister] need to do more . . . This is our last 

kick at the cat, we‘re going to have practices failing out 

there [in rural Saskatchewan]. 

 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4999 

And of course we‘re starting to see that. We just saw Moose 

Jaw. We‘ve got Yorkton, Outlook, Lestock, everywhere. 

 

The minister‘s failed to negotiate with over 25,000 health care 

workers. He‘s failed to negotiate with the SMA [Saskatchewan 

Medical Association] in a timely fashion, and he‘s ripped up the 

contract with chiropractors. Mr. Speaker, how can the people 

trust this minister to bring doctors to their communities when he 

has failed at everything he has tried so far? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you know 

she mentioned a quote, so I have a quote as well from former 

. . . Dr. Lewis Draper, former NDP MLA, and here‘s what he 

had to say: 

 

It‘s sheer hypocrisy for Judy Junor to carp about health 

care. She and the present leader of the NDP were both 

part of the cabinet that spent 15 years shredding rural 

health care in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That‘s from a former member of the NDP, Mr. Speaker. That‘s 

what rural Saskatchewan is facing. We in the last two and a half 

years have moved a long ways to start repairing some of the 

shredding that that former government did in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Ministry of Environment Budget 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to the 

minister: why did the Sask Party government cut protection for 

the environment by 13 per cent in this budget, one of the 

biggest cuts in the budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, going into this budget 

cycle we were asked to look for efficiencies, and that‘s what we 

did within my ministry. And as far as the cuts within the 

Ministry of Environment, a large part of that is under the fire 

budget. There was a reduction of almost $20 million in capital 

that we no longer needed. We‘re at the end of phase 1 and phase 

2 of aerial fleet renewal, so there‘s $20 million that we don‘t 

need this year that we spent last year. And there‘s also a $10 

million reduction in the fire budget. It‘s all for operations that 

we thought would be manageable under an average fire season, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the majority of the cuts in the Ministry of Environment come 

from those two areas. It‘s manageable and it‘s a responsible 

way of budgeting, Mr. Speaker, while taking care of the 

environment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well there would be argument as to whether 

they‘re taking care of the environment, Mr. Speaker. The 

government says it wants Saskatchewan to go green, but it still 

won‘t make it‘s latest greenhouse gas reduction targets legally 

binding. And they cut funding to go green in this budget. 

 

When you look at last year‘s budget, they allocated $15 million 

for green initiatives. This year they appear to be spending 15 

million as well, but they‘ve earmarked 4 million of that for 

SARCAN. And the funding for the beverage container and 

recycling system has conveniently been cut by $4 million, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

To the minister: why should Saskatchewan people see this as 

anything other than a cut to the green initiatives budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I would imagine from the 

member‘s question that she thinks recycling is not a green 

initiative. I don‘t know where exactly she gets that from, but 

funding for recycling is indeed a green initiative, Mr. Speaker. 

It keeps waste out of our landfills; it reuses a product so we 

don‘t have to make them from new. I think it is absolutely a 

green initiative. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as for the funding to SARCAN, I find it also 

very interesting that the members opposite would ask that 

question. They collected environmental handling charges on 

beverage containers and put a lot of that money back into GRF 

[General Revenue Fund] and not ever put it back into recycling, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have changed the approach for SARCAN. They are the only 

beverage container recycler in the province. We have increased 

their budget by over $11 million from what the NDP did, Mr. 

Speaker. So they are adequately funded because they are 

growing, because people in this province do believe that 

recycling is a green initiative and want to be involved. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, anyone that looks at the budget 

will see that this is nothing but budget fudge-itry by this 

government in terms of hiding that money. Mr. Speaker, this 

kind of fiscal shell game is typical of this government. They 

shuffle money around to hide what they‘re really doing. They 

transfer money from the Crowns and the rainy day fund to 

disguise the fact that they‘re running a deficit. They offload 

expenses onto communities and taxpayers to cover their broken 

promises. And they move money around in an Environment 

budget to disguise the fact that they‘ve cut funding to go green 

by more than 26 per cent. 

 

To the minister: why is the government using more financial 

trickery to hide the consequences of their incompetence and 

mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 



5000 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, what the members 

opposite will see in this budget is a part of a reorganization of 

the Ministry of Environment in order to focus on areas of 

importance, Mr. Speaker. As an example, we have $1.2 million, 

an additional five FTEs [full-time equivalent] going to in the 

ministry on climate change because that‘s important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have spent over the last two years $2 million 

on a northwest sustainability development plan, something that 

the NDP never did. They were fine to go and lease land to oil 

sands development, but had no actual plan in place to make sure 

that all of that area was actually being developed sustainably, 

Mr. Speaker, so that we could protect our air and our water and 

the people who live there and use those resources, Mr. Speaker. 

So we are using our funds in the Ministry of Environment 

responsibly. We are putting money where it is needed to make 

sure that our environment is protected going forward, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Climate Change 

 

Ms. Morin: — If this minister is serious about protecting the 

environment, she wouldn‘t cut $291,000 to a program of a 

round table with the FSIN which was far more reaching than the 

minister even realizes, because she didn‘t have the decency to 

talk to them about what that program actually entails. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan now has the highest greenhouse gas 

emissions of any province in Canada. This government is 

preparing to conduct a fire sale of wildlife habitat protected 

lands. It‘s privatizing and gutting environmental protection. It‘s 

slashed the Environment budget by over 13 per cent, one of the 

biggest cuts of any ministry. And this government is led by a 

Premier who told audiences outside the province that we should 

―rag the puck‖ on reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 

 

To the minister: given this government‘s record of cuts and 

broken promises and its refusal to make legally binding 

commitments to protect the environment, why should anyone 

believe their latest promises on climate change? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, for all the member 

opposite‘s bravado and feigned outrage on this issue on climate 

change, we gave the opposition the opportunity on Thursday. 

Our House Leader introduced a motion in order to get our 

climate change Bill passed, Mr. Speaker, and what did they do? 

They said no. So who‘s ragging the puck on this issue? 

 

If they want a real plan in place in this province, Mr. Speaker, 

they would let our climate change Bill go through, because after 

16 years under the NDP, we do have the highest emissions per 

capita because the NDP didn‘t do anything, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are trying to do something. We are trying to put in 

legislation and regulations in order for large emitters to control 

their emissions, Mr. Speaker. The only people in this province 

who are stopping the reduction of emissions in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, are those 20 on the other side of the bench, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Prevention of West Nile Disease 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, this government‘s short-sighted budgetary decisions 

just keep piling up — decisions that may save $1 now but will 

cost taxpayers at least $3 down the line. 

 

The recent budget decision to axe the West Nile mosquito 

control program is an example of this short-sightedness. Mr. 

Speaker, why did the government make this decision to axe this 

program in the budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there was a program that 

has been operating in the province for a number of years, for a 

few years regarding West Nile and mosquito control. It was a 

program that was cost shared between municipalities and the 

provincial government. When we look at the numbers of West 

Nile cases in the province over the last number of years, it 

spiked two or three years ago at around 1,400. Then it dropped 

down to about 17 or 18. Last year there was only one case of 

West Nile in the province, Mr. Speaker. We feel that we can 

move away from the mosquito control program. 

 

But what we are continuing to do is do surveillance around the 

province so that, if there is an increase of the mosquito that 

carries West Nile virus, that we‘ll be able to put money towards 

controlling that outbreak in that area, Mr. Speaker. But as far as 

the whole program provincial-wide, if municipalities still want 

to have a mosquito control program, they certainly may. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, North Battleford received 

$17,000 a year and took a lot of preventative measures with that 

funding. They drained ditches and other standing pools of 

water. They funded a larvicide program to kill mosquitoes 

before they grew to maturity. The number of West Nile cases is 

down. The program is working. Now the government is cutting 

the program, completely missing the whole point of prevention. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is the minister cutting a program that works 

and forcing communities to foot the bill? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said that . . . You 

know, the member opposite mentions that the number of West 

Nile cases are down. They‘re down significantly —from 1,400 

a few years ago down to one last year, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, that‘s why we are deciding that the mosquito control 

program itself does not need to be funded by the provincial 

government. 

 

If communities, municipalities, or cities want to continue with a 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5001 

mosquito control program, they certainly may. But on the West 

Nile front, Mr. Speaker, our government is continuing to put 

money forward for surveillance, and in the event that we see a 

large increase in the mosquito that carries West Nile, Culex 

tarsalis, Mr. Speaker, we will be there to help control those 

outbreaks. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, communities are already 

warning that they won‘t be able to take some of the preventative 

measures that they have been over the past couple of years. And 

Regina officials say that as a result of the cut they will be short 

the staff and equipment to do complete coverage of the 

mosquito control program. Saskatoon says they won‘t have the 

money to spray sloughs outside the city where most of the 

mosquitoes come from. 

 

So to the minister: why is he going to wait until there is a rise of 

West Nile cases, and why should the health of Saskatchewan 

people be put at risk because of this government‘s fiscal 

mismanagement? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, the 

mosquito control program that has been in the province for a 

number of years, it does what it says. It controls all mosquitoes. 

There is only one type of mosquito that carries West Nile. We 

were putting in $1 million or so annually to cover a mosquito 

control program when we‘re really only trying to target one 

specific type of mosquito that carries West Nile. That‘s why 

we‘re continuing on with the surveillance, around $364,000. 

 

We‘ll continue on with surveillance, Mr. Speaker, and if we see 

an increase of that type of mosquito, the Culex tarsalis, Mr. 

Speaker, we will make sure that we are there with some control 

to isolate that particular area, Mr. Speaker. If cities and 

communities want to continue on with a broader program, such 

as a mosquito control program, they are certainly in the position 

if they so choose to do that on their own. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‘m not sure what number 

of incidents or cases will be acceptable to the minister but to sit 

on the money and sit back and just provide surveillance is 

totally unacceptable. This government, this government is 

putting people‘s lives at risk of getting West Nile by cutting this 

program funding. 

 

And after some sober second thought, the government 

reinstated a small portion of the money into the Dutch elm 

disease program. Mr. Speaker, healthy people are at least as 

important as healthy trees. Will the minister reverse his 

short-sighted decision and reinstate the money for the program 

before we have an outbreak of West Nile? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the mosquito control 

program that we were entered into with municipalities is only 

one form of protection, Mr. Speaker. The most effective way of 

protecting oneself against West Nile virus is having the proper 

clothing on, of course, Mr. Speaker, using mosquito repellent. 

Self-protection is by far the most important piece of the whole 

mosquito program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we‘ll continue to educate the general public and tell people 

to make sure that they wear proper clothing, bright clothing that 

repels mosquitoes, as well as using mosquito repellent because 

that is by far the most effective program to prevent West Nile 

disease. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 139 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 139, 

The Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining Government) 

Amendment Act, 2010 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 139, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 140 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2)/Loi 

corrective (rationalisation administrative) n
o 
2 de 2010 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 140, 

The Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining Government) 

Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2) be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 140, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2) be 

now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 



5002 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 141 — The Business Statutes Administration 

Transfer Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 141, 

The Business Statutes Administration Transfer Act now be 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments has moved first reading of Bill No. 141, The 

Business Statutes Administration Transfer Act. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 142 — The Business Statutes Administration 

Transfer Consequential Amendments Act, 2010/Loi de 2010 

portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 

Business Statutes Administration Transfer Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 142, 

The Business Statutes Administration Transfer Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2010 now be introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments has moved first reading of Bill No. 142, The 

Business Statutes Administration Transfer Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Ms. Draude: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 143 — The Tobacco Tax 

Amendment Act, 2010 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 143, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved first 

reading of Bill No. 143, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 

2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today on a point of order with 

regard to the government‘s closure motion on the debate 

regarding extended sitting hours of the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I‘d ask the member to state the point of order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Despite 

having been part of the rules of this Assembly since 1917, 

closure has only been invoked eight times. The last time it was 

invoked was in 2008 after eleven and a half hours of debate. At 

that time, the official opposition raised a point of privilege 

based on the fact that standing orders of the legislatures and 

parliaments are traditionally only implemented after opposition 

parties have been consulted and their consent obtained or, 

alternatively, after a lengthy parliamentary debate. 

 

At that time, the government had not consulted with the 

opposition and did not allow a lengthy parliamentary debate. In 

response to the point of privilege, the Speaker stated that ―The 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5003 

issues the Opposition House Leader has raised are properly 

questions of order and not privilege.‖ 

 

Today we are once again in a situation where the government is 

unilaterally moving forward with changes to the rules of this 

Assembly with absolutely no consultation with the opposition 

and after just 2 hours and 16 minutes, Mr. Speaker, just 2 hours 

and 16 minutes of debate, significantly less time than was 

devoted to the debate on the issue the last time they arbitrarily 

changed the rules. 

 

As instructed by the Speaker last time when the Speaker said 

that current concerns are properly questions of order and not 

privilege, I am raising a point of order on this issue today and 

asking the Speaker to rule whether or not the closure motion 

can proceed under the rules and customary procedures of the 

House. Since the closure motion was raised on Thursday, this is 

the opposition‘s first opportunity to raise this issue in the 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker must always ensure that the majority within the 

Assembly conducts its business in an orderly manner that is 

consistent with the rules and customary procedures of the 

House. And the Speaker must also ensure that the minority‘s 

fundamental right to be heard is vigorously protected. The 

Speaker can rule this closure motion out of order on the grounds 

that insufficient debate has occurred and that procedure is 

simply being sued to violate the rights of the minority . . . 

pardon me, used to violate the rights of the minority. 

 

Extending the hours of the Assembly is not a trivial matter. 

Requiring members to sit in this Assembly from 8 a.m. until 

midnight will directly affect our ability to effectively represent 

our constituents. Having question period first thing in the 

morning restricts the ability of delegations of concerned citizens 

to come to their Legislative Assembly to have their issues 

raised in question period. Sitting until midnight on Thursday 

restricts those members whose constituencies are far from 

Regina from being able to meet with their constituents on 

Fridays. The list of problems goes on and on. We need to 

debate this further in order to fully understand the implications 

of extending the sitting hours of this Assembly. 

 

But just after 2 hours and 16 minutes of debate, the government 

has moved closure and intends to impose their will on the 

minority without any consultation and with minimal debate. For 

that reason, we ask the Speaker to rule this closure motion out 

of order and to allow the debate on the government‘s motion 

regarding extended hours to continue. 

 

Again, this is keeping with the instructions of the Speaker on 

April 9th, 2008, when the Speaker said the concerns are 

properly questions of order, not privilege. Given the fact that 

the Speaker will likely want to take time to consider his ruling, 

we would ask that the closure motion be delayed until such time 

as the Speaker has determined whether it violates the rules and 

procedures of this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — In response to the point of order, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, most if not all of this legislation was on 

the order paper last fall. The opposition has had plenty of time 

to study it and to consult, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite said that closure in the past 

was done with the consent of the opposition — far from it, Mr. 

Speaker. I was here when that was done a number of times by 

the former NDP administration. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to read a quote on this very topic, Mr. Speaker, from 

the then House leader and now the Leader of the Official 

Opposition, and I quote: 

 

Mr. Speaker, in speaking to the point of order, I just want 

to make the comment very briefly that under the point [of 

order] that we are at in the agenda of the Assembly, we 

have seen the opposition members move adjournment 

motions. What we are doing here in terms of procedure 

might seem to be very similar: that is, moving a motion to 

extend the hours. 

 

I would make the argument, a much more legitimate 

argument if you‘re worried about getting the work of the 

people done, to extend the hours in order to accomplish 

the will of the government which is duly elected by the 

people of the province. That‘s a fundamental principle that 

should be allowed in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the closure motion and the time extension that will 

take place in debate allows the people of Saskatchewan and the 

opposition as much time as possible to talk about and raise the 

issues that they desire to raise before this House, Mr. Speaker, 

and still maintain the rules that were put in place under the 

previous administration. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I‘ve heard the point of order 

and the Government House Leader‘s response. If the members 

would just give me a moment, I‘d like to confer with the Clerks 

and just take a look at and think over the point of order that‘s 

been raised. 

 

I would ask the House leaders and the members of the 

Assembly to allow us to have a 10-minute break. We‘ll resume 

at 10 to 3, and that will allow me the opportunity of conferring 

directly with the Clerks where we don‘t have . . . where we‘ve 

got the ability to sit down and thoroughly look at the point of 

order that‘s been raised. 

 

So this House will recess for roughly 10 minutes. We‘ll resume 

at 10 to 3. 

 

[The Assembly recessed for a period of time.] 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Closure Motion 

 

The Speaker: — Call the House to order. And I thank the 

members for allowing me an opportunity to sit down with the 

Clerks to review the point of order raised by the Opposition 

House Leader. 

 

First of all, I would like to thank the Opposition House Leader 

for providing a copy of his point of order. The member is 

correct; it is a question of order. The question of order is, has 

the minister followed and complied with the terms of the rule? 



5004 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

In addressing the point of order, the rules do not require 

consultation. The member raises the point that there has not 

been sufficient debate. Our rules do not specify that there is a 

specific number of hours required for closure before closure can 

be moved. 

 

The Opposition House Leader states, and I quote: 

 

The Speaker can rule this closure motion out of order on 

the grounds that insufficient debate has occurred and that 

the procedure‘s simply being sued to violate the rights of 

the minority. 

 

On page 561 and 562 of Marleau and Montpetit, I quote: 

 

The Speaker has at times been asked to use discretionary 

authority to refuse to put a closure motion to the House on 

the ground that a measure had not been given enough 

debating time. Invariably, he or she has declined to 

interfere with the application of the rule, deciding in each 

case that the Chair has no authority to intervene in the 

process when the closure rule is applied properly. 

 

And quoting Speaker Fraser at the lower part of the page: 

 

. . . Speaker Fraser ruled that the timing of closure in a 

debate is not a procedural matter and that the Chair has no 

discretionary power to refuse the motion and is without 

authority to intervene when a Standing Order is used 

according to the House‘s rules and practices . . . 

 

I therefore find that the point of order is not well taken. Before 

closing, I would like to point out that in some jurisdictions there 

are rules which attaches to the Speaker a very clear discretion 

whether or not sufficient hours have been spent in a debate 

before closure can be moved. Saskatchewan, like the House of 

Commons, has no such rule. If the member believes that this 

should be part of the rule, I invite the member to raise it with 

the House Services Committee. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy House 

Leader. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Closure 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, before Orders of the Day 

is called for resuming debate on item 20, the proposed sessional 

order for the revision of sitting times, pursuant to Rule 66(1), I 

move: 

 

That debate on the motion regarding the revision of 

sessional sitting times and on any amendment or 

subamendments proposed thereto be not further adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government Deputy 

House Leader: 

 

That debate on the motion regarding the revision of 

sessional sitting times and on any amendment or 

subamendments proposed thereto be not further adjourned. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 15:11 until 15:21.] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. All those in favour of the motion, 

please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 32] 

 

Morgan Bjornerud Gantefoer 

Draude Boyd Eagles 

Cheveldayoff Duncan Huyghebaert 

Heppner Harpauer D‘Autremont 

Harrison Norris Reiter 

Hutchinson Brkich Elhard 

Hart Schriemer Stewart 

Allchurch Weekes Wilson 

Hickie Michelson Ottenbreit 

Ross Chisholm Bradshaw 

Kirsch McMillan  

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion, please rise. 

 

[Nays — 15] 

 

McCall Belanger Harper 

Trew Higgins Junor 

Atkinson Forbes Vermette 

Furber Morin Yates 

Taylor Quennell Chartier 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 32. Those 

opposed, 15. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Hours of Sitting 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‘m 

pleased today to pick up where I left off the other day. But, Mr. 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5005 

Speaker, I say pleased only in the sense that I am continued to 

be afforded the right to speak in this Assembly. I say that, Mr. 

Speaker, because I‘m outraged that this government would put, 

I‘m outraged, Mr. Speaker, that this government would put their 

power over the privilege and the principle of what this place is 

all about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are seeing here today that, after just 2 hours and 18 minutes 

of debate in this Assembly, a motion that essentially denies 

public participation in the legislative process. After 2 hours and 

18 minutes of debate, this government, Mr. Speaker, the Sask 

Party government elected just a little over two years ago, is 

removing the rights of members to speak about the issues that 

are important to us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They will argue, of course, that a motion to extend the hours 

gives us more opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to speak to the 

legislation. But by and large, Mr. Speaker, those who paid 

attention to my remarks a week ago Wednesday, Mr. Speaker, 

would see exactly how wrong they are, that this extension of 

hours, Mr. Speaker, actually denies the public the right and the 

ability to participate in the legislative process, Mr. Speaker, 

something that we all take very, very seriously. 

 

This whole process is, as I said, putting power before principle, 

Mr. Speaker. And it‘s an admission that the government is as 

adept at managing this House as they are at managing the 

finances of our local economy, our provincial economy, Mr. 

Speaker. This government, this government is as bankrupt in its 

policy planning processes as it is in managing the provincial 

resources, Mr. Speaker, fiscal resources. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am outraged that we are at this point in this 

Assembly. Mr. Speaker, we have been here for a very short 

period of time so far but, Mr. Speaker, already we are seeing 

this government in panic mode. They have decided that what 

they‘ve brought forward they can‘t achieve, and therefore they 

must do something about it, Mr. Speaker. This is all 

desperation; it‘s panic. It‘s showing the people of Saskatchewan 

that this government has not got the ability to plan its way 

through what needs to be planned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as politicians we often appear in parades in our 

community, Mr. Speaker. We are often the second, third, fourth, 

fifth car in 200 or 300 cars going down the streets of our 

communities, Mr. Speaker. This government is demonstrating 

that it can‘t manage a two-car parade, Mr. Speaker, let alone a 

large one that they themselves have been in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These are not difficult matters, to live within the rules. And as 

members will know from my remarks the other day, Mr. 

Speaker, rules apply to everyone. And rules are quite simple, 

Mr. Speaker. You decide what you need to get done. You sit 

down to talk about how best to achieve the goals that you want 

to set. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every single sporting event in the world has rules. 

Every single sporting event, those rules apply equally to 

everyone. And, Mr. Speaker, when they start the game, they 

understand what those rules are, and they know how to get to 

the end of the game, Mr. Speaker. In hockey there‘s overtime, 

Mr. Speaker, if you‘re tied at the end of three periods. 

Overtime, Mr. Speaker, is not an extension of hours; it‘s an 

extension of the time that‘s allocated, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And our rules, just like hockey, allow for overtime. If this 

government can‘t manage before the end of the day on May the 

20th, they can sit for five more days, Mr. Speaker, without any 

special rules of the Assembly because we‘ve reached 

agreements on that, Mr. Speaker. The referee can blow the 

whistle at any time, Mr. Speaker, but everyone knows what that 

whistle means, and they know what the consequences of that 

action are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government knew before this session began 

that it had till May the 20th to get its agenda through. And it 

planned so poorly, Mr. Speaker, that now just a few weeks in, 

they‘re in panic mode because, oh my goodness, we aren‘t 

going to get all of our work done. And they blame us in the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. They blame us for not allowing this 

stuff to move forward. Well, Mr. Speaker, where are we at in 

just the last little while? How many Bills are awaiting Royal 

Assent? 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the public‘s information, every day in this 

Chamber we get a little blue pamphlet. The pamphlet is called 

Routine Proceedings and Orders of the Day of the Legislative 

Assembly Province of Saskatchewan. Right now we‘re in the 

third session, the 26th legislature. And today is Monday, April 

the 26th, 2010. Mr. Speaker, on the back page of this 

multi-page document are the Bills awaiting Royal Assent, Mr. 

Speaker, Bills that have already been dealt with by this 

Assembly. They‘ve been through first, second, and third 

readings. They‘ve been through committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Those Bills include: Bill 133, The Tobacco Control Amendment 

Act; Bill 97, The Agri-Food Amendment Act; Bill 118, The Milk 

Control Repeal Act; Bill 108, The Cities Amendment Act; Bill 

109, The Municipalities Amendment Act; Bill 110, The 

Northern Municipalities Act; Bill 111, The Northern 

Municipalities Consequential Amendments Act; Bill 112, The 

Justices of the Peace Amendment Act; Bill 113, The Justices of 

the Peace Consequential Amendments Act. 

 

Bill 115, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act (No. 2); Bill 103, 

The Miscellaneous Statutes (Professional Discipline) 

Amendment Act; Bill 101, The Credit Union Amendment Act 

(No. 2); Bill 127, The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act; Bill 104, The Summary Offences Procedure 

Amendment Act (No. 2); Bill 114, The Small Claims Amendment 

Act; Bill 102, The Personal Property Security Amendment Act; 

Bill 124, The Legal Profession Amendment Act; Bill 128, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Labour Mobility) Amendment Act. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, every single one of those Bills has gone through 

the entire process of this Legislative Assembly. And there‘s still 

four weeks to go, Mr. Speaker, before this session is supposed 

to end. Today, Mr. Speaker, the government announced there‘s 

still five more Bill, four more Bills . . . five, I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that they‘re introducing today. Today. And they want 

us, because we‘re going to have this extended motion now, 

we‘re going to pass those before this session ends too. Not only, 

Mr. Speaker, are they failing to understand how quickly some 

legislation is going through this Chamber and blaming New 



5006 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

Democrats for holding it up. 

 

Well my goodness, Mr. Speaker, just read that list again, and 

I‘m sure that somebody this afternoon is going to do it, Mr. 

Speaker. We all know that the closure motion restricts members 

of this House to only 20 minutes of debate. So, Mr. Speaker, I 

can‘t fully outline the benefits of where we‘re at today but, Mr. 

Speaker, the members opposite will say that the NDP has been 

stalling and holding up legislation. This list, Mr. Speaker, says 

that those comments are not accurate to the circumstances of the 

day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now at the same time, we know that this government isn‘t just 

inept at the current time. Mr. Speaker, this government was 

inept a year ago as well, Mr. Speaker. This is not the first time 

they‘ve had to move extension of hours. This is not the first 

time they‘ve had to move closure on a motion to extend the 

hours, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Back on April the 7th, 2008 after only nine days of the 

legislature sitting, Mr. Speaker, they moved the motion to 

extend the hours. On April the 8th — the next day, April the 

8th, 2008 — they brought in a closure motion and we went 

through this whole process all over again. And, Mr. Speaker, on 

April the 9th the closure motion was taken, the speeches on 

closure, again expressing our outrage at the process, Mr. 

Speaker. But then what happened? In just a couple of days, Mr. 

Speaker, the government realized, oh my goodness we went 

into panic too soon, and they changed everything back to 

normal hours, Mr. Speaker. By April 21st we were back to 

normal hours and that session ended, Mr. Speaker, 

appropriately. 

 

We have an agreement in this place, Mr. Speaker, we have an 

agreement whereby we have a calendar. And the calendar says 

that there‘s a spring sitting and a fall sitting. And the fall sitting 

is where everything begins. The fall sitting is the Throne 

Speech and introduce your legislation. 

 

During the course of the winter, Mr. Speaker, the public 

reviews that legislation and that legislative agenda, and in the 

spring, Mr. Speaker, that legislation . . . the debate concludes in 

the Legislative Assembly. This government that‘s now into its 

third year has failed to understand this simple concept fully, 

fully. They‘ve failed to understand the simple concept that 

legislation introduced in the fall with a Throne Speech can be 

passed and concluded by the end of the spring session, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Here we are in the middle of the spring session, and they‘re still 

introducing brand new pieces of legislation and saying to the 

opposition, we‘re the majority. You‘re the minority; we will 

pass the legislation whether you want it to or not. And we‘re 

going to do it, Mr. Speaker, by extending the hours and not 

allowing the public to be a part of that process because we‘re 

sitting at 8 o‘clock in the morning and we‘re going till 

midnight, Mr. Speaker. And nobody will know until kind of 

midnight the night before what‘s going to happen the next day.  

 

Mr. Speaker, there are no notice provisions. If we‘re sitting in 

committee on a given day, how is the public supposed to know 

in Saskatoon and Meadow Lake and Weyburn whether they can 

come in to participate in a committee debate, Mr. Speaker? 

They can‘t. They can‘t because of the way in which this motion 

is drafted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So here we are. This government is so caught up in the power 

of being government and the power of being in the majority, 

Mr. Speaker, that they are running roughshod over the rights of 

the people of Saskatchewan because the people who speak for 

the people of Saskatchewan are represented by the minority in 

the Chamber. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this motion, have we heard a word from 

members of government about their legislative agenda? No, Mr. 

Speaker. On the legislative agenda itself, Mr. Speaker, have we 

heard much from members of the opposition? Absolutely not, 

Mr. Speaker. So those who are listening to the public and those 

who are communicating the words of the public, Mr. Speaker, 

sit on this side of the House. They are members of the 

opposition. They are New Democratic Party members, and they 

were elected by constituents in this province, Mr. Speaker, to 

pass on messages to government. 

 

And this is our forum in which we do that, Mr. Speaker. It‘s the 

forum in which we present information. We‘ve listened to the 

public. We‘ve evaluated the information. We have brought it 

forward to the government. We evaluate the government‘s 

response to that information, Mr. Speaker. We then consult 

further with the public, and we can conclude debate on various 

pieces of legislation. 

 

There are not a lot of Bills left on the order paper, Mr. Speaker, 

and that‘s why I don‘t fully understand this panic that the 

Government House Leader and the government Deputy House 

Leader, where this panic exactly comes from, Mr. Speaker. This 

may be back to 2008, where they are afraid of something as 

opposed to having planned through their efforts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There‘s a number of Bills that are still up for debate. There‘s 

lots of time left in this Assembly over the course of the next 

four weeks to debate those Bills, Mr. Speaker. But by golly if 

this government, understanding the rules, wanted to have their 

legislative package all passed by this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 

those rules were very simple. Bring forward the legislation in 

the fall, review it with the public over the winter, debate it and 

conclude it in the spring. And if you can‘t conclude it by the 

20th of May, which is the last calendar day, simply sit another 

week, Mr. Speaker, and take care of it. 

 

The other thing is, Mr. Speaker, this government seems to think 

closure is not important. Mr. Speaker, if we review the history 

of closure, the history of closure in parliamentary democracies, 

we will see that it is used very sparingly, Mr. Speaker. It 

doesn‘t become habit, and this government seems to think 

closure is a habit, Mr. Speaker. Twice in three years we are 

seeing closure brought forward. 

 

The bottom line though, Mr. Speaker, is that when closure has 

been used in the past in most parliamentary jurisdictions within 

the commonwealth, it‘s been used on specific pieces of 

legislation, not on an entire legislative agenda. Mr. Speaker, 

specific pieces of legislation. So if this government wants to 

pass Bill A, Bill B, Bill C, Mr. Speaker, they could, if it‘s their 

habit, put closure on those Bills and stand up to the people of 

Saskatchewan and say this Bill is important to us and we‘re 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5007 

going to ram it through. The public view doesn‘t matter, Mr. 

Speaker. We don‘t care about those things at all, the public 

view. We‘re going to pass this piece of legislation. 

 

No, that‘s not what this government did though, Mr. Speaker. It 

says we‘ve got a legislative agenda. The public doesn‘t even 

know what‘s all a part of that agenda, Mr. Speaker, because not 

everybody in the province get‘s this nice little blue sheet of 

paper every morning like we do, Mr. Speaker. We‘re going to 

just ask that you pass absolutely everything, whether the public 

comments on it or not. 

 

The bottom line is, Mr. Speaker, if they want to use closure, 

they should be willing to stand up and say what we want that 

closure to do, not just blindly allow them as government to 

bring forward an agenda that‘s not transparent, that‘s not 

accountable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the bottom line, Mr. Speaker, in all of this, and I see my time 

running down, the bottom line in all of this, Mr. Speaker, is that 

we have seen a government that can‘t manage a two-car parade, 

that‘s forcing the members of the opposition to abandon — 

although we will not abandon, Mr. Speaker — but they‘re 

forcing us to abandon this whole process of representing the 

public. 

 

The bottom line again, as I started to say, Mr. Speaker, it comes 

down to who best represents democracy and the people‘s 

interest in democracy, Mr. Speaker. Well I think we‘re seeing 

here very clearly that the people‘s interests are best represented 

when parliament works efficiently, Mr. Speaker, and you work 

efficiently under the rules. 

 

It‘s like that hockey game, Mr. Speaker. It‘s efficient because 

there‘s somebody blowing the whistle every once in a while — 

slows things down, sends you back to your benches. Think 

about this for a few minutes, come back on the ice, and play out 

the game. If at the end of the game, Mr. Speaker, you‘re not 

finished, carry on. Carry on, Mr. Speaker, keep it going and 

don‘t force the game. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, you can‘t put 20 men on the ice at one 

time because that‘s not part of the rules, Mr. Speaker, but that‘s 

what this government seems to be doing. It‘s trying to put more 

individuals on the ice, Mr. Speaker, to play this game, as 

opposed to waiting till the end of the time period to see what the 

score is. They don‘t care what the score‘s going to be, Mr. 

Speaker, anything to win. Power before principle. 

 

I talked briefly, Mr. Speaker, about this whole idea that it 

doesn‘t matter what the public says. If they want to do 

something, they‘re just going to go out and do it. Remember the 

last person who said that publicly, Mr. Speaker? The last person 

who said it was Brian Mulroney, prime minister of Canada, on 

the goods and services tax debate. It could have been on the free 

trade debate, Mr. Speaker, but I‘m pretty sure it was on the 

goods and services tax debate. Prime Minister Brian Mulroney 

said, I don‘t care what the people think. This is right. This is 

good public policy, and we‘re going to do it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what this government seems to be saying is, 

we don‘t care what the people think. We‘re going to do this 

because we can. We‘re the majority. We can do this and we‘re 

going to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Why does this not raise more eyebrows? Who was sitting in 

Ottawa at the time that Brian Mulroney was acting this way, 

Mr. Speaker? Well it‘s the Premier, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 

was working in Ottawa for the Conservative Party of Canada, 

Mr. Speaker. He was working in Ottawa, and he was learning 

his lessons from Brian Mulroney, the guy who said, I don‘t care 

what the people think. My agenda is my agenda. I think it‘s 

right. I‘m going ahead with it no matter what anybody says. 

 

And we all know that the Government House Leader, the 

Deputy House Leader, and the members of the Sask Party 

opposite are taking their direction from the Premier, the man 

who learned at the hands of Brian Mulroney and Grant Devine, 

Mr. Speaker. That could explain an awful lot about why the 

province‘s finances are being mismanaged and, Mr. Speaker, 

now the legislative agenda is being mismanaged. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I want to put forward an amendment 

to the motion that‘s in front of us. And, Mr. Speaker, I will read 

the amendment I‘m about to move. I will be moving: 

 

That all words in clause 1 and clause 3 and 4 be deleted 

and replaced with the following: 

 

(1) Notwithstanding rule 6(1), the ordinary times for the 

daily meetings and adjournment of the sittings of this 

Assembly on Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays shall 

be 10 a.m. to 10 p.m. with a recess from 12 to 1 p.m. and 

from 5 p.m. to 7 p.m. and on Thursdays from 10 a.m. to 1 

p.m.; 

 

Routine proceedings under rule 14(2) be at 1:30 p.m. on 

Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays and at 10 a.m. on 

Thursdays. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The motion before the Assembly is the 

amendment presented by the member from The Battlefords: 

 

That all words in clause 1 and clause 3 and 4 be deleted 

and replaced with the following: 

 

Notwithstanding rule 6(1), the ordinary times for the daily 

meetings and adjournment of the sittings of the Assembly 

on Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays shall be at 10 

a.m. to 10 p.m. with a recess from 12 p.m. to 1:30 p.m. 

and from 5 p.m. to 7 p.m. and on Thursdays from 10 a.m. 

to 1 p.m.; 

 

Routine proceedings under rule 14(2) be at 1:30 p.m. on 

Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays and at 10 a.m. on 

Thursdays. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, this is the second time in three years since the 



5008 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

Sask Party came to government that we have a motion that‘s 

been submitted by the Government House Leader to change the 

sitting times of the Assembly. So, Mr. Speaker, this is a 

government that this is their third session and it‘s the second 

time in three years that the government, the Sask Party 

government, has moved a motion to change the sitting times of 

the Assembly. So one would have to think that there is a great 

deal of work that they‘ve decided to enter into this Assembly 

and they just can‘t seem to get the work done. But let‘s review 

the record. 

 

This is a government that doesn‘t have a very significant 

legislative agenda. This is a government that doesn‘t have 90, 

100, 120, 130 Bills that they‘ve brought before the Assembly. 

This is a government that has 48 Bills. Well, Mr. Speaker, that 

is a fairly light legislative agenda. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Now of those 48 Bills, Mr. Speaker, on April the 26th, which is 

today, five of those Bills have come into this House today, and 

the ministers haven‘t even given their second reading speech, 

Mr. Speaker. So let‘s do a little math — 48 Bills We‘re now 

down by 5 to 43 Bills. Now of the 43 Bills that the members 

have had before this Assembly, two have received Royal 

Assent. They received Royal Assent in December and that was 

the 911 Bill and the let‘s not use your hand-held cellphone 

while you‘re driving Bill, Mr. Speaker, and those two pieces of 

legislation received Royal Assent and they‘re in place. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, 18 of those Bills are Bills that have gone 

through all of the stages of the Assembly. They‘ve received 

second reading, they‘ve been to committee, they‘ve come back 

into the House and those 18 Bills are waiting for the Lieutenant 

Governor to come and receive Royal Assent. So that gets us 

down, Mr. Speaker, to 23 Bills. And, Mr. Speaker, two of the 

Bills are in committee. So fundamentally, Mr. Speaker, there 

are 21 Bills that were waiting to go through what is the normal 

democratic process, where members who want to speak to those 

Bills have the ability in this Assembly to enter their remarks on 

to the public record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what are those Bills that members of the 

Assembly, particularly in opposition, might want to speak to? 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I know one of the Bills has to do with very 

significant changes to environmental assessment. Mr. Speaker, I 

haven‘t yet had the opportunity to speak to that Bill where the 

government wants to fundamentally alter dramatically how we 

do environmental assessments in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the other Bill, Mr. Speaker, which is getting a lot of 

attention from the Wildlife Federation, from Ducks Unlimited, 

from nature conservatory, The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

(Land Designation) Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, 2009, 

basically is a Bill that means open season on natural habitat in 

the province of Saskatchewan where, depending on who you 

are, you can buy land that has up until now been in legislation, 

protected by legislation. What these men and women want to 

do, opposite, is they want to move all of the land out of 

legislation and into regulation. And we know where that leads, 

Mr. Speaker. We know where that leads. That leads to a 

decision by government to sell off natural habitat, and that is 

hugely concerning, Mr. Speaker. 

The other point I want to make which I think is an important 

point, that of the 21 Bills that are awaiting second reading, Mr. 

Speaker, two, three of those Bills were just entered into this 

Assembly last week. So, you know, this is a government that 

has a very light legislative agenda but they seem to be a 

government in a hurry to ram through their view of the world. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, their view of the world. 

 

Now when you have a government that has a light legislative 

agenda, as I indicated to you, 48 Bills, 18 are waiting Royal 

Assent, two have already been assented to, so we‘re talking 

about 28 Bills, eight of which — eight — have just come into 

the House in less than a week. We‘re talking about 20 Bills of 

which members of the opposition have not yet had an 

opportunity to fully participate in determining in how we would 

like these Bills to proceed. 

 

Now this is a government, and it‘s becoming clearer and clearer 

each day that this is a government that believes that they have 

the divine right to rule the Assembly as they please, when they 

please, how they please, and, Mr. Speaker, they don‘t really 

take much heed from the opposition because they are ruling by 

divine right, because they believe that they have a mandate. 

And they‘re going to do what they want, when they want, how 

they want and to heck with the members of the opposition. 

 

Now one of the things I thought was a basic function of any 

government is to have legislation written, debated in the 

Assembly, and then passed. Now this seems to be a group of 

men and women that can‘t get the potash numbers right, they 

have difficulty there, so they can‘t really add and subtract. This 

is a government that can‘t seem to balance the books. I mean 

here we have the second time in three years, they‘re forcing 

closure. Two years out of three they‘ve got a deficit budget and 

what we‘ve determined, Mr. Speaker, is that they are so utterly 

and completely incompetent that they can‘t even get through 

what‘s kind of a basic function of government. 

 

They can‘t add up the numbers of hours that are needed for 

Bills and determine how much time they need in order to get 

the Bills through. And they certainly don‘t know how to finesse 

anything. They can‘t finesse 48 pieces of legislation through 

this Assembly, which speaks to their utter lack of competence. 

Now instead of following rules which they helped to negotiate 

and that this Assembly came to agreement on, the Sask Party is 

unilaterally ramming through these abrupt rule changes. 

 

Now as I said, we don‘t have a lot of pieces of legislation — 48 

is a very light legislative agenda. There are some Bills that we 

consider to be controversial. I think they want to increase the 

amount of money that SaskEnergy can borrow. I think it‘s fair 

to say the opposition has some worry about that given that 

they‘ve totally taken all of the money out of CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] with the exception 

of $195 million for a children‘s hospital which, Mr. Speaker, 

we‘re now being told will be a floor at the Royal University 

Hospital, and $40 million for clean coal. So we‘re a bit worried 

that that $400 million that they want to allow SaskEnergy to 

borrow will end up in the GRF because they can‘t seem to 

balance their budgets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So they have tried to spin it out in the foyer that the opposition 

is holding up all of these pieces of legislation. That‘s what 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5009 

they‘ve tried to spin. But, Mr. Speaker, I would say that, unlike 

the members opposite, we‘ve been trying to do our job of going 

through each piece of legislation, giving it due diligence, 

consulting with people who are affected. In fact my colleague, 

our deputy leader, has been around the province speaking to 

people in the Wildlife Federation, talking about the reality that 

these men and women want to take out over 3 million acres of 

natural habitat that is protected by legislation. They want to 

move that into regulation. 

 

And I think it‘s fair to say that the Wildlife Federation, ducks, 

nature conservatory have some concerns about that. And we 

want to debate that in the legislature because I guess we want to 

know, which pieces of legislation are you interested in selling, 

and to whom? Whom do you want to sell this land? That‘s a 

pretty good question. Why do they want to take 3 million acres 

of land that has been protected by a piece of legislation, that‘s 

natural habitat, why do they want to take it out of legislation 

and sell it? We want to know the answer to that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that that‘s not a bad question 

to have answered and it‘s not a bad idea to consult with the 

Wildlife Federation, in particular, that are holding meetings 

across the province, to see what they think because these 

members of the Wildlife Federation come from all over 

Saskatchewan. They come from all parts of Saskatchewan. 

 

The member from Moose Jaw has been to Asquith, which was 

the meeting of the northwest division of the Wildlife 

Federation. She‘s been to Arcola. She‘s been all over the place 

meeting with Wildlife Federation people who have a concern 

about that, because they don‘t know what the Sask Party‘s 

agenda is here because the Sask Party didn‘t consult them 

really. 

 

They had a technical briefing and said, we are going to change 

the legislation; we‘re going to take 3 million acres of land out 

of the legislation, put it into regulation, and we‘re going to sell 

as much land as we possibly can. To heck with the idea of a 

future heritage for future generations. To heck with wildlife. It 

doesn‘t matter. We‘re taking it out of legislation, putting it into 

regulation, and we‘re going to sell it off. Something like what 

they‘re doing with Crown land. 

 

Now they‘ll say, well the cattlemen want this done. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I think there‘s about 450 members of the Cattlemen‘s 

Association, but there‘s literally tens of thousands of people 

who belong to the Wildlife Federation. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I 

think the Wildlife Federation has more members than all of the 

political parties in this province put together. And I think you‘re 

about to hear from the members of the Wildlife Federation. 

 

And this is one piece of legislation that we think should be 

debated and debated hard in the Assembly because I‘m 

interested in knowing, what do these members really think? Do 

you think it‘s important that legislation to take 3 million acres 

of natural habitat out of legislation, put it into regulation, and 

sell it off? I don‘t think once . . . the people of Saskatchewan 

want this to happen even though you may have a few friends 

that do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Government House Leader, this is quite 

funny, he said in the media that the Sask Party doesn‘t want an 

extra week of question period. And I can understand why the 

Sask Party doesn‘t want an extra week of question period. And 

why would that be? Because 25 minutes each day the 

opposition gets to ask the members opposite questions, and we 

try and hold them to account. 

 

And I know that there has been quite few instances in this 

House, particularly in the last three weeks, where those 

members have had not exactly a blue-ribbon day, not exactly a 

blue-ribbon day. And in fact I think it was on Thursday, every 

one of their ministers including the Premier who got up to 

answer questions was red-faced. And, Mr. Speaker, they were 

so red-faced that they sort of blended in to the carpet in the 

Assembly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that they think that they are the 

masters of the province, that they‘re in charge, that they‘re the 

smartest and the best and the brightest, and they know what‘s 

best for all of us. But you know for 25 minutes a day the 

opposition gets to ask the ministers opposite, the government 

opposite, some questions. And you know hopefully these 

ministers will be able to answer them. But I can see why they‘re 

embarrassed by their track record because they haven‘t been 

exactly doing a stellar job of answering those questions. 

 

Now, you know, Mr. Speaker, I think it‘s fair to say that this 

extended hours motion proves, proves, that the Premier and the 

Sask Party can‘t manage the basic function of government. The 

basic function of government is to pass legislation through this 

legislature, and they can‘t seem to get Bills passed. Now this 

shouldn‘t come as any surprise because we know that the 

Premier doesn‘t exactly have a consistent track record when it 

comes to good management or success. 

 

Now I know that they‘ll say, oh but he is the Premier. And yes, 

he is the Premier. But this is a Premier that has been in charge 

of two deficits in three years at a time when the place was 

booming. And I notice The Globe and Mail article on the 

weekend that had an exposé on the province of Saskatchewan, 

and what was interesting is they did have a picture of the 

Premier, but they didn‘t refer to the Premier in the article. And 

you know who they referred to? They referred to a former 

Finance minister of the NDP, Eric Cline, who is a 

vice-president of Shore Gold. And you know, when you count 

columns, I think Mr. Cline was quite prevalent in this article. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And the article talked about good governance and good policy 

implemented — I use the word implemented — implemented 

by an NDP government that caused us to be in the position that 

we‘re at today where we have many of the goods and services 

that the world enjoys, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a Premier that doesn‘t have a good 

track record. We have a Premier that inherited $2.3 billion in 

cash — 1 billion at CIC, $1.3 billion in cash in the rainy day 

fund — and now we‘re faced with over $1 billion in deficit. 

They‘ve drained the rainy day fund. There is not much left over 

at CIC. And I note that that business person from Saskatoon, the 

member from Silver Springs was the minister of CIC when the 

rainy day . . . or when the CIC was being stripped of all of its 

money, Mr. Speaker. 



5010 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

 

And so I would say that we have a Premier who has a sorry 

record when it comes to how he runs the province. In three . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, she‘s calling it a personal attack. 

It‘s not a personal attack; it‘s reality. The Premier is the Premier 

of Saskatchewan, and in three years that Premier has taken, he‘s 

stripped the Crowns of all of its money. He‘s drained the rainy 

day fund. They had $2.3 billion, and he‘s racked up over $1 

billion in deficit. And those are the facts. That is not a personal 

attack. 

 

The facts are that this government can‘t seem to get its 

legislative agenda through here without amending the hours. 

They can‘t finesse anything. And yet they only have 48 Bills 

before this sitting of the legislature — 18 are waiting for Royal 

Assent, 2 have received Royal Assent, 2 are in committee. They 

just introduced eight Bills in less than a week and . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Oh, she‘s saying I‘m making it up. Well I‘m 

not making it up. Check the blues. Check the blues, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And you know, as far as I know, we still live in a democracy. I 

still understand that individual members of the opposition get to 

speak on Bills. And if they can‘t count and they can‘t add up 

the amount of time they need in order to get their legislative 

agenda through, if they can‘t finesse anything with the 

Government House Leader, if they are in such a bad way that 

they can‘t get their agenda through, Mr. Speaker, I say extend 

the House, extend the days. Extend the days, give us a few more 

days and we‘ll get the work done. 

 

But what they‘re really worried about, Mr. Speaker, is they‘re 

worried about question period because they‘re not doing well in 

question period. Because 25 minutes a day they have to answer 

questions. The press is here. Now I hear that they‘re thinking of 

having question period at 8 o‘clock in the morning. And I think 

what they think is that the press won‘t be here and they‘ll be 

able to slip under the radar screen and carry on with their 

business . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, and she says that‘s 

exactly what they want to do. 

 

The Minister of Social Services has just indicated that‘s exactly 

what they want to do. This coming from a woman who used to 

be the former deputy House leader. She says that‘s exactly what 

they want to do. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it‘s a pretty sorry day for democracy. It‘s a 

pretty sorry day for democracy when we have a government 

that hasn‘t even fulfilled one term, and for the second time in 

three year they‘ve had to amend the sitting hours because 

they‘re so incompetent and so inept that they cannot get their 

legislative agenda through, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time has expired. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

rise today to speak against the main motion here and speak in 

favour of the amendment. I think this is clearly an attack on 

democracy and it is indeed, as my colleague from Nutana says, 

it‘s a sad, sad, sorry day for democracy. And it‘s one that . . . 

It‘s unfortunate because we seem to see history repeating itself, 

and at what speed in this legislature. Usually these types of 

things don‘t happen very often. But we‘ve seen in this short 

period of time that this government‘s been in power, that the 

Sask Party‘s been in power, that they‘ve reverted yet again to 

this. 

 

In fact I was just looking back at my speech on April 9th, 2008 

when we were speaking about a very similar motion, a motion 

of closure. And I just want to read a quote from Merrilee 

Rasmussen, a person that many of us in the House will be 

familiar with. She‘s a former employee of the legislature, and 

she has some expertise in this area. And she wrote a piece 

entitled ―The Role of the Legislature.‖ 

 

And in her conclusion, she was reviewing the role of the 

legislature from 1982 to 1991. And this is a quote I want to use 

because I think it‘s very insightful. It really illuminates what is 

going on on the government side. Where are they coming from? 

This is so odd that in such a short period of time, just over two 

years, almost two years to the date, they have yet invoked 

closure. 

 

And this is what she says, and I quote: 

 

The erosion of the legislature continues, albeit perhaps 

. . . more slowly than at times in the past. The Devine 

Conservatives believed that they had a majority of the 

seats in the legislature so they could do whatever they 

wanted. 

 

And we‘re seeing history repeat itself again, two years ago and 

now. Here they believe they can do whatever they want. 

Whatever they want. We have a process in which I thought the 

legislature actually made some major gains over the last many 

years working together, the committees on how to restructure 

the legislative process so we could all be more reflective of the 

concerns that our constituents would like us to be. But this is a 

major step back. And it‘s really no wonder because when 

Merrilee Rasmussen is reflecting on what the Devine 

Conservatives did, because (a) as she said, they believed they 

could do whatever they wanted because they had the majority 

of votes. 

 

And that‘s just the way it is. That‘s the way it is. When you‘re 

in a tyranny, if you‘ve got the power, you use it and you do 

whatever you want to do with it. And clearly, there‘s many 

people associated with the Devine Conservatives over there. 

Many are associated with the Devine Conservatives. In fact, in 

fact we see a direct link, in fact, with the Premier with the 

Devine Conservatives. And there‘s no getting around that he 

was schooled by Devine on how to behave in this legislature, 

how to behave in this House. And it‘s not an accident that we‘re 

seeing this being repeated just two short years later. And for 

what reason? For what reason? Clearly this is an attack on 

democracy. 

 

We see a government that does not want to stand up to scrutiny 

in question period. It used to be that you‘d just extended the 

number of days. And you‘d have a few more question periods. 

And yes, it is a little difficult, a little more scrutiny for the 

government. But a government that can stand on its record has 

no problem. A government that can stand on its record has no 

problem with facing questions during question period. 

 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5011 

It‘s only a government that has some questions, some problems 

with their record. The record they‘ve established in this short 

period of time, when they‘ve gone through a $2.3 surplus down 

to a $1 billion deficit, clearly they don‘t want to have questions. 

Clearly they don‘t want to have questions. And we‘ve seen 

questions, many questions particularly around health care, that 

no wonder, no wonder they want to limit the number of days 

and speed through, speed through the House. 

 

And so they don‘t want to extend the House, and we‘re very 

concerned about that. They‘d rather start at 8 in the morning 

and go to midnight. And we know that there are major concerns 

about how we can function appropriately. We know in the days 

. . . And when I was first elected, there were days that we went 

into long hours. They weren‘t great. We weren‘t working at the 

best of our abilities. 

 

And so we saw reasons why we should change that, why we 

should have a better committee structure. And that happened. 

Both parties agreed to that, and it‘s working very well. And so 

why do they want to change the rules midstream again so 

quickly? So we have some real problems with this, and that‘s 

why I said I‘ll be voting for the amendment and against the 

main menu. 

 

Of course, as I‘ve been talking, this is an attack on democracy. 

There‘s some other points that I want to talk about, the 

transparency and accountability of this government who really 

believed that they had ran on that record, ran on that position 

during the election that they would be more transparent, more 

accountable. And we don‘t see that at all. And in fact actually, 

we‘re seeing the opposite of that. We‘re seeing a government 

that won‘t answer written questions, questions we know that are 

straightforward, but just have decided no, we won‘t answer. We 

won‘t answer the questions. 

 

And that‘s a real concern because clearly what are they hiding? 

What are they hiding, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they will not 

answer written questions? And we know that many, many, the 

vast majority of these questions are straightforward questions 

that they‘ve answered in the past, answered in the past, and for 

some reason they won‘t answer them again. So they have the 

information at hand. 

 

And of course I do want to spend a few minutes talking about 

just the simple mismanagement of this government because 

during the past two and a half years in power, we‘ve had some 

very major concerns about how well can they budget. How well 

can they budget. Some of the concerns, I know within Social 

Services we‘ve seen questions about the rising caseloads. 

People are living one paycheque away from being in poverty, 

and we see the poverty caseloads rising, first time in many, 

many years. And we‘ve seen that happen over the past 15 years. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what I really want to focus on . . . And I do 

want to take a moment and thank former speakers on this, the 

people who‘ve risen, the member from Nutana and the member 

from Battlefords, how eloquently they raised the concerns 

particularly around the Bills. We‘ve seen Bills progress through 

the House in a relatively straightforward fashion. We do want to 

be able to speak to each Bill that we see as important, and 

we‘ve been able to move Bills forward. We‘ve been able to 

move them forward, and they have been passed. And so we 

have some real, real concerns. 

 

So we don‘t know what the real motivation is here because 

clearly this is a government — and it reflects in how they 

conduct themselves in the House — who have a hard time 

managing themselves. But this is a real attack on democracy. 

And how can they say that when they have a House that‘s going 

to be sitting from 8 a.m. to midnight, that constituents, that the 

people of Saskatchewan and their concerns are going to be 

heard clearly in this House, that their points are going to be well 

made? People will not be able to do that. 

 

And when you have question period, for example, at 8 a.m. in 

the morning, how is the proper research going to be done? And 

the media. This will be a new wrinkle for the media. I know I 

do want to just point out that they did try or they are trying 

something similar to this in Ontario, where they‘ve moved 

question period to earlier in the morning. And we can see the 

experiences that we‘ve had even with our experience of doing 

this at 10 a.m. on Thursdays — that‘s a special day — but if we 

were to do that every day of the week, this is a concern. And 

doing it even earlier, how can we do proper, proper research? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are concerns that 

people have and do want to be reflected in the House. And we 

can think about the questions that we have. And I can think 

about, particularly, environment — we see six Bills that are 

coming forward that have some major problems. They really do 

reflect a change in philosophy for the Ministry of Environment. 

And, Mr. Speaker, just to say, well we‘re going to go to them 

whatever time they come up: no, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

There are concerns right across the province about these Bills, 

whether it‘s climate change and a government that has 

flip-flopped and gone all over the map in terms of climate 

change. And we see today that we have a minister who would 

prefer to go on the attack than to talk about what her plans are. I 

don‘t think she understands what her plan is because she 

doesn‘t really ever really want to talk about her plan. She‘d 

rather talk about everything else under the sun but her plan on 

climate change. We have some real, real concerns about that. 

 

[16:15] 

 

We have some concerns about the wildlife habitat Act, the 

amendment Act. We don‘t know what this all means. It seems 

open-ended. And it really is a deep concern when we see the 

power being removed from the legislature, the power being 

removed from the legislature and moved to the cabinet table 

and being put into regulations. And to us this really seems to be 

the tip of the iceberg. Because when you have a way of 

examining all Crown lands, all Crown lands, and of course the 

first part will be the wildlife habitat protected lands, where does 

it stop? Where does it stop? 

 

Does this then go on to the representative area network lands 

that we have so . . . We‘ve done so much work, so much work. 

And we‘ve taken a lot of time to develop a good listing, a good 

group of land, a good representation of Saskatchewan right 

across the province, of lands that need to be protected. And we 

need to do so much more work in this area. So much more 

work. 

 

I know the Wildlife Federation, Nature Conservancy of Canada, 



5012 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

Ducks Unlimited, Nature Saskatchewan are all deeply 

concerned about this. Deeply concerned, because there‘s more 

work to be done, and we seem to be moving in the . . . actually 

the opposite direction, the opposite direction and by stifling 

debate on this and not allowing people to be here, to be present 

because of the new hours. 

 

And how will the hours be advertised? How will people find out 

about the hours so they can be here? There‘s some real, real 

concerns, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So we have concerns about 

environment, and I could go on, go on at that. 

 

And of course we have labour Bills, and in particular we have 

Bill 80, the construction Bill. We see a ministry that is flaunting 

its nose at the International Labour Organization‘s rulings on 

some basic principles about how you should work in 

partnership between business, labour, and government. And 

they have been cited from the ILO [International Labour 

Organization] based out of Geneva, a very well-respected 

international organization, part of the UN [United Nations] — 

actually it was there before the UN; started in 1919, I believe — 

well respected across the world. And here we have the 

Saskatchewan government being cited for their infractions 

about how to proceed, how one ought to proceed, how a 

government should proceed with good legislative practice. 

 

And to top it off, today we‘re talking about closure. That‘s 

unbelievable, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When you put those two 

together, when you put the ILO rulings and closure together, 

this is shocking. This is absolutely shocking. So we see an 

environment of a huge paradigm shift about what do they see as 

their role. And we see a role that they describe as supporting the 

economy almost at any cost, and the premise that we believe in, 

clean land, air, and water, and a rich biodiversity in this 

province, being set aside by saying, we want to pass these Bills 

and we want no more question periods because, in fact, we are 

anything but transparent and accountable. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have some real concerns and I think 

this is indeed a very sad day for Saskatchewan people. And I‘m 

not sure everyone will know what‘s happening today. And 

while the government opposite can laugh, and we see them 

chuckling and thinking this is a bit of a humorous adventure 

that we‘re on today, in fact we‘re on anything at all. A 

government‘s record where twice now they‘re invoking closure, 

it‘s not a proud record, not a proud record for a government that 

has said that, in fact, they are very much for transparency and 

being accountable. This is something that I think that we have 

some real, real questions about. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, I don‘t know if I‘m going to get to 

everything that I wanted to talk about, especially the 

mismanagement. And I‘m sure others will pick up on that, but I 

do want to talk about, to go a little more in depth about the 

transparency and accountability aspect because clearly this is 

something that this Premier has staked his reputation on and we 

wonder over here how much longer can this trust, this faith by 

the people of Saskatchewan last with this Premier. Because 

clearly he is flaunting everyone‘s trust in this province that this 

legislature will proceed in a manner prescribed by the rules that 

have been laid out. And today we see this government 

dismissing them as if they are acting, and they are acting in 

many ways, like the tyranny of the majority. 

 

And we‘ve seen this government, we‘ve seen a real question 

mark about the transparency and accountability. We see how 

they deal with money within their departments, their ministries, 

how they‘ve shuffled it around. Last year in the fall when we 

were in estimates, supplementary estimates, we were not 

allowed to ask questions about how money was organized 

within departments. Because I know within Social Services 

there was some real questions. When we saw the poverty 

caseloads shoot through the roof, we saw the number of clients 

on transitional employment allowance go through the roof, 

where just months prior they said they were going to go down 

and, in fact, we saw them go up by some 40 per cent. We 

couldn‘t figure out where were they finding money to pay for 

this. Well we were not allowed to ask for that. 

 

And we hear, for example, in committee that the Watershed 

Authority is now required to borrow money, borrow money to 

do basic maintenance. Now that is something new. That is 

something new. How transparent is that? 

 

Usually when you‘re doing basic maintenance on infrastructure 

in this province, you‘re using general revenue funds. That‘s 

why you have those funds — to do your basic maintenance. No, 

we understand that in fact some agencies are in fact having to 

borrow money. 

 

And perhaps the most egregious, the one example I have from 

my riding is when the domestic abuse outreach program was cut 

last November and no one was told about this program being 

cut — no one at all. All of a sudden it was being cut. In fact I 

don‘t think the Ministry of Social Services even told the . . . I 

don‘t think the Ministry of Social Services told the Minister of 

Social Services and I don‘t even . . . and definitely did not tell 

the Ministry of Justice that another program was coming their 

way. 

 

It was only during question period, where the two ministers 

were kind of embarrassed by not knowing what was going on 

with the domestic abuse outreach program, it came to light. And 

now I understand that in fact they are scrambling, they‘re doing 

some consultations, and while the consultations look promising, 

there‘s still no money there for that kind of programming. 

They‘re going to have to shuffle money around. They‘re going 

to have to find it because clearly there‘s no money. 

So when you have a government that can‘t keep track of their 

finances and you have a Minister of Resources predicting some 

outrageous numbers for potash, outrageous numbers last year, 

and then you have the kind of work that we saw, you wonder 

how this can actually happen. But when you look opposite, you 

understand. 

 

And so I have to reflect yet again on the quote by Merrilee 

Rasmussen that talks about what was happening during the ‘80s 

with the Devine Conservatives where . . . I wonder what she 

would say today about the rate of the erosion of the legislature 

and its powers because when you see this kind of thing 

happening twice — twice do we see closure in just over two 

months — I find this a sorry, sorry day for democracy. 

 

And when she said, and I quote: 

 

The erosion of the legislature continues, albeit perhaps 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5013 

more slowly than at times in the past. The Devine 

Conservatives believed that they had a majority of the 

seats in the legislature so they could do whatever they 

wanted. 

 

And you see the direct line between the Devine Conservatives 

and this government here — a Premier that was schooled by 

Devine and many of the folks there involved with that 

government of the day. And it‘s no wonder that they‘re acting 

very much in the same way, very much in the same way, that 

they have a majority and they will act like it. And they have a 

tyranny of a majority and that‘s how they‘re going to act. They 

have an agenda. They have an agenda that we believe is very 

dangerous for some things in Saskatchewan. 

 

And whether it‘s biodiversity, the conservation of some very 

important lands in Saskatchewan, or Bill 80 where you have the 

workers of Saskatchewan, the construction workers being under 

attack — and we see that quoted by the International Labour 

Organization from Geneva — we have some grave, grave 

concerns. 

 

And so it‘s no wonder that we saw this day coming, no wonder 

that we saw this day. And it‘s a very, very sorry day indeed 

because clearly this government is acting in a manner, a tyranny 

of majority, and they don‘t really care what other people have to 

say. They don‘t really care at all, Mr. Speaker. And so this is a 

sad day indeed for . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Just recognize the member from Cannington, 

the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member may state his point of order. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

amendment put forward by the member from Battleford, I 

believe, is fatally flawed, Mr. Speaker. And I would like to 

point out in the motion that it says, and I‘ll . . . 

 

(1) Notwithstanding rule 6(1), the ordinary times for the 

daily meetings and adjournment of the sittings of the 

Assembly on Monday, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays shall 

be from 10 a.m. to 10 p.m. [this is the important part now, 

Mr. Speaker] with a recess from 12 p.m. to 1:30 p.m. and 

from 5 p.m. to 7 p.m. and on Thursdays from 10 a.m. to 1 

p.m. 

 

That‘s, if I may paraphrase now, with a recess on Thursdays 

from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. Further it says that routine proceedings 

on Thursdays shall commence at 10 a.m. So routine 

proceedings are called on Thursdays and immediately recessed. 

Mr. Speaker, it means we‘re not sitting at all on Thursday. I 

believe this amendment is out of order. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I‘ve listened to the 

member‘s point of order and it certainly . . . Okay. I recognize 

the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The hon. 

member opposite is, I think, reading an intent into the motion 

that is not intended, very clearly. It‘s intended that the hours 

shall be Monday, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, 10 a.m. to 10 p.m. 

with a recess from 12 noon to 1:30 p.m. and from 5 p.m. to 7 

p.m. Mr. Speaker, on Thursdays, the hours would be from 10 

a.m. to 1 p.m., Mr. Speaker, and with no recess. And routine 

proceedings, Mr. Speaker, on each of the . . . or on Monday, 

Tuesday, and Wednesdays would be 1:30 p.m. and 10 a.m. on 

Thursdays. 

 

The Speaker: — I‘ve listened to the member‘s point of order 

and the Opposition House Leader‘s comments. And given the 

fact that under Beauchesne‘s, on page 174, if a motion is 

unusually . . . if there‘s irregularity of a motion, a motion can be 

withdrawn or modified to be no longer objectionable. And on 

listening to the Opposition House Leader, it would certainly 

appear that the intent of the motion was to read that the session 

would sit at its normal times on Thursday from 10 a.m. to 1 

p.m. 

 

Unfortunately, the way it‘s worded, as the Government House 

Leader has pointed out, it can be read to mean that the 

Assembly will recess at that time period. 

 

Would the member from The Battlefords be prepared to have 

his motion modified in order that there‘d be the clarity? 

 

Also pointed out, pointed out that the Speaker actually, under 

566(4), also has the unquestionable authority to modify motions 

with respect to form. But I would be more than prepared to 

accept a recommendation from the member from The 

Battlefords that the modification be made. 

 

I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the Opposition House 

Leader has indicated our intent on the motion. I firmly believe 

that clarity is important. Whatever it takes to ensure clarity, I‘m 

willing to work to see that that happens. The key word there is, 

whatever it takes, whatever it takes to ensure clarity, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Therefore I would accept modification of the motion to ensure 

clarity that outlines the intent as expressed by the Opposition 

House Leader a few moments ago. 

 

[16:30] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Members, I‘ll read the motion so that 

there is, if there‘s any . . . We‘ll make sure that we‘ve got 

clarity on the motion so that it receives approval of all 

members. And the motion from the member from The 

Battlefords: 

 

That all words in clauses 1 and 2 and clauses 3 and 4 be 

deleted and replaced with the following: 

 

Notwithstanding rule 6(1), the ordinary times for the daily 

meetings and adjournment of the sittings of the Assembly 

on Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays shall be at 10 

a.m. to 10 p.m. with a recess from 12 p.m. to 1:30 p.m. 

and from 5 p.m. to 7 p.m. 

 



5014 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

And shall sit on Thursdays from . . . And on Thursdays, 

the Assembly shall sit from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. 

 

Routine proceedings under rule 14(2) be at 1:30 p.m. on 

Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays and at 10 a.m. on 

Thursdays. 

 

Is that wording in agreement with the members? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you. Debate shall continue. I recognize 

the member from Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

once again a great honour for me to rise and take part in a 

debate in this Assembly on behalf of the fine people of Regina 

Northeast. And, Mr. Speaker, we normally do that with a great 

deal of joy and excitement because it‘s an opportunity to 

convey the thoughts and the wishes of the good folks from my 

constituency and have the privilege of doing so. 

 

It‘s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that we once again find ourselves 

in this debate, a debate over . . . Really, it‘s a debate over 

democracy. Yes, what‘s at risk here is democracy. And this is 

what really the fundamental question is, is the rights for people 

to have the opportunity to be represented and through their 

representatives to have the ability to convey their thoughts, 

convey their opinions, convey their wishes, and to do so in an 

atmosphere of co-operation, of understanding, of willingness to 

accept. And that, Mr. Speaker, seems to be really the question at 

heart here, and we have a government that has decided that they 

want to limit that ability. They want to restrict the abilities to 

have freedom of expression in a manner that will best represent 

the people of the constituency. 

 

I think it‘s probably no accident, Mr. Speaker, that we find 

ourselves in this situation for the second time in two years, the 

second time under this government, the Sask Party government, 

that we find ourselves debating a motion put forward by the 

government to change the sitting times of this Assembly. 

 

It would strike me as strange, Mr. Speaker, that we find 

ourselves having to deal with this almost on a yearly basis, but 

certainly on a every-second-year basis, because the government 

finds itself incapable of presenting its legislation in a 

businesslike manner, to be able to have a reasonable debate, to 

allow democracy to take place, to have that debate that which 

. . . It‘s a fundamental principle of democracy is a right of 

debate and to have that debate take place in a timely fashion 

within this House, to be able to meet the needs of the 

opposition, the needs of the opposition to express their opinions 

and the opinions that are passed on to us by not only our 

constituents but by the stakeholders across this province who 

have at stake, a lot of times in the Bills, the particular issues that 

they wish to bring forward. 

 

And they do so, Mr. Speaker, because they haven‘t got the 

ability to manage the House and to manage the business of 

government in a professional, in a businesslike manner to 

ensure that there‘s a proper opportunity for the opposition to 

express its concerns on behalf of the people of this great 

province, while yet getting the business of the Government of 

Saskatchewan done. 

 

And we realize, Mr. Speaker, that there is a need to have this 

government business done. There is a need to have changes. 

Often changes or amendments to legislation, there‘s a need for 

it. And that need has been identified by the government, 

hopefully after a fair amount of consultation with the 

stakeholders involved that will be affected by the changes to the 

Act. 

 

And I‘m hoping in some cases that has been brought to the 

government‘s attention by those stakeholders, and stakeholder 

groups will come forward to meet with the government and 

outline what their concerns are and how they believe that 

legislation should be changed — in many cases modernized. 

Some of the legislation that we may have in place may not be 

reflecting the reality of today but be looking more at the time in 

which that legislation was put in. 

 

But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, we need to have the ability 

for the opposition to have time, time to consult with the 

stakeholders, consult with those various groups who find 

themselves on the front lines of the effect of changes to 

legislation or even new legislation being introduced, so that we 

can get feedback from them to identify perhaps something that 

the government has missed. 

 

I‘m hoping that the government, and I think any reasonable 

government would be open to the criticism, constructive 

criticism to make improvements to the Bills that will, at the end 

of the day, have a more positive or a positive effect or a better 

result for the people of this great province, and that be the 

opportunity for the opposition to do so through a debate. 

 

But we need that time also, Mr. Speaker, to do the 

consultations, to talk to the various stakeholders that are 

involved as to how they feel to changes to particular piece of 

legislation may affect them. That, Mr. Speaker, is something 

that this government is moving quickly to deny, and I mean 

quickly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think the records will verify we‘ve only had about two hours 

and 18 minutes of debate in committee and we need to have the 

opportunity to consult with the stakeholders to bring back that 

information, and certainly, certainly, Mr. Speaker, two hours 

and 18 minutes of debate isn‘t any indication the opposition is 

trying to hold up legislation. I would say that that‘s really not 

on at all, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government wants the House to start to sit at 8 

o‘clock in the a.m. in the morning and sit right through until 

midnight. Mr. Speaker, that denies the ability of the opposition 

members to be able to consult with stakeholders in their various 

critic areas and various critic responsibilities, particularly as it 

applies to legislation that the government is introducing, the 

government has tabled. And the opportunity for the opposition 

members to get that feedback — so critical, so critical to the 

fundamentals of democracy to have the ability to get that 

feedback, to have the ability to express to the government that 

they have missed something here or if these amendments go 

through in their present form perhaps would have a negative 

effect on groups out there or individuals out there, Mr. Speaker, 

and that opportunity for that consultation is now being denied. 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5015 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is really at risk here is the fundamental 

principle of democracy — the opportunity to debate and freely 

debate and freely express the opinions of those people that we 

represent. It‘s interesting, Mr. Speaker, and in some ways sad 

when we look at the history of our country, look at the history 

of the world. And we note throughout history there has been 

many wars, many battles, many wars fought over the principle 

of democracy, over the rights of individuals to have the ability 

to determine their own destiny, over the rights of individuals 

having the opportunity to, in a public forum, debate those 

issues, debate those rights, and to secure those rights for the 

majority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there have been wars, wars fought throughout 

history over maintaining the principles of democracy. 

Democracy has risen from the ashes of such battles, Mr. 

Speaker, and today we see that very principle, that very 

principle of democracy, under attack here in this legislature here 

in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look at the history of our province and we think back 

to those people, Mr. Speaker, who throughout history in this 

province have given their lives to defend the principles of 

democracy in two great wars as well as the war in Korea as well 

as other police actions or battles throughout the world and 

peacekeeping roles throughout the world, Canadian citizens and 

Saskatchewan citizens have given their lives to protect the 

rights of democracy. 

 

We look at the news, Mr. Speaker. We know it around the 

world today, we know it around the world today there are 

people who are prepared and have and do, on a regular basis, 

put their life on the line to protect democracy — in some cases, 

Mr. Speaker, in some countries in the world to develop that 

democracy. That‘s how important it is. And yet, Mr. Speaker, 

we have a government here who is prepared to run roughshod 

over democracy by being able to restrict the ability for the 

opposition to be able to function to its fullest, to be able to do 

the consultation that is required right across the role of 

government right across the piece, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And democracy is a very, very, very important, I guess you 

would say, way of government that is very fragile and if you 

don‘t work at maintaining democracy you can lose it. I think it 

was Winston Churchill who — and I don‘t know if I‘m 

perfectly correct here — but I think it was Mr. Churchill who 

said that democracy may not be the best form of representation 

of people, but it certainly beats whatever is in second place. 

 

And I think democracy is a system that is always under 

development, always under change, always under, hopefully, 

improvement, Mr. Speaker. And I think that is what the role of 

government and the role of opposition should be, is to look at 

improving democracy so it generates the best representation for 

the people of our great province here. And this, Mr. Speaker, is 

not a step forward by no means. In fact this is a step backwards. 

 

There is no opportunity for co-operation here. There‘s no 

opportunity for negotiations, Mr. Speaker. It‘s the 

heavy-handedness of government and yet you wonder why. 

You wonder why, Mr. Speaker, because when we look at 

what‘s really going on here, we‘re looking at, so far in this 

session, Mr. Speaker, the government has introduced 39 Bills in 

this session. That of course does not include the eight Bills it 

has introduced in the last week or week and a half or so. So, Mr. 

Speaker, in reality there‘s 47 Bills have been introduced. plus 

there‘s one Bill that‘s been outstanding from the last session, 

which was not included and that‘s Bill 80. That‘s been carried 

forward from the previous session. So we have 48 Bills 

altogether. The government has introduced 48 Bills. 

 

Two of these Bills have been passed and received royal assent. 

And that happened last fall, Mr. Speaker — Bill 116, the 

cellphone Bill and Bill 99, the 199 amendment Bill. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to say that on those two Bills, I think there‘s 

probably examples, and good examples of co-operation 

between opposition and between government bodies. And it 

was recognized that these were Bills that would benefit 

Saskatchewan people. At the end of the day, the majority of 

Saskatchewan people would receive a benefit from these Bills. 

 

And particularly in the cellphone Bill, which would improve the 

safety of the motoring public on our highways, Mr. Speaker, so 

that when the good folks, including myself, drive . . . I like to 

do a lot of my phoning when I‘m driving and I do that. And I 

must admit, I have one of the Bluetooth mechanisms that allow 

me to be able to do a hands-free calling, and I‘m still working at 

getting used to it. 

 

It‘s not exactly a 100 per cent, I haven‘t gotten it down to a 100 

per cent science, but I‘m working at it. But it does simply free 

up one‘s hands. It does allow one to have a greater control over 

one‘s vehicle, and which is very, very important. 

 

Because at the end of the day, we want to ensure that the 

operation of the Legislative Assembly is an operation that will 

benefit the majority of the people of this province and do so in a 

positive way. That, Mr. Speaker, is one of the Bills that does it 

in a positive way. It does bring safety, a greater level, a greater 

degree of safety to our motoring public. And I think that‘s very 

important, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it‘s one that I suppose all of us have to work at, ensuring 

that we have the talents, I guess you would say, to operate the 

new technology. But it is simple enough, Mr. Speaker, for me to 

operate it. And if I can operate it I think, Mr. Speaker, it‘s safe 

to say just about anybody else could because when it comes to 

technology, particularly when it comes to computers, I struggle 

often just to be able to turn it on, let alone be able to do 

anything more with it. But I freely admit that, Mr. Speaker, 

without any difficulties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 18 Bills have been passed and are now waiting 

Royal Assent. Two Bills are in committee: Bill No. 80 and Bill 

119, the ticket sales and scalping. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, here is a clear indication. If you look at the 

record here, Mr. Speaker, you can see that the opposition 

certainly has not been dragging its feet. The opposition 

certainly has not been holding back legislation. The opposition 

has been working in a very co-operative way with government, 

moving the House and moving the business of Saskatchewan, 

moving the business of Saskatchewan people forward. 



5016 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, if you look at where we are, where 

we‘re at at the present time in our cycle compared to any other 

sitting of this House, you‘ll find we‘re right in there. We‘re 

right in that band. We‘re right in, right there where certainly 

there‘s no indication at all that the opposition is dragging its 

feet and holding back legislation. 

 

And the rules, Mr. Speaker, of the legislature, as I understand 

them, are fairly clear. If the government feels a need, that they 

haven‘t been able to move on their legislative agenda fast 

enough, far enough by the end of the appointed time, the 

agreed-upon time of adjournment of this House, they can 

extend that for five days. There‘s five days leeway there, Mr. 

Speaker, that helps the government get its agenda through and 

helps the opposition to have enough time to be able to properly 

scrutinize the Bills that are being put forward by the 

government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think there‘s really no reason, there‘s really 

no reason for the heavy-handedness of government introducing 

this particular Bill because what it does, it restricts the ability of 

the opposition to do its job, to do its job in consultation with 

those folks out there who are affected by the changes to the 

legislation that the government is proposing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I say that because if you look at the number 

of Bills that have gone and where they‘re — gone through this 

House — but where they‘re stationed, where they‘re stationed 

in the process, it will indicate that we‘re no different than any 

other session, that we‘re moving along at a regular and an 

accepted pace, Mr. Speaker. And there is no reason for this 

heavy-handedness of government because the opposition 

certainly, certainly is not restricting the flow of the legislation. 

It‘s allowing legislation to work through in a businesslike 

manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is also eight new Bills that have been 

introduced within the last week or thereabouts, and they haven‘t 

even received second reading yet. So, Mr. Speaker, why would 

the government expect us to blindly pass these Bills and deny, 

deny democracy is what this is. They haven‘t even called them 

for second reading, and they want us to blindly pass the Bills. 

Mr. Speaker, that‘s not fair. That‘s not fair to the people of 

Saskatchewan. It‘s not us, it‘s the people of Saskatchewan who 

are being denied the principles of democracy. 

 

And all we‘re asking for is to have the time, a reasonable 

amount of time to do the consultation work, to talk to those 

individuals who are affected, to talk to those groups who may 

have the input, that wishes to have time to present their side of 

the story and indicate the effect of . . . how they may be 

affected, I should say, by the amendments and the legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. So there‘s really no reason for this other than, Mr. 

Speaker, the government isn‘t able to manage the affairs of the 

legislature. 

 

They have clearly indicated they can‘t manage the affairs of the 

people of Saskatchewan. They‘ve taken a province, Mr. 

Speaker, that they inherited that had a $2.3 billion surplus, and 

within three years they‘ve blown the surplus. The surplus is 

gone. It‘s gone, Mr. Speaker, and they have . . . racking up a 

debt of over $1 billion. A brand new debt, Mr. Speaker, and it‘s 

not an investment debt, it‘s a spending debt. And there is a huge 

difference there, Mr. Speaker. And it‘s only $1 billion. It‘s only 

$1 billion. Why? It‘s only $1 billion because they stripped all 

the profits from the Crown corporations except SaskPower. 

They stripped all the profits from the Crown corporations in a 

dividend to lessen the debt, to lessen the deficit, but still left a 

deficit of $1 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One has to be concerned. One has to be concerned, not only as 

an elected member of this legislature, but as the public of 

Saskatchewan are growing more and more concerned about this 

government‘s track record on mismanagement of the affairs of 

this province, which is mirrored by the mismanagement of the 

business of this House, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it‘s one of 

the same. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it‘s without a doubt in my mind, Mr. 

Speaker, that this government is incapable of making long-term 

decisions. We‘ve seen that happen last time, Mr. Speaker, that 

this government introduced the amendment to change the sitting 

hours of the House. We‘ve seen that introduced, and then all of 

a sudden they backed off because they were scared that the 

opposition may have co-operated with them because of the new 

rules regulations, to the degree where they no longer have 

enough business just to keep the House running this full term. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would daresay that this government is simply 

indicating through its record that it hasn‘t got the capability of 

managing the province of Saskatchewan and the affairs of the 

good people of this province. Why? Simple. They inherited a 

province of 2.3 billion and within three years have left the 

province with a debt of $1 billion. That‘s $3 billion, not 

millions, not millions but billions of dollars. And let me tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, there‘s a huge difference between millions 

and billions of dollars. When we had a Conservative 

government in the past in this province that put Saskatchewan 

in the hole on a regular basis over a 9-year period — or 11-year 

period, I believe it was — that they did so by hundreds of 

millions of dollars a year, by hundreds of millions of dollars a 

year. 

 

This government is trumping that. This government is putting 

Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan people in debt by billions of 

dollars a year. And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that hole is 

much, much deeper and a much, much steeper climb to come 

back from for the future generations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is just an indication that this government 

hasn‘t got the capacity to govern this province. It hasn‘t even 

got the capacity to be able to manage the affairs of the 

Legislative Assembly in a way that is orderly, in a way that is 

effective, and in a way it is of best interests of Saskatchewan 

people. That, Mr. Speaker, this government has proven over and 

over again, that they simply haven‘t . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member‘s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Regina Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here we are debating a 

closure motion. When I came here earlier today for question 

period, my seatmate says, well are we going to do some work 

on behalf of our constituents, on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan, or are we going to be stuck debating a Sask 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5017 

Party closure motion? Well we know what we‘re stuck debating 

— a Sask Party closure motion. 

 

And what a shame it is. We‘re going to blow a whole day when 

we could have been dealing with Bills. Bills that deserve 

scrutiny, deserve our scrutiny, deserve our diligence and our 

attention. Bills that have been getting the diligence and 

attention of opposition members. The proof is in the pudding. 

The hon. member for The Battlefords read a list of Bills that 

have been passed, are sitting waiting for Royal Assent as I 

speak. And here I am speaking on what? The other Bills that are 

waiting to be dealt with? No. I‘m dealing on a silly closure 

motion brought forth. 

 

It‘s the second time in two years that this Sask Party has gotten 

scared of their own legislature. They‘re frightened that they 

can‘t manage a two-car parade, never mind a three-house paper 

route. Mr. Speaker, we‘ve got a Sask Party that doesn‘t even 

understand the new rules, the rules that they helped negotiate, 

the rules that gave us a fixed calendar. 

 

And I‘ll just want to say this about that. What happens . . . I‘ve 

been around, as you know, Mr. Speaker, quite a number of 

years. In my 24 years here so far, I have seen changes in 

government. I started in opposition, then I was part of the NDP 

government, now I‘m part of the New Democrat opposition 

again. And that‘s the normal ebb and flow. But what I have 

seen is it doesn‘t matter who‘s in opposition, they take their job 

seriously and they scrutinize the legislation and they scrutinize 

the budget. And they‘re looking for ways to either recommend 

improvements or to point out where the government just doesn‘t 

get it, where they just aren‘t acting on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. Either way, that‘s the job of the opposition, and 

oppositions do their job diligently, typically. 

 

And then at some point — maybe it‘s an aha moment; maybe 

it‘s that all of the hours of endless hours of research is caught 

up and we‘ve had time, oppositions have had time to consult 

with people that legislation involves, that the budget involves 

— and it‘s just almost like a dam bursting and the legislation 

flows through and without fail gets passed. Without fail. Mr. 

Speaker, we could be dealing with the budget, we could be 

dealing with legislation, we could be dealing with anything 

other than the hours of legislation. 

But let me say this about the hours, the hours that we‘re 

supposed to sit. You know, we get elected. All of us, everyone 

in this room that‘s sitting as an MLA is elected. And one of the 

things we get to do is to pick the hours that we should work. 

And for the most part, Mr. Speaker, we pick hours that kind of 

make some sense — that allow the research to take place, that 

allow for us to consider legislation, that allow for us to consider 

Bills, that allow for us to consider budget. But every once in a 

while, we just seem to go on tilt. We just seem to go on tilt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, can you tell me any other occupation in the 

universe, any other occupation in the universe that would say, 

oh I want to be sitting, I want to be looking into the camera, I 

want to be under public scrutiny, have to be here from 8 

a.m. . . . That‘s not a bad start time, incidentally; 8 a.m. is fine. 

Most of us start work before . . . But we have to be here 

attached to this Chamber at 8 a.m. until midnight — 8 a.m. until 

midnight. 

 

And you know I‘ve seen right wing parties call for free votes in 

the legislature and free votes in the House of Commons. 

They‘re great when they‘re in opposition for calling for that. 

But I want to call bogus because there is no way that every Sask 

Party member is that nuts that they want to sit from 8 a.m. until 

midnight for a month now. There is nobody that‘s that crazy — 

Just it‘s not on; it just isn‘t. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the ability to get the business done. We 

have the ability to be talking about the budget and about Bills. 

We have that ability. We should be using that ability. I just 

want to point out for government‘s edification too, when we‘re 

in here all those hours, from 8 a.m. until midnight, it‘s the 

government‘s responsibility to maintain quorum, which is 15 

members at all times, Mr. Speaker. There‘s an obligation for 

government to maintain quorum. And I know that because it 

was part of my responsibility for a long time, 16 years in 

government, and for the most part we succeeded, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we‘re into a situation where . . . We changed the rules 

about four years ago and in fact changed the sitting times. We 

extended the sitting times, Monday through Thursday, and 

almost made up for the old five-day schedule. And why did we 

condense it to the four days, Mr. Speaker? It was so that 

out-of-Regina MLAs could have a Friday, a day in their 

constituencies to meet with constituents, to talk about issues, to 

talk about concerns, maybe hear their suggestions, hear of their 

problems, and then come back to Regina to this very building, 

this legislature and deal with them, try and make our province 

work a little bit better. That‘s what the members of the 

government now and us put together some four years ago. 

 

And here we are now saying . . . Being forced to deal with 8 

a.m. to midnight, five days a week, I mean it‘s just crazy to 

think that any MLA is going to have more than the fleeting 

passing moment to speak with any of their constituents, never 

mind our families. Never mind the things that have to happen 

day in and day out. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a democracy, the majority ultimately has its 

way. But in a democracy, the minority has its say first. And that 

is an important principle in any democracy: the minority has its 

say, then the majority gets its way. And this is not a case where 

that‘s happening in any way at all. We‘re sitting here in a 

heavy-handed Sask Party government forcing closure, forcing 

hours of work that no sane person would want to work under. 

How is this somehow beneficial for good governance? How 

does this help the government or the opposition deal with 

legislation in any meaningful way, Mr. Speaker? How can we 

possibly provide the diligence that our constituents hired us for 

when they elected us in November of 2007? How can anybody 

possibly function that many hours a day, wrapping their heads 

around budget and legislation and constituents and family? It 

just doesn‘t work. It can‘t possibly work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[17:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, some people would have us believe that with 

extended hours that somehow it gives us more opportunity to 

speak. And you know that‘s just not the case either. I‘m 

reminded of a little bit earlier today when I had . . . I was 

actually standing in on a school group for the hon. member for 

Regina Dewdney when he was here dealing with this issue at 



5018 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

the very front end of it. And I got talking with a couple of the 

teachers that came. And I said, you know, it‘s kind of like if 

you extended the hours of your school. You know, you 

normally sit from roughly 9:00 a.m. to 3:30, you know, five 

days a week.  

 

But if you, in an emergency, you said, well no, you‘ve got to be 

here at 8:00 a.m. and we‘re going to teach you right through till 

midnight. You know, Mr. Speaker, it‘ll work one day. It might 

even work two days in a case of a nuclear war or something, 

you know, some huge crisis. You might be able to push it for 

two days. You might, if you‘re just exceptionally strong and 

have this determined constitution, you might even make it for 

three days. But after that, I guarantee you those students aren‘t 

learning anything. They‘re exhausted. I guarantee you that the 

teachers, all but the tiniest handful of them, would just, couldn‘t 

keep up with the lesson planning, Mr. Speaker, never mind 

stand up and deliver these lessons for those kinds of hours. 

 

It is nuts for us to think for a minute that this is going to result 

in better speeches, more freedom of speech, better legislation, a 

better budget. Well I can tell you how you can get a better 

budget. That‘s easy. Just call an election. Get out of the way, let 

New Democrats run it because we wouldn‘t be $1.9 billion out 

in potash alone. We left a $2.4 billion surplus on the books. 

That‘s turned now. There‘ve been two successive nearly $1 

billion deficits in two years. Mr. Speaker, at a time of plenty, 

the finances have been mismanaged, have been arguably 

bungled, have been terribly mismanaged. 

 

And where does this leave us? It leaves us with a government 

that says, oh no, we won‘t extend the sitting five days. We‘ll 

extend it these hours instead and create this crisis of democracy. 

We‘ll extend the hours until you‘re so exhausted you can‘t 

fight. Well my constituents deserve better than that, sir. My 

constituents deserve my diligence for every piece of legislation 

and every budget item. I can‘t do it from 8 a.m. to midnight. I 

cannot do it. I cannot do it. It‘s just not possible. I cannot do it. I 

cannot do it. 

 

To those constituents who elected me for — I‘ll point out this 

with pride — for the seventh straight time in November of 

2007, I say thank you ever so much. I am so humbled, Mr. 

Speaker, to be standing here in this legislature on their behalf. 

But I apologize to them. I apologize to every one of those 

constituents that I am unable to do the job. I cannot, I cannot do 

what the Sask Party is demanding that I do for the next month. I 

might be able to do it for a day or two. I might be able to do it 

for a day or two. I cannot physically keep that pace from 8 a.m. 

to midnight thinking about Bills and budget and all of the other 

meetings, the committee meetings that we have in this 

Assembly. Mr. Speaker, I cannot do it. 

 

And I feel bad about that because though I know I‘m not the 

best MLA in the universe. I know that. I know that, but I‘m far 

from the worst MLA. And I do try and be diligent on behalf of 

my constituents. I do try and do the job. I don‘t always succeed, 

but this Sask Party government is forcing me to failure, forcing 

me to failure. And it‘s a failure on behalf of my constituents, 

every one of them in Regina Coronation Park. And I defy a 

single MLA to stand up and say that they can do a whole lot 

better, that for a month they‘re going to go from 8 a.m. to 

midnight and they‘re going to be diligent and they‘re going to 

be right on top of their game all those hours. 

 

It‘s nonsense. It cannot happen. It will not happen. Shame on 

the government. Shame on the Sask Party for thinking it can 

happen. Shame on you for thinking it can happen. It is 

absolutely not right for any democracy for that to happen. Good 

legislation, good legislation and good budgets will pass. They 

all deserve scrutiny. 

 

And in fact, you know, some of our best legislation that we 

passed, we wanted scrutiny. We wanted people to understand it. 

I remember the Bill we passed last year that I had the pleasure 

of introducing and taking it through, and that was the Gallenger 

amendment to The Highway Traffic Act. And I wanted for 

people to understand what it was we were doing. That 

legislation deserved scrutiny. In many ways it still does deserve 

scrutiny, if for no other reason than the memory of Jim 

Gallenger, the highway employee that gave his life trying to 

keep our highways safe. 

 

Good legislation will pass. It deserves scrutiny and it should get 

it. Then it should pass. Good budgets deserve scrutiny and an 

opportunity for government members to brag about it, for 

opposition members to say, well done. And that does happen on 

occasion. For the most part, we‘re busy finding things that 

should be done better. But it does happen. 

 

But bad legislation and bad budgets don‘t deserve to be rushed 

through in the dark of the night, passed at 11:55 or 11:59 p.m. 

when everyone is simply too tired and too exhausted to carry 

on. Bad Bills and bad legislation, Mr. Speaker, are wrong, 

wrong, wrong. And I am predicting that the Sask Party will get 

that message by the next general election. Bad legislation and 

bad budgets pushed through by closure, pushed through by 

extended hours that are extended far beyond anything even 

reasonable. Far beyond anything that‘s reasonable. 

 

And then just watch, Mr. Speaker. Government members are 

going to stand up and they‘re going to vote all as one. They‘re 

going to go . . . [inaudible] . . . all as one, saying yes. Yes sir, 

yes sir, three bags full. They‘re going to say, I can do it. I can 

sit from 8 a.m. until midnight. I can do it. I can give my 

constituents what they voted for me . 

 

I ask members of the Sask Party government to just think if that 

is really . . . If you can look yourself in the mirror . . . You don‘t 

have to look at me. You don‘t have to answer to me. Ultimately 

you‘ll have to answer to your constituents. But if you can look 

at the mirror and look at yourself and say, I can do it, then by all 

means you should stand up and you should vote for that 

government closure motion, Mr. Speaker. But if you can‘t — if 

the answer is no, I can‘t do it from 8 a.m. till midnight for a 

month solid — then, Mr. Speaker, the answer has to be, quite 

clearly, democracy has to prevail. 

 

This legislature is about democracy. My seatmate talked about 

wars and people having gone to war, and people are still going 

to war. And governments everywhere are telling us it‘s for 

freedom of speech. It‘s for freedom and democracy is what 

they‘re saying, Mr. Speaker. Well how does that work when we 

come here, a place that should be the seat of democracy, and the 

government is telling us something absolutely different than 

that? Absolutely different. How can that possibly work? How 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5019 

can this be a good thing? 

 

Here we are, day 50 of this legislature. Day 50. What did we 

see? Three new, four new Bills passed this morning — or not 

passed, introduced — I‘m sorry, introduced. First reading, 

introduced this morning. We had some introduced last week. 

Bills that haven‘t even been called by the Sask Party 

government for second reading. And we‘re being asked to deal 

with closure. You see the absurdity of it. You see how wrong 

that is. When there‘s a half a dozen Bills that the government 

has the right to introduce. 

 

Government should introduce legislation. I would argue that 

many of them could have been introduced before day 50 of the 

legislature, you know, when we‘re in the final month according 

to our schedule. But governments have the right to introduce it. 

Governments also have the right to wait and introduce it in the 

fall. Some of the legislation can be done then. Governments 

have a right and an obligation to manage the legislature, to 

manage the needs of the people of Saskatchewan, to manage the 

budget. Governments have an obligation to provide for the fair 

and equitable democratic operation of this province. 

 

On every front, the Sask Party government is failing, Mr. 

Speaker, failing. They‘re wrong on every single count here. 

Wrong. We have passed . . . The member for The Battlefords 

read the list, the legislation we have already passed. It‘s just 

waiting for Royal Assent. And the list is fairly lengthy, and it‘s 

been growing every day when we‘ve been dealing with 

government business. Not dealing with this nonsense about 

motion of closure, this motion that‘s going to extend the hours 

from 8 a.m. to midnight. I mean it is beyond absurd. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to end where I was 10 minutes ago in my 

speech, and that was I want to again apologize to my 

constituents. I want to thank them for electing me November of 

2007. I thank them and I‘m eternally grateful for all of their 

support. But I want to apologize because I can‘t do what the 

Sask Party government is demanding that I do by sitting from 8 

a.m. to midnight all these days for the month. I‘ll do my very 

best, that‘s my commitment to my constituents. I will do my 

very best, but I already know, sir, it will not be the best that 

they deserve. And they deserve more and that‘s a shame. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member‘s time has 

expired. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‘m quite 

happy to enter into this debate because basically it is a debate 

about democracy. And I have been here for 12 years, and I have 

to say I‘ve heard many of my colleagues say the same thing — 

I‘ve never actually seen this kind of behaviour in the House in 

all of that 12 years. The total disregard for not only the 

long-standing processes of the legislature that have been agreed 

to by both parties . . . And I was on the rules committee when 

that agreement came through. 

 

And the understanding we had at the time was to make things 

better for people who are working here so they can do their jobs 

and still give a great service to the people of Saskatchewan in 

their constituencies. So lots of the things that we saw happen 

were because we wanted to make it better here. This is just 

absolutely undermining and totally throwing out and 

disregarding all the good work that‘s been done for those years 

when we came to that point of agreement. 

 

The rules mean something to this legislature and they mean 

something to us as legislators. And I don‘t get that feeling any 

more. I get the feeling that the rules mean nothing to the Sask 

Party government. If they don‘t like them, they don‘t listen to 

them, and if they can, they will change them. And by changing 

them they . . . I mean just ramming them through. This is such a 

bullying tactic that it‘s hard to believe that that is still 

something that‘s prevalent in this day and age, that people could 

actually get away with this without some sort of outcry. And 

I‘m happy to say that 20 of us will be able to speak to that and 

represent the outcry of the public who do not like to see their 

rights trampled. 

 

And I think the message that I would take if I was a member of 

the public is that if this Premier can treat this House like this, if 

this Premier can treat the members of the Legislative Assembly, 

and particularly the opposition who have a job to do for due 

diligence on all the actions of the government, if the Premier 

can trample those people‘s rights — all of our rights and the 

rights and the procedures of this Legislative Assembly — they 

should worry about what he will do to their rights. 

 

And I think that that‘s going to become clearer and clearer to 

people, that there is no commitment to rules of order, to rules of 

the Assembly, to respect for people‘s rights, to respect for this 

Assembly. It is so disrespectful it‘s almost . . . It is shocking. I 

heard that word used already. It is shocking. It almost takes 

your breath away to think that this could actually happen in a 

legislature in Saskatchewan. I thought . . . I mean we lead in the 

country in many places. I‘ve been to many conferences where 

people look to Saskatchewan to provide leadership. This will 

not be one of our shining moments. It will certainly not be a 

shining moment for Saskatchewan. 

 

[17:15] 

 

And when this gets reported, and it always does, people around 

the country watch and they see what happens in the parliaments 

of the country, and they will not be judging us very favourably. 

This will not be . . . This will be a black mark against 

Saskatchewan. And the Saskatchewan Party government will 

have to wear this across the country. 

 

When people look at how this was done and why this was done, 

the absurdity of it is only part of it. The actual disrespect for the 

House and for the members of the House and the work of the 

members of the House is far worse. It is far worse to have that 

statement on record that no one cares about that anymore, but if 

you don‘t like the rules, you just change them. 

 

That is not the work of this Assembly. The work of this 

Assembly is to look at legislation that best fits the vision of 

Saskatchewan, that works for the people of Saskatchewan. How 

coming to work at 8 in the morning where delegations won‘t be 

able to get here, how changing all the hours in such a punitive, 

ham-handed, hard-headed way, in any way, shape, or form 

serves the people of Saskatchewan is beyond me. And I do 

believe it‘s going to be beyond their comprehension as well. 

 

And I think they‘re going to send a message to the Sask Party, 

and it won‘t be very positive. And I don‘t know if it‘ll even take 



5020 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

18 months for it to happen, but I do know in 18 months people 

will be well aware of this, well aware of how this government 

acts, well aware of how this government treats people and their 

rights, and this is only part of that. I mean it‘s a demonstration 

to people that are watching or that will hear about this, about 

how this government respects the democratic process. 

 

And the member from Cannington talks about uncooperative. 

Well I understand that the Sask Party wanted us to sign a 

agreement to pass all Bills, including ones we hadn‘t seen — 

including ones we hadn‘t even seen. That is not how you do due 

diligence. We‘ve had Bills presented in this session where 

we‘ve seen what consultation the Sask Party has done or 

proposed, purported to have done. The wild ponies, First 

Nations were not consulted. They were not consulted. 

 

And this big thing about, we had to have it done. Well you have 

to do things right as well. There is a certain respect for the 

legislature when you don‘t do that. I mean when you disrespect 

the legislative process, it really weakens all of democracy. And 

I don‘t think these people get it. The Sask Party do not get that. 

They do not get what they‘re doing to democracy. 

 

And I think that‘s a very sad commentary on all 38 people that 

sit there, that they have no idea of what‘s happening to 

democracy under their, under their watch. And this business 

about bullying and ramming it through and coercing and 

threatening and all the things that they‘re doing behind the 

scenes, do you think people don‘t know? People talk. And when 

we go out and talk to people, they come up to us and say, what 

about this? What about this? And I‘m pretty sure that they‘re 

not going to be fooled very long, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is 

the second time in two years that the Sask Party has tried to do 

this. It is a clear signal that they cannot manage the affairs of 

government. In particularly in this legislature, simply can‘t do 

it. Is beyond their comprehension, how to actually move Bills 

through in a timely fashion. Don‘t get it. 

 

And it‘s a total commentary on their lack of ability to negotiate. 

Twenty-five thousand health care workers are sitting out there 

for two-plus years because nobody over there knows how to 

negotiate. The doctors are sitting there, they have nothing either 

because nobody over there knows how to negotiate. The kidney 

transplant program is in jeopardy because negotiations have 

failed. So this government has no track record on negotiations. 

 

They‘ve said they‘re going to war with workers. Well they‘re 

going to war with everyone, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is a war 

on democracy. And I think people, no matter where they work 

or whether they‘re unionized or not unionized, will see that 

because people in Saskatchewan are pretty sophisticated and 

have been leaders in the country and in the world, moving 

forward many agendas. This will be a black mark on 

Saskatchewan, and I‘m embarrassed to say that I‘m part of this 

legislature that is actually going to have to see this happen. 

 

And I think my constituents will certainly miss the contact they 

have on Fridays with me. And this is something that is 

unnecessary. I mean the Bills that have gone through already, 

the Bills that are sitting waiting Royal Assent, there‘s 18 of 

them ready. We‘ve moved those through the House. There‘s 19 

more that are still being debated, and some of them have 

significant issues attached to them. One of them is The 

Opticians Act, which we were getting basically two different 

opinions on whether it should be passed or not. And at least two 

letters or two organizations have said, withdraw the Bill. 

 

We were part of the tobacco Act debacle that happened a couple 

of weeks ago. Somehow that was a test of somebody‘s macho 

or machismo to ram that thing through, and the stakeholders 

were bewildered, bewildered about how that actually went. 

Sitting in committee, in Human Services, where the staff, the 

Clerks were running all over the place, the stress was palpable 

in the room because that‘s simply not how things are done. 

 

Not only does it show disrespect for the legislature, it shows 

disrespect for the staff here. The people who understand how 

the legislature works, tend to do their job that way. And when 

it‘s been interfered with, like the tobacco Act was, everybody‘s 

wondering what happened. So it certainly is a message to 

people who come here and have seen how this works. The 

tobacco community came and listened and saw how it worked. 

Nobody had to actually tell them, they saw it with their own 

eyes. They heard it, and they commented on it. I mean, it was 

noticeable how badly that was handled. 

 

So if you don‘t have a handle on how you deal with the basic 

functioning of the legislature, you can‘t move Bills through in 

an appropriate manner, respecting the stakeholders and the 

legislative process and the opposition. That‘s a sad commentary 

on your ability to govern. And I think that‘s basically what 

people are getting from all of this idiocy that‘s happening 

around here. 

 

All the Bills that have been introduced are moving along as they 

should. There‘s many that still need commentary, and having 

been with the tobacco Act, the wild ponies Act, now The 

Opticians Act, I do understand that the idea of consultation that 

the Sask Party has is certainly not what the stakeholders have, 

and it‘s certainly not what we have as an opposition. And to do 

our job, we need to talk to people. And when we talk to them, 

they tell us. They reinforce the idea that, no, you know, we 

haven‘t been consulted. And if it‘s somehow somebody‘s idea 

of consultation, it isn‘t meaningful in any way, shape, or form. 

 

So like I said at the beginning, the government, when they can‘t 

abide by the rules that they help negotiate, it does send a 

message about how they honour agreements. And the 

chiropractors will tell you that when they ripped up an 

agreement already. 

 

So there is no honour dealing with the Sask Party, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And that is another commentary that I think it would 

be fairly embarrassing to have to admit, that there‘s no honour 

there. If there is agreements in place, they mean nothing. When 

you see the chiropractors can have theirs ripped up, what does it 

mean to sign a paper with the Sask Party? It means nothing. It 

doesn‘t mean anything. 

 

So people don‘t have any trust. If your word doesn‘t mean 

anything, you‘re in a sad state. If your word does not carry any 

weight and you can‘t abide by your word, then you are in a sad 

state. And I think there‘s quite a few people over there who 

have obviously . . . You know, when you throw a stone into the 

dark and somebody yelps? There you go. 

 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5021 

So despite the government‘s spin and rhetoric, the opposition 

has not been holding up legislation. As I mentioned just a few 

seconds ago, there‘s legislation moving through the process. 

Eighteen Bills are waiting for Royal Assent. This is not 

something that has clogged up the House. 

 

So whatever machismo is going on here and muscle flexing and 

blowing hard and blowing long and whatever that means, it‘s 

not actually working. It‘s not working. It‘s not fooling anybody. 

You can blow smoke up people‘s, you know, nose and it‘s not 

going to, it‘s not exactly going to fool them. I don‘t think 

people . . . They aren‘t fooled. They understand what‘s going 

on. And I think as they understand more, it will certainly not be, 

it will not be positive for the Sask Party. 

 

And when we see rules extended like this, I think my colleague 

from Coronation Park was right. I don‘t think people expect to 

have people working 12, 14 hours a day and doing good work. 

It‘s pretty hard to maintain that pace and do good work. And I 

know that there was certainly, there‘s certainly the ability in the 

rules to add an extra week if that becomes necessary as we get 

closer to the end of the session. There are many days left to 

accomplish the work of this House. And obviously this motion 

is disruptive and disrespectful, as I‘ve mentioned several times, 

and it‘s disruptive to the House. And it‘s certainly not necessary 

to have it done because we have time. And if we don‘t have 

time, we have the ability, according to the rules that have been 

mutually agreed upon in a respectful process, we have the 

ability to add another week. 

 

Well the House Leader, the member from Cannington, has said 

that the government doesn‘t want another week because they 

don‘t want another question . . . They don‘t want four more 

days of question period. Well, boo hoo. You know, question 

period is when the ministers are accountable to the public. 

When we have questions that we ask, we don‘t ask them 

because they come out of the blue. We ask them because the 

public wants to know the answers. And if we don‘t have that 

opportunity, then the public is the one who is being punished. 

And I think people will definitely get that one. 

 

I think the government is embarrassed. They want to get out of 

here. They don‘t feel . . . I think they‘re pretty much 

embarrassed. They don‘t want to add another week of scrutiny 

with question period. I can see the embarrassment. I mean I see 

them sitting there. They‘re either laughing or joking or trying to 

somewhat disregard the process and disrespect the process. 

Most of all, it‘s smirking and laughing and swinging their chairs 

around and turning their backs on people. I think that that 

actually is a signal to anybody who‘s in the gallery watching. 

 

And people have commented on that action from budget day 

when the Premier had a temper tantrum in front of, I don‘t 

know, 500 people in the gallery, in the building, had a temper 

tantrum that he had to apologize for. People saw that and they 

certainly remember it. And when they come here and they 

watch, many comments are made about the activities of the 

government. And we know that the Premier . . . I‘m not 

surprised, and when the Premier is leading this government, he 

doesn‘t have a good track record of management. He has a 

record of failure. He can‘t manage. 

 

And it‘s pretty evident that nobody can manage that side of the 

House. They‘re on their second House Leader, and he‘s 

certainly doing a lot less better . . . a lot worse than the first 

House Leader was. And I think if we had a report card of how 

many points of order that the member from Cannington has 

stood up on and lost, I think it would be like 95 per cent. Most 

of it is specious. I mean he totally has disregarded any common 

sense and stands up to make a fool of himself at any 

opportunity, the drop of a hat. So we definitely have a track 

record from this government of not being able to manage, and 

here it is demonstrated again in not being able to manage the 

business of the House. 

 

This is a pretty sad commentary on a government who simply 

has had two deficit budgets, has blown $2.3 billion that was left 

in the coffers when they took over. In fact when they first took 

over, the government said, oh this is in stark . . . We‘re in a 

stark circumstance. They weren‘t even right then. The first day 

into government, they weren‘t right, and they haven‘t been right 

since. 

 

And all this wild talk about potash revenues and wild 

speculations about costs of what potash would be — everybody 

seems to want to stick their oar in the water — none have been 

right. It certainly does not lend to any degree of trust in the 

public that this government can actually manage the province. 

 

And people do understand that we are doing well here, despite 

the Sask Party. The groundwork was laid, as The Globe and 

Mail article on the weekend said, quoting Eric Cline, the 

groundwork was laid before ‘07. And when this government, 

the Sask Party government came in, things were in place 

already for the boom to happen. But they‘ve blown the boom. 

Like people are coming forward and saying, well what 

happened to me? Why can‘t . . . why isn‘t this happening? 

Where did all the money go? In fact that‘s the question I get 

from young people: where did all the money go? Well they 

don‘t . . . Nobody can answer that. Nobody can say, where did 

the money go? 

 

Basically the children‘s hospital was kind of a bit of a gloomy 

event on Saturday. No one was terribly excited about the 

message that they had got in this budget, and there was 

certainly some odd conversations going on that I thought were 

certainly, I think, indicative of how that community in 

Saskatoon trusts . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. The decibel 

level is increasing dramatically. There‘s a lot of side 

conversations, and I‘d appreciate it if I‘d be allowed the 

opportunity, as would the other members, to hear the member 

who has the floor. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think last 

year‘s budget, ‘09 budget had a lot of talk about transparency 

and accountability. A lot of things in there talking about how 

this government was going to perform better so people could 

understand what was going on and they would be accountable. 

Well that certainly disappeared awfully fast. Never worked for 

even one year and certainly has never seen any of it in this 

current budget. 

 

And this current budget, I don‘t know how anybody can say it‘s 



5022 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

a balanced budget when everybody with any degree of 

economic intelligence has seen through it and has commented 

on that. And I think it‘s again going to go to people‘s trust. 

People won‘t trust somebody who can‘t manage the finances of 

the province and they can‘t manage the business of the House. 

That‘s two strikes already. I mean it isn‘t going to take long to 

make the next swish and you‘re out. 

 

So I think that all the things that we have seen in the budget, a 

lot of them are hidden and they‘re going to be coming out 

slowly. We‘ve seen them trickling out. And some of the cause 

and effect will happen, and I think the people of Saskatchewan 

will see that this government really doesn‘t have their best 

interests at heart. They don‘t care about people. They care about 

their own agenda, which appears to be, one, at war with labour, 

second is privatization. Those things are key points of this 

government‘s agenda. 

 

So it doesn‘t matter about democracy. We can trample that. We 

can trample people‘s rights, we can trample their expectations. 

It doesn‘t matter. And that message is quite clear. 

 

[17:30] 

 

I don‘t think people are confused about that message. I think 

they‘ve got it. I think they‘ve heard it, that there isn‘t anything 

that‘s constructive for most people that are living in a certain 

income; that there‘s things like vehicles, government vehicles 

being taken away from community-based organizations that 

relied on those to do the work of their organizations. They‘re 

gone. 

 

And that‘s something that‘s quietly been eroded. And there‘s so 

many of those things, those quiet things that have been taken 

away that they basically at a certain point become a pile of very 

bad news for people that will look at them and say, this is 

significant. This is a significant problem and we should do 

something about that. And that opportunity to do something 

will come November of 2011. 

 

And I don‘t think there‘s going to be much left for the Sask 

Party to ride on because if you‘ve ridden on two deficits — 

probably three coming up, which most people have seen in the 

budget books; three will be coming, maybe four — and you‘ve 

totally trampled democracy and you‘ve shown to people that it 

doesn‘t matter, that when we try to have an institution like this 

legislature and have respect for it and respect for the work that 

it does, legislation that it passes, budgets that it passes, policy 

that it puts forward, you‘ve eroded that. You‘ve smacked it. 

 

And you think that somehow people will like that and they‘ll 

respect you for it? I don‘t think so. I think that people will see 

that you don‘t have any respect for this facility and this 

institution. Then how are you going to respect them? And I 

think that people‘s rights will be trampled on, which we‘ve seen 

in many cases now. Small things coming forward, big things 

coming forward. 

 

I can only imagine what‘s going to happen with the health 

districts with the budget they‘ve got. They‘re already talking 

about the deficits they had last year and what‘s going to happen 

with next year. It‘s going to be a catastrophe. And I don‘t think 

anybody over there has a clue. They don‘t have a clue. I don‘t 

know who they listen to, but I gather from the way that we see 

business going through in the House, they don‘t listen to 

anybody. 

 

It‘s somebody, and I think it‘s the Premier sets the direction. 

And the group around him says, this is how we‘re going to go 

and make it fit and make it work. And so here we all are 

suffering the consequences of that dictatorship, that 

heavy-handed dictatorship. 

 

I mean, that is not how we‘ve done business up to this point. 

And I said, I‘ve been here 12 years. I have not seen the business 

of the House conducted so poorly as I have since the Sask Party 

government has come into power. It‘s absolutely . . . I think 

someone mentioned earlier that it‘s almost like governing with 

the Devine right, and I don‘t think there‘s any pun intended. I 

think people are starting to think that this government feels they 

have a divine right, the people gave them the right, and they‘re 

going to make it . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. The member‘s 

time has elapsed. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‘m pleased 

to speak in favour of the amendment and against the motion for 

closure. 

 

I do come to this debate with a slightly different approach than 

some of my colleagues, although I do want to reiterate I 

completely agree with them. I completely agree that this is 

reflective of this government‘s inability to manage anything. In 

prosperous times . . . I‘m new in this Legislative Assembly, and 

I don‘t quite get how there can be record revenues and this 

government has to make cuts. Record revenues the last two 

years, and we have to make cuts. And particularly these cuts are 

being done poorly and without any regard for consultation with 

the groups impacted. 

 

SCN is a really great case in point. SCN, two and a half years, 

no consultation with their independent board, between the 

ministry and this independent board. No connection or contact 

with the film and television industry. SCN is a critical piece, 

one of many pieces in the film and television industry here in 

Saskatchewan, but a critical piece nonetheless. And this 

government made cuts without consulting the people who knew 

anything about this. 

 

So in prosperous times, we‘re making cuts and not particularly 

wise cuts. Short-sighted. Again I‘m new here, but I understand 

that the government is in control of the House business and 

can‘t seem to organize themselves to get the work done in the 

time that has been allotted. Being fresh around here, I don‘t 

quite understand how that works. When you‘re in charge of 

something, you have a plan. You‘ve set out a plan, and then you 

work to achieve your goals. And if you don‘t know how it 

works, you don‘t deserve to be sitting on that side of the House. 

 

I completely agree that this motion translates into less 

accountability, less transparency, and a lack of democracy. 

Question period, moving question period till 8 in the morning 

will limit the opportunity . . . There‘s many community 

organizations, many groups of people who like to come, who 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5023 

it‘s their right and their privilege to come to this Legislative 

Assembly and watch the proceedings. Moving it to 8 in the 

morning makes it very difficult from anyone outside, from 

anyone outside of Regina to come here and participate. 

 

This government is making, by limiting . . . If you can‘t finish 

your business in the time that‘s allotted and you have to . . . 

And you‘re not willing to add days on the end. You get to the 

end period and you have the opportunity to add days, but you 

don‘t want to add days because you don‘t want to face question 

period. That is a problem. Question period is our opportunity as 

opposition to stand up and ask questions of the people who have 

concerns. When I get up and my colleagues get up to ask 

questions in question period, we‘re asking questions on behalf 

of people who have raised concerns. To limit that opportunity I 

think is shameful. 

 

My colleagues before me on both sides of the House introduced 

a fixed calendar with fixed hours that both sides negotiated, so 

if business isn‘t done in that time, there was a capacity in the 

existing rules, without a rule change, to add to days of the 

sitting. So why do you . . . When they did make these changes 

to fixed hours, they did it because it made sense. From a 

work/family perspective, it was better for MLAs. I think we‘re 

all more effective with our work if we all have a little bit of 

balance in our lives. But it more importantly was effective, 

better for our constituents, getting MLAs back in their 

constituencies on Friday to be able to make connections and do 

the work that we‘re supposed to be doing, representing our 

constituents. 

 

So how is this, I‘d like to ask how this is good for or how this is 

beneficial for good governance, sitting 16-hour days. There‘s 

all kinds of research that shows actually a six-hour workday . . . 

Technically if you crunched it down, we generally all work 

about 8 to 10 hours, or other professions. But 16 hours a day? 

How can you do anything properly and well if you‘re working 

for 16 hours a day? Things will slip and not be done properly or 

well. 

 

All that said, as I said, I want to reiterate what my colleagues 

said, but I also come to the table with a slightly different 

perspective. This time about a year ago, a little bit longer, I 

made the decision to jump into the race to be the candidate, to 

put my name forward as the candidate in Saskatoon Riversdale 

and, as was my hope, to become the MLA for Saskatoon 

Riversdale, my home for much of my life. 

 

As a very committed mother of two young kids, this wasn‘t a 

decision I took lightly. I was well aware that would be many 

demands on my time and many challenges facing me and my 

family. But I‘m more than willing to make those sacrifices, and 

I have the family support necessary to do this job well and to 

ensure that my kids are in loving care when I‘m not there for 

them. 

 

But there are a whole lot of people out there, a lot of women in 

particular — both men and women, but women in particular 

because women are still responsible by and large for the care of 

our children and our elders — but there are a lot of people out 

there who would love to consider putting their name forward 

and to serve their constituents. There are a lot of people out 

there. Sadly though, when you find out . . . And I think people 

understand that politics is a very demanding job. There‘s long 

hours. There‘s time away from our family, so it‘s already a bit 

difficult and challenging for sure. But when people hear the 

absurdity of sitting from 8 in the morning till midnight there‘s 

no way, when we think about our roles as caregivers, that most 

people will be willing to put their name forward to stand for 

politics. 

 

And I come to this place as a firm believer that our legislature 

needs to look more like the diversity of our province, whether 

it‘s more women, more First Nations and Métis people, more 

people of visible minorities. And something like this, putting a 

motion like this forward totally turns people off and makes 

people think, why would I want to engage in a job that keeps 

me away from my family 16 hours a day, or has the capacity — 

and on short notice, you know. And I am incredibly 

hard-working and more than willing to make those sacrifices, 

but you know what? When the rules change, that is a problem. 

That is a problem. 

 

I am willing to work evenings and weekends, and I do that. I 

serve my constituents well, but my constituents don‘t expect 

every ounce of my lifeblood, or any of us for that matter, to be 

given away. 

 

You know this is a barrier for women to enter politics. Women 

are still the primary caregivers of children and of seniors. That 

is a fact. That is a fact. It slowly is starting to change. And I 

would say, you look around the House here, most, most . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Your job is 365 days a year. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Yes. Yes. The member from Martensville is 

telling me my job is 365 days a year. I do in fact recognize that. 

And I am more than willing to serve my constituents, but I also 

want to see this legislature look like the diversity of this 

province because decisions that get made in here have an 

impact on all of us. And quite honestly, a room full of white 

people in suits isn‘t the best thing for our province when it 

comes to outcomes. 

 

In order to attract women into politics, I‘m a big proponent. I 

can do this job because I have the support, but by and large, 

people who have engaged in politics of the past — look around 

this room — the women who have participated generally have 

done so after they‘ve had their families, launched their families, 

their families are on their way. The reality is, most women who 

enter politics do so when our kids are much older because our 

husbands usually aren‘t willing to step outside of the workforce 

to become at-home parents. 

 

I have a husband who is willing to do that because he wants to 

help me break ground for other women to enter politics so our 

policy decisions can look better. And again I have to 

emphasize, I do not shy away from hard work. I work many, 

many hours a day, long after my children have gone to bed, but 

I don‘t think anybody expects politicians to completely . . . I 

may be an MLA and I may be a representative for my 

community, but the reason people elected me is because I was a 

mother who knew and understood their issues and was 

connected and knew what was going on . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . And I can hear someone over there saying, oh 

you poor thing. You know what? It‘s not about me. This is 



5024 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

about making sure that we have a legislature, we have a 

legislature that looks like the diversity of our province, and this 

is not the case at all. 

 

An Hon. Member: — You‘re mean, heartless people. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — No, it‘s not about . . . And it isn‘t about being 

mean and heartless. It‘s about trying to change our institutions 

so they look like they should and we do what we need to do to 

make sure we pass good policy. And part of that is about having 

people involved in politics who represent the province. And I‘m 

sorry, but we‘re not a legislature that‘s reflective of the 

diversity of this province at all — not in the slightest bit. And if 

you‘re not going to have a legislature that looks like the 

diversity of your province, you should at least be consulting 

with other people. And I think that this government has shown 

us very clearly that they don‘t have the capacity to consult with 

all the stakeholders. 

 

I think the most important thing here too though is thinking 

about our ability, how sitting 16 hours a day impacts our ability 

to serve our constituents. I know that throughout the day we all 

take calls. We all get emails while we‘re here, trying to stay 

connected, but this legislature is a bit of a bubble. The reality is 

this legislature is a bit of a bubble. 

 

I love when I go home to my community and I‘m out and about 

on the weekends, on Friday, Saturday, Sunday, talking to 

people, finding out what‘s going on. It‘s a wonderful 

opportunity to sort of be grounded and think, okay, this is what 

it‘s all about. This is the reason I‘m doing this job. It‘s because 

of these people and this constituency, and I want to give them 

voice. And again if you can‘t manage your House and get the 

work done needed in the allotted time, well shame on you. And 

as I said, you don‘t deserve to be sitting on that side of the 

House . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Sorry . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Oh no, I . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. It would be 

interesting to hear the full extent of that discussion, but I think 

we‘ll leave that for another time. The member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale has the floor. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker. In my experience it‘s 

sometimes very hard for me not to engage with the banter on 

the opposite side of the House. I haven‘t fully learned to tune 

these people out yet. And I know that you‘re listening very 

intently. 

 

So again though the whole notion of attracting more women 

into politics, it‘s very much . . . All the work-family research 

right now shows that young people are not willing to do what 

those of older generations did in terms of abdicating their 

family responsibilities just to work. People nowadays want 

some balance in their life. That is a reality. All the empirical 

evidence illustrates that and I am in a position, I am in a 

position that many men have been in for years and years and 

years in politics. 

 

I have a husband who has opted out of paid labour so I can do 

this job. But you know what? I fully . . . I love this work and 

it‘s great, but I‘m still a mother and I still . . . Just because I‘m 

here, I don‘t want to be completely disconnected from my 

children. And I don‘t think my constituents expect that either, 

as many of them are having many work-family issues as well, 

and they want to have a life with their kids. 

 

[17:45] 

 

But, you know, this is about making sure we create a workplace 

. . . This is not a particularly family-friendly workplace. And as 

I said, I am in a position to make that sacrifice. And I have a 

willing family, whether it‘s my husband who brings my nursing 

toddler here to Regina with us when we‘re here or when I‘m 

back in Saskatoon, but a lot of people don‘t have the partner or 

the spouse who‘s willing to opt out of paid labour, be it a man 

or a woman. Fewer women are willing to. Many women have 

careers of their own and aren‘t so inclined to want to opt out of 

paid employment so they can stay home while their husband 

serves in the legislature. That happens less and less. 

 

So we‘ve created a space here that is very limiting in terms of 

the number of people we can attract to put their names forward 

to run for politics. And I think being able to change the rules as 

you go along, all recognizing that, yes, this is a demanding job 

and the hours are long, but 8 in the morning till midnight is 

absurd. It is absolutely ridiculous. And how can one do good 

work? How can anyone do good work when you‘re working 

from 8 in the morning till midnight? I would challenge someone 

over there to explain that to me. 

 

And again I just want to reiterate the point that since we don‘t 

have a legislature that‘s reflective of the diversity of our 

province, at the bare minimum there should be consultation 

going on. And everybody‘s wondering over there, well why 

don‘t we just pass all the legislation they put before us? Well 

we‘ve had people point out major flaws in their legislation, at 

the bare minimum flagging concerns. Whether it was The 

Tobacco Control Act, the wild ponies Act, The Opticians Act, if 

you‘re not reflective of the diversity of the province, at least 

make sure you‘re talking to people so you have good 

information when you‘re making decisions. 

 

There‘s such a disconnect here between this government and 

people who are on the ground where the rubber hits the road. 

They want to be a part of the process of making sure good 

policy is passed, and that just is not happening. Again as I said, 

SCN is a classic example, and this government is going to do 

great harm to the film and television industry here in 

Saskatchewan with the closure of SCN. And why is it 

happening? It‘s because they never met with their independent 

board in two and a half years. Two and a half years, there was 

not any meaningful contact between the government and the 

independent board of SCN. And again up until the budget 

happened, there was no consultation with the film and 

television industry about what they needed. And had this 

consultation taken place, these decisions wouldn‘t have to 

happen and wouldn‘t have to have such a negative impact on 

people. 

 

We suppose we are a representative democracy. This is the kind 

of world in which we live, right here, right now. This is a 

representative democracy. But there still needs to be 

mechanisms for a participatory democracy because we don‘t 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5025 

have all the answers. I don‘t have all the answers. I know they 

certainly don‘t have all the answers. How do we get the 

answers? We get the answers by consulting with people, by a 

broad range of people, not the one stakeholder you like. You 

need to talk to a broad range of people to ensure that the 

legislation you‘re passing makes sense. And my concern here is 

that has not happened. 

 

In my short time in this legislature, I‘ve seen a complete lack of 

consultation. The domestic violence program in Saskatoon, the 

domestic violence program, you cut this. The domestic violence 

program in Saskatoon has been cancelled, and the only way 

they, the domestic violence program . . . There was no 

consultation with the people in Saskatoon. This is a program 

that should have . . . It was cancelled because we heard that it 

was a one-off. Well you know what, Mr. Speaker? This is a 

program that should have happened throughout the province. 

And people expect, people expect if you‘re going to be cutting 

something that you have some contact with them. 

 

Quint, a community organization that has huge impact in my 

constituency, that has put many people in houses, many families 

in the core of Saskatoon, have helped them become 

homeowners and be well established and repopulate the core 

with families, their funding was cut just out of the blue. Their 

whole component of provincial funding was cut. And that was a 

politically motivated decision, I would argue, and had no basis 

in reality or need. An organization that was doing good work, 

very good work in my constituency and other constituencies in 

the core, cut with absolutely no, no consultation or warning. 

 

This is the other thing. Everything seems to happen without any 

warning. You‘d think if you had to make some changes that 

you‘d want to engage with stakeholders, but that‘s not the case. 

And again my biggest argument is, if you don‘t have a 

legislature that is representative of the makeup of the province, 

at least you should be talking to people. And this government 

just seems to like to talk to the one or two stakeholders that are 

fond of them, but that pile of stakeholders is getting smaller and 

smaller. 

 

I can tell you, I had a very interesting conversation with a 

young man actually over the weekend, from rural 

Saskatchewan. And he made it very clear . . . He actually 

worked on one of the members opposite‘s campaigns and then 

said to me, you know what? They think their support‘s in rural 

Saskatchewan, but man oh man, it is dwindling. 

 

So this is a young man in rural Saskatchewan who worked on a 

campaign in 2007 for one of the members opposite and his 

family is still connected in rural Saskatchewan and still lives 

there. He‘s living in Saskatoon. 

 

Which . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Okay. I‘m sorry, I still 

have a very hard time not engaging with things going on 

opposite. I‘m sure that‘ll get better in time. But this young man, 

anyway, was very adamant that he had talked to all kinds of 

people in his community. He had worked on a campaign for a 

Sask Party member, a sitting MLA, and would not be doing that 

again. And again, he made it clear it wasn‘t just him. He had 

talked to lots of people who had reiterated that support for the 

Sask Party is dwindling. 

 

Trust is a huge issue. If you can‘t be trusted to manage the 

finances in a time of record revenue, record revenue — more 

than $10 million in government coffers and you have to make 

cuts. Again, I‘m new here but that is astonishing to me. I don‘t 

understand how that could possibly happen, how you have 

record revenue and you have to tighten your belts. Well I do 

understand because they‘ve gone on a spending spree for two 

and a half years without any big vision or forethought about 

what that should look like. And so now they have to tighten 

their belts but unfortunately they‘re making these random cuts 

without being connected to reality and not really realizing what 

those cuts do to people. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this move to extend . . . This move for this 

motion I think is deplorable, and will do nothing to support and 

promote a more diverse legislature in our province. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member‘s time has 

expired. I recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‘s a 

pleasure to rise . . . Well actually it‘s not much of a pleasure. I 

didn‘t think we would be in this debate again this evening of 

debating this closure motion and moving to the extended hours. 

But all of the things I had thought about talking about on this 

whole motion, I have to say, Mr. Speaker, this legislature has 

always stood for tolerance, good debate, and an understanding 

and consideration for the views that each of us bring as elected 

members of the legislature. 

 

And to hear the banter that was being thrown across the floor 

when the member from Riversdale was up speaking about the 

difficulties of being a woman in the legislature and the 

difficulties of being a woman with a younger family in the 

legislature, the comments were quite disconcerting, Mr. 

Speaker. And this I think better explains the whole process of 

how we have seen the Status of Women office basically wiped 

out, how we‘ve seen gender-based analysis being done 

throughout government and on government policies and 

processes wiped out, that joint job evaluation and the process 

that the Government of Saskatchewan went through over a 

period of time putting in place a pay equity policy framework, 

recognizing that women are affected differently by policies and 

programs that are put in place, it seems to be in jeopardy, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and that‘s a great concern. Not only as a 

member of this legislature, but when one of my colleagues 

cannot stand in this House and speak her views without being 

criticized and some disconcerting comments being made across 

the floor, it‘s truly appalling, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, after making that point I‘ll get back to the 

whole reason for the debate this evening. For the second time in 

two years, two years . . . This government‘s been in place not 

quite three years, but twice we have stood in this House and 

debated the extension of hours. And not just four hours a day. 

No, it‘s always exaggerated. It‘s always over the top. It always 

has this feel of being bullied about it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It‘s not negotiated as things are normally done in this House 

where we sit down and . . . Do you know, people across the 

province may watch question period and think, wow, it‘s just a 

bit of goofiness and theatre that goes on in this legislature. But, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know that there‘s a great deal of 



5026 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

conversation that goes on. Otherwise we have worked together. 

We have always given a daily schedule to the opposition. That 

doesn‘t happen any more. When we walk in this door as the 

opposition, representing our constituents, we find out just 

before we walk in the door what‘s coming up for that day. So 

we just have to come in and be prepared for whatever may 

happen. 

 

Now maybe the government feels that that‘s the appropriate 

way but, Mr. Speaker, I‘m finding more and more . . . Do you 

know, people in the labour movement felt that they were being 

targeted and ignored when Bills 5 and 6 and Bill 43, Bill 80 

were brought before this House, pushed through the process. 

And some have been passed. Bill 80 is sitting on the docket 

waiting to have its final vote at the end of this session. Many 

people thought, well the Premier was right. He had just gone to 

war with labour. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as we move through a couple more sessions, 

we‘re finding more and more people have been ignored. We are 

hearing of groups that . . . SCN, for example, when the Chair of 

the board, of the independent board of SCN, says that the 

minister hasn‘t even taken the time. Two and a half years the 

Sask Party government has been in power, they have never met 

with the board of SCN. 

 

Aboriginal communities across the province — we could list 

many — they have never had a sit-down meeting with the 

minister in two and a half years. So, Mr. Speaker, this 

government obviously feels that they have some kind of right, 

by winning an election, that they can do whatever they like, 

whenever they like, and not do proper consultation or proper 

processes that go with the democratic system that we have 

enjoyed for many years. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, here we are for the second time in two short 

years. The Sask Party can‘t manage its own agenda so it‘s put 

down a change, a motion that will change the sitting times of 

the Assembly. And like I said, it‘s not just four hours or not just 

five hours, or extend it a week. No, they want to sit from 8 

o‘clock in the morning till midnight. 

 

And here we are right now, Mr. Speaker. They even denied that 

we should have a dinner break, which we normally had. It‘s 

time to get out of the House, go for a walk if you like, have 

something to eat, relax; come back to sit for our evening 

session. Basic consideration, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 

obviously it‘s more of the tactics that they feel will push their 

agenda forward. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what is . . . I mean the government‘s basic 

function is to put forward legislation that it‘s written — 

hopefully with consultations but that‘s questionable — have 

debate in the Legislative Assembly, move it through into 

committee, and it will be passed. Hopefully better legislation 

will be passed at the end of the scrutiny, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

so that there has been input from constituents. There has been 

time for us to have conversation with our constituents — what 

works; what doesn‘t work — offer suggestions, do a critique of 

what the government is putting forward. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we are seeing over and over again that this 

isn‘t the way the government feels that it should work. It 

doesn‘t feel like it should be questioned. It doesn‘t feel like, or 

obviously doesn‘t feel that it has to give an explanation to 

stakeholders that are involved in any of this. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, those initial concerns that were felt by labour 

and felt by other stakeholders, the opposition is treated the same 

way. So I would say to them, don‘t feel like you‘ve been 

singled out. The government treats everyone like this. 

 

[18:00] 

 

And I almost wonder if it goes back to some of the Premier, the 

now Premier when he was leader of the opposition had gone to 

a number of Republican conventions down in the United Sates, 

and I think he brought back the kind of George Bush logo or 

lingo and added to it. It was kind of, you‘re with us or you‘re 

against us, and there was nothing in between. 

 

And that seems to be the attitude that we‘re seeing permeate 

from this government, Mr. Speaker. And more and more 

citizens are concerned, and we‘re hearing many, many 

complaints in our constituency offices and receiving emails and 

having a number of conversations. But, Mr. Speaker, it just 

basically boils down to, this government can‘t manage its own 

mandate. It‘s had a great deal of difficulty putting together 

budgets. 

 

And I just spoke to my local media in Moose Jaw about the new 

TV ads that are currently being run. And he asked me about the 

ads, and I said, well all of it‘s fact. All you have to look . . . any 

of those figures are contained in the government‘s own budget 

and financial documents that have been released this budget 

year and last budget year. It‘s all fact, Mr. Speaker, and you can 

find it in the government‘s own documents. But they don‘t like 

seeing the facts out there, and they don‘t like hearing the truth. 

 

But when it‘s out there, it raises concerns when people see the 

deficit that‘s being run up or close — $1.3 billion in deficits in 

two years. Debt is climbing this year. It‘s up over $750 million. 

And we‘ve seen over $1 billion taken out of the Crown 

corporations. 

 

So don‘t seem to be able to manage. And clearly that hits on the 

financial side of the work of government, but now we‘re seeing 

it again arise in this House where they can‘t put forward a 

schedule or don‘t seem to be able to put forward a workable 

schedule to get their own legislation passed, Mr. Speaker, 

which is a little unusual. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is, I believe one of my colleagues said early 

on, this is a pretty light session when you look at the legislation 

that‘s being brought forward. I think there‘s 47, 48 Bills, 48 if 

you include Bill 80 that is currently sitting on the docket. 

 

A couple of those Bills have been passed and have received 

Royal Assent already. Eighteen Bills have been passed and are 

awaiting Royal Assent. Two Bills are in committee waiting to 

be dealt with, which we could have been doing today, Mr. 

Speaker. And 19 more Bills are before the House in adjourned 

debate. And, Mr. Speaker, eight of those Bills have been tabled 

in the last two sitting days. So five today, which we don‘t see 

until they‘re tabled in the House, but yet we‘re expected to just 

shoo them along — sight unseen, no scrutiny, no talking to 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5027 

stakeholders, no having discussions with people that might be 

impacted by those Bills. Mr. Speaker, they just figure we‘re 

going to rubber-stamp them and move them along. Well that‘s 

not the job of oppositions. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, most governments don‘t need to 

change rules or amend the sitting hours to get their agenda 

done. You plan ahead. You make sure your legislation is tabled 

early enough so that you have plenty of time for scrutiny and 

. . . to do the job that needs to be done here in this legislature. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think this government is really afraid to 

answer to the people of Saskatchewan as we see more and more 

scrutiny on the budget documents. We see the deficit that 

they‘re running up. We see the debt that is increasing in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And what they‘re trying to do is just 

get us out of this legislature as quickly as possible so that 

there‘s less scrutiny on what they‘re doing day to day. And I 

think they‘re just embarrassed by their track record. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they don‘t want to answer to it. They don‘t want 

the close scrutiny. And that‘s disappointing. Because if you feel 

something is worth doing, well as a government member you 

need to be able to stand up to constituents and to people in this 

province and you need to be able to defend what you‘re doing 

. . . or not defend but to explain it. You need to be able to 

explain it because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, even if people don‘t 

agree with you, they need to understand why you‘re putting in 

place a piece of legislation and why you‘re making the changes. 

I believe that that responsibility comes with the job we have as 

elected representatives. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this extended hours motion just proves that the 

Premier and this government can‘t manage the most basic of 

government functions, and that‘s passing Bills through this 

legislature. 

 

But I think it shouldn‘t be a surprise to too many people 

because we know that the Premier has a consistent track record 

of mismanagement and failure. I mean we‘ve talked today. 

There‘s been a couple of members‘ statements in the House 

about the Country Music Hall of Fame, how it went into 

receivership when the Premier was the manager of that. And his 

other business, the Last Stand Adventure Company, I believe 

the Premier‘s term was it wound down. 

 

So we can fight over the wording, whatever we like, but either 

way the Premier has two failed businesses, and other than that 

he seems to have spent his life in politics, either working for the 

Grant Devine government — and we all know his record there 

and have seen his signature on the various memos requesting 

free alcohol being brought over from the liquor stores. But we 

also know that he worked in Ottawa for Brian Mulroney‘s 

government. So he‘s really made his living off of public life, 

Mr. Speaker, or the public sector for sure. So his track record 

isn‘t quite as shining as some would like to believe or to 

portray. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what we‘re seeing . . . And I said whatever 

happened in his private life that‘s fine, but the fact is that track 

record is being brought into the public finances of the province 

of Saskatchewan. And when we see that they have gone from a 

$2.3 billion surplus in the bank, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

they‘ve spent that and we are now sitting with over a $1 billion 

deficit, a drained rainy day fund — even though it hasn‘t been 

raining, Mr. Speaker, the fund‘s been drained — and over $1 

billion in two years has been stripped out of the Crown 

corporations. 

 

So it‘s a problem, Mr. Speaker, and we can see why the Premier 

does not want to be accountable, does not want to be 

transparent, and wants to be out of the legislature as quickly as 

possible. And, Mr. Speaker, packing the work and the time into 

extended absolutely ridiculous days from 8 a.m. in the morning 

till midnight I guess is one way to do it. But it really does avoid 

accountability and transparency. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, one of the problems that I have with this, well 

I drive from Moose Jaw every day. I live in Moose Jaw and I 

commute back and forth to Regina daily. So it will mean a 

change to my schedule but I can handle that. Mr. Speaker, what 

it does cause problems with is I don‘t think there‘s anyone on 

this side of the legislature in opposition, all of my colleagues, 

we have meetings set up with constituents, whether it‘s about 

some of the financial implications of this government‘s budget 

and the multiple cuts that they have made right across the 

province. 

 

We‘re just beginning to find out a lot of the detail to do with 

that as the government departments negotiate contracts with 

some of the CBOs [community-based organization]. We‘re 

seeing the effects and the cutbacks that are rolling out. It‘s 

happening in numerous places and I‘m sure there is more to 

come and I‘m sure that the government just wants us busy here 

so we can‘t have these meetings, can‘t talk to constituents and 

people in the communities and hear where they‘re being 

impacted by this budget. 

 

It definitely . . . I think the Premier is looking for any trick he 

can find to be less accountable and transparent to the people of 

Saskatchewan. And if that restricts us having meetings, I guess 

so be it. That‘s the way he‘s decided he wants to do this. He‘s 

used some . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Hart: — With leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member of Last 

Mountain-Touchwood has asked leave to introduce guests. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and thank you 

to the member who had the floor for yielding the floor to give 

me this opportunity to introduce guests in the Speaker‘s gallery. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have the parents of one of the 

legislative interns, Elise Lonie. Her parents are Glen and 

Donna. I hope I‘ve got the names right. I‘m not sure who the 

young fellows are that are sitting beside them, but I‘m guessing 



5028 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

they could be some brothers. 

 

They come from . . . The Lonies live in Strasbourg. Pastor Glen 

is the pastor of the Strasbourg Alliance Church. They have been 

living in Strasbourg since — the Internet tells me — since 

1993. Great citizens of the community of Strasbourg. The 

Alliance Church has a lot of good things happening and I know 

it‘s because of the leadership of Pastor Lonie and his family, 

and so I would ask all members of the legislature to join with 

me in welcoming them here to their legislature. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. McCall: — With leave to respond to the introduction, I 

guess, or add to the introduction. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has requested leave to introduce guests. Is 

leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

would like to add, on behalf of the official opposition, our 

voices of welcome to the Lonies. 

 

Elise is doing a great job. We‘re glad to get her on this side of 

the House now. Certainly it‘s an interesting program in terms of 

that turn and turnabout and that perspective it engenders, but 

one thing that is for certain is the calibre of the legislative 

interns. And certainly Elise is, you know, representative of the 

sharp, hard-working young people that have been through the 

legislative internship program through these years. 

 

So it‘s good to see the Lonies here in their gallery, and I‘d ask 

all members to join with us in welcoming them also. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Hours of Sitting 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again I 

want to say I believe that the Premier is looking for any kind of 

a trick that he can to be less accountable and transparent to the 

people of Saskatchewan. And I mean he‘s used some pretty 

intricate financial tricks in his budget to conceal some of the 

true debt and deficit. He‘s hid program cuts by shuffling money 

around between departments, and now he‘s trying to avoid 

public scrutiny through question period by refusing just to use 

what a normal process of extending session by a couple days or 

five days if there‘s concern they can‘t get their act in gear here 

and get their legislation passed. But they want to do it by 

extending our daily sitting hours into the wee hours of the night. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think the Premier and the government are 

just concerned that more and more issues are going to be 

brought out in the public, and they‘re trying to dodge that 

scrutiny. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have to say that this motion infringes upon every 

member‘s important responsibilities that we have to represent 

our constituents. As I was saying previously, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, all of us, we have an events calendar. It‘s set out for 

well beyond the month, probably into two months, and you will 

find any number of events that are scheduled in and many of us 

who have responded to say we will be attending. And we have 

all set up meetings that we needed to have in the areas of our 

critic responsibilities and other areas of interest to us. So, Mr. 

Speaker, all of this is set aside. 

 

Now I know the members opposite said, well it‘s a 365-day job, 

which it is, Mr. Speaker, because we never take off our hats as 

MLAs no matter where we are. Whether we‘re out with family 

or out taking the dog for a walk, we‘re still an MLA, and many 

people will stop and talk to us. That‘s wonderful. It‘s great to 

have constituents stop and talk, but there‘s also a certain 

amount of work where we need scheduled time to meet people 

that have busy lives, and all of that is going to be set aside. 

 

I phoned my office today and I said, well be prepared to change 

the whole schedule. We‘ll see what the schedule looks like 

tomorrow. We‘ll go day by day because the government won‘t 

give us a schedule of what they want to deal with when. 

They‘re too afraid of that. They figure it‘s easier, I guess, to 

keep us all on our toes, or they figure that that‘s the way a 

government should operate, just spring it on you the next day. 

So we‘ll look at the schedule day by day, and if there‘s 

meetings that I have to cancel, then I guess they‘ll have to be 

rescheduled for sometime. When that sometime is, we‘ll just 

have to wait and see how the schedule goes. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I truly feel this whole process, this motion, 

the extension of hours, the way it‘s been done and the way the 

hours are extended is purely for the Premier and this 

government to avoid any type of transparency and 

accountability. And people are concerned with the initiatives 

that this government has brought forward, the lack of 

consultations, and the lack of transparency, accountability, and 

scrutiny that‘s been allowed. And, Mr. Speaker, it will come 

back to haunt them quickly. That we know for sure, Mr. 

Speaker. And for sure I will be voting against the motion. 

 

[18:15] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join in the 

debate, but first of all join my colleague and the member from 

Last Mountain-Touchwood and welcome the Lonies from 

Strasbourg here. 

 

What‘s happening — for their purpose and for many other 

purposes, different people that may be watching to see the 

proceedings tonight as opposed to the Montreal/Capitals game 

— is the fact that what‘s happening here is the legislative 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5029 

agenda that the Sask Party had in place, they realize for the 

second year in a row they didn‘t have enough time to put 

through all their Bills. And now they have to extend the hours. 

And we‘re saying that instead of extending the hours per day, 

why don‘t you extend the sitting for an extra four or five days at 

the end of session? Because typically a session ends sometimes 

on the week of May 20th. Now what happens here, for the 

Lonies‘ purpose, is that we‘re saying that you should extend the 

sitting days. And those guys over there don‘t want to do that, so 

they‘re extending the hours. 

 

So this reminds me of a story, this reminds me of a story at the 

. . . And I‘ll share the story with you, Mr. Speaker. My 

grandson and my granddaughter and I went to visit a 

neighbouring farm. And when we got to that farm, Mr. Speaker, 

there was these white, fluffy things bouncing around in this 

little penned-up area. And my granddaughter said to me, Papa, 

what are those things? And I said to them, those are a bunch of 

chickens. I said, those are a bunch of chickens, is what I‘d said, 

Mr. Speaker. And then my grandson said to me, well why are 

they clapping like seals? They can clap like seals, my boy, I 

said, but they‘re still a bunch of chickens. That‘s basically what 

I told my grandkids. 

 

And then when you look at that, Mr. Speaker, even if they clap 

like seals, that still remains the fact that they are a bunch of 

chickens. So no matter what happens, my boy and my girl — 

it‘s a story about my visit to the farm — you should never try 

and act like them. You should face the challenge like anybody 

else. And I still can‘t understand, Mr. Speaker, why they can‘t 

fathom somebody that looks like a chicken but claps like a seal. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, all we‘re asking for in the opposition is an 

extra four or five days to extend the session, as opposed to 

extending the hours. And this Sask Party can‘t do it. They won‘t 

do it, Mr. Speaker. And the question you ask is, why? Why 

won‘t they do it? The reason why they won‘t do it is because 

the two years that they‘ve had as a government, they put us $1 

billion in the hole, year one, and another billion in year two. So 

that‘s $2 billion they put us in debt. In the first year they again 

wanted to extend the sitting hours because they couldn‘t 

manage a legislative agenda, and now we‘re at that again the 

second year. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don‘t have any faith in their financial 

management whatsoever. None whatsoever. And I thought, 

maybe for the record, the member from Cannington would have 

enough experience in the Assembly to know how to manage a 

House. And, Mr. Speaker, two years running, and they still 

haven‘t got it right. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, my point to the people and to all the people 

listening, that‘s what this debate is about. We‘re asking for 

extension of days, and they won‘t do it. And now we‘re asking 

them to manage the finances right, they won‘t do it. We‘re 

asking them to manage the Legislative Assembly right, well 

they don‘t how to do it, Mr. Speaker. And that‘s what the 

debate is about tonight. 

 

And I say to the people of Athabasca and the people of all of 

Saskatchewan, this is exactly what we warned you about. When 

you have a bunch of people that don‘t know exactly where 

they‘re from, they have no experience, how in the world could 

you expect them to manage Saskatchewan? And, Mr. Speaker, 

they don‘t how to do it, Mr. Speaker. They don‘t know how to 

do it, and this motion is further evidence of that. It‘s further 

evidence of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I say to the people of Saskatchewan, you never say whoa in 

a mudhole. And that‘s why these guys, that‘s why these guys 

are saying, well let‘s extend the hours because we‘re stuck here 

again. Well they said whoa in a mudhole, Mr. Speaker. And 

once again the official opposition are challenging that the 

member from Cannington, who‘s supposed to be this great 

wizard of the Assembly process, well, Mr. Speaker, we‘ve 

finally realized that this guy does not know what he‘s doing. 

And all the people behind him and around him, they‘re going to 

continue following him right off that cliff. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I told a lot of folks back home, I never had 

confidence in them from day one. And I still don‘t have 

confidence to this day, and the reason being, quite frankly, quite 

simply — and this motion is exact evidence of that — is they 

don‘t know what they‘re doing, Mr. Speaker. They don‘t have a 

clue. 

 

Now I say to people out there, well do you want extension of 

hours? We heard all the compelling arguments, and I say in my 

caucus, you‘re darn right we do. I want this extension of hours 

because it gives us more time to explain to the people what‘s 

wrong with them, Mr. Speaker. And the wizardry of the 

member from Cannington . . . He doesn‘t realize that the 

opposition, from my perspective, should want this because 

where else do you get 400 minutes of time, free time to tell the 

world what‘s wrong with them? 

 

And they call that a strategy, Mr. Speaker? They call that a 

strategy? Well, no way. It doesn‘t work for them. And if their 

members want to sit here from 8 a.m. till midnight while we 

have the opportunity to explain what‘s wrong with them, guess 

what? We‘ll take it. We‘ll take it, Mr. Speaker. And that‘s 

exactly what‘s wrong with that particular party and why they 

shouldn‘t be government in 2011 because (a) they don‘t know 

what they‘re doing, but worse, we can‘t continue to afford 

them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I would point out to my colleagues, the people that sit on 

this side of the Assembly, we want this extension of hours. We 

want to be able to knock them around, explain to people exactly 

what is wrong with their Premier, their leader, right down to 

each member, Mr. Speaker. And as I look at their history, the 

two years that they‘ve had, you know, first of all they‘ve 

prevented the Tories from running in the last election so the 

Tories wouldn‘t split the vote. Well we‘ll see them in court over 

that one. 

 

Now they‘re trying to . . . fudging the books. Well that might 

work. Let‘s take out the rainy day fund. Let‘s kill off the 

Crowns. Let‘s take the money from there and we‘ll try to 

confuse the people. And now they‘re trying to mess around with 

the Chief Electoral Officer. Like why would they do that again 

to interfere with the selection of the Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. 

Speaker? Because they want to circumvent a fair election 

process by appointing somebody of their own liking, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 



5030 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

And the final point I would make is they want to stifle the 

debate from the opposition. They want to stifle the debate from 

the opposition through silly motions of this sort, silly motions 

of this sort. Well, Mr. Speaker, it isn‘t going to work. It isn‘t 

going to work because every minute that we have the 

opportunity to speak from this Assembly, we‘re going to speak. 

And we‘re going to give a big thanks to the member from 

Cannington because he‘s afforded us this 400 minutes of time 

to tell people exactly what is wrong with the Saskatchewan 

Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We will take every minute of this opportunity to tell the people 

of how they put this province in a deficit, Mr. Speaker, of how 

they‘ve destroyed our Crowns, of how they have tried to 

prevent the Conservatives from running and yet half of them are 

conservatives. I just can‘t figure them out, Mr. Speaker. So I try 

and make sense of it all. How could they be this bad and still be 

in denial? How could they be this bad and still be in denial? 

And I‘ve finally come up to the conclusion is they know not 

what they do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again I go back in my earlier point, the member from 

Cannington putting this motion forward, and he thinks we‘re 

not going to take advantage of the opportunity. Well I thank 

him for this opportunity and the 400 minutes of time that we 

have to tell the world and the people of Saskatchewan just how 

terrible they are, Mr. Speaker. That‘s our role, and we‘re going 

to take every bit of opportunity. 

 

Now I look at their lay of the land from that opposition or from 

that government and I say, well no wonder they‘re confused. 

No wonder they‘re confused, because on the Premier‘s left are 

the Liberals. Well in the political spectrum, I thought they were 

on the right. Then I look at the Premier‘s right, and there‘s 

Liberals over there. And then behind them there‘s 

Conservatives. And then on the far back of him there‘s 

Reformers. And so after a while I say, well no wonder they‘re 

confused. They don‘t know who they are, what they are, and 

they don‘t know how to do the job. 

 

So what they do, Mr. Speaker, is they try and push their agenda. 

And they just simply can‘t figure out (a) how to run a province; 

and (b), they can‘t even figure out how to run the Legislative 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And I say to them that this opportunity 

for us to say these words and many other words, we thank you, 

the member for Cannington, for the opportunity to not only talk 

about this at 9 o‘clock in the morning, but at 2 o‘clock in the 

afternoon and at 10 o‘clock at night. We thank you. It gives us a 

great opportunity. And if you think for one minute that we‘re 

not going to take advantage of it, you‘re dead wrong. We‘re 

going to take advantage of that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I‘ll point out to many, many people out 

there, all that was afforded to us was 2 hours and 15 minutes of 

debate on 40 Bills — 2 hours and 15 minutes, a rough estimate 

— and that‘s all we could afford. That‘s all they were trying to 

afford the opposition to debate the Bills that they presented 

here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And to the people of Saskatchewan, rules were set in place 

where the opposition has adequate time to dissect the 

information, to consult with people — which they never did — 

and to certainly challenge the government on the issues of some 

of the Bills they‘re bringing forward. And the same way they 

went to war with labour with Bill 80, they‘re now trying to 

stifle this Assembly. And I say to them, shame on them, but 

thank you for the opportunity because we will make the most of 

it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now as I pointed out, the two Bills that were passed and 

received Royal Assent in the fall session were the cellphone 

Bill, which talked about proper use of cellphones, and the 911 

amendment Bill. Those two Bills are pretty basic Bills. They 

were needed and necessary, and the opposition supported that. 

 

Now where we want to have some real debate and some real 

discussion is on Bill 80, and those are where we want to have 

the debate. But instead of having Bill 80 as a single place that 

we should debate, they are throwing everything in here. And, 

Mr. Speaker, that lends argument to my point that they don‘t 

know what they‘re doing. 

 

Now what happens is we start at 8 o‘clock in the morning. 

We‘ll be here at 8 o‘clock in the morning. It ends at 12 at night. 

We‘ll be here at 12 at night. Now, Mr. Speaker, what this does 

in essence, it stifles the debate. It stifles the debate for many, 

many people in Saskatchewan that might want to participate 

and learn about how these Bills are going to impact their life. 

But these guys don‘t care. 

 

And secondly, it‘s as you travel, travel throughout the province 

— and I do this on a regular basis — a lot of people want to see 

what‘s going on in the Assembly. They may not think people 

have an interest, but people have the interest. They have the 

interest in knowing what‘s going on, what Bills are being 

passed, where they‘re at. There‘s a lot of people that have a 

remarkable interest in what happens with the Assembly. They 

have now stifled those people as well. 

 

And I go back to my point, what did the opposition want? They 

wanted four or five extra days of question period. Twenty-five 

minutes a day makes what? A hundred minutes. A hundred 

minutes of debate at question period more and this thing would 

be settled. But, Mr. Speaker, they chose not to. They chose not 

to. Why? Because like all those little, white, fluffy animals in 

that pen, that‘s what it reminds me of to this day, Mr. Speaker. 

And those white, fluffy animals are clapping like a bunch of 

seals because that‘s what they are told to do. That‘s what they 

are trained to do. 

And then all of a sudden, they confuse the people. But we in 

opposition are not confused. We know exactly what they can‘t 

do. They know what exactly what they don‘t want to do. And at 

the end of the day, they‘re massively confused because they 

don‘t know whether they‘re Liberals. They don‘t know whether 

they‘re Conservatives. They don‘t know whether they‘re 

Reformers. They don‘t know what they are. So if they don‘t 

know what they‘re doing, they don‘t know what they are, and 

they haven‘t had any success, they can‘t run to a national leader 

because, well, who is their national leader? 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that leads me to point out to people they are 

leaderless. They‘re rudderless, and they‘ve had no success 

whatsoever in managing the finances of this province, of 

managing the economy of this province, and now to add insult 

to injury, of managing the legislative agenda of this province. 

 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5031 

And I say to all the backbenchers over there, shame on you for 

not speaking up because the member from Cannington doesn‘t 

know the rules all that well, Mr. Speaker. He‘s making them 

look terrible, and the opportunity we have for 400 minutes of 

debate to point that out, we‘re going to point it out. And we‘re 

going to point it out in this Assembly. And what‘s worse, Mr. 

Speaker, if you look at what the people of Saskatchewan are 

saying, they‘re going to say the same thing. What‘s going on 

there? Why are they sitting so late now? And our response is 

going to be, because they couldn‘t manage the legislative 

agenda on their part. 

 

[18:30] 

 

So again you go down the list of things that they have been 

trying to do: can‘t manage finances, can‘t manage the economy, 

can‘t manage their legislative agenda. They don‘t know who 

they are or what they represent. They‘re not certain what 

direction they‘re going. They just spin, spin, spin. And what 

happens at the end of the day? At the end of the day, the people 

of Saskatchewan are going to say, well I think we‘ve had 

enough of these guys. I think we‘ve had enough of these guys. 

 

And I want to point out to the people as well, my colleague here 

earlier in the day pointed out that Grant Devine, when he was 

the premier, well they put the province millions of dollars in the 

hole over a period of time. Well these guys would make even 

the former Premier Grant Devine blush when they‘re putting the 

province $1 billion in the hole each year that they‘ve been in 

office so far. And we‘re still counting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I‘ll point out again that, as a result of the incompetence of 

this government, people in Saskatchewan are now given the 

latest slap in the face when it comes to the legislative agenda. 

They are now being forced to work within a very tight time 

frame, under very long hours, so the incompetence of these 

guys doesn‘t show up at the end of the day. Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan know this. When they insult the people 

of Saskatchewan‘s intelligence by saying, oh we‘re going to 

blame the NDP for this one, I say to them that the people of 

Saskatchewan are a lot brighter than that, and they know 

exactly what is going on. 

 

When the session is forced to go into overtime, when they‘re 

looking at extended hours, that‘s a failure on the House 

Leader‘s part to negotiate proper passage of their Bills and 

proper, timely debate on some of the opposition‘s role when it 

comes to those Bills. And quite frankly that‘s another level of 

incompetence being suffered by the people of Saskatchewan for 

the inability of the Sask Party government and its members to 

do things properly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again I would point out to the people of Saskatchewan, 

they‘re extending the hours from 8 to 12. We accept that time. 

We‘ll work within that time frame. And not one of us will 

blink, Mr. Speaker. We‘ll take every opportunity to criticize 

this government. And I said it at the front; I‘m going to say it 

again. We welcome the time. We thank the member from 

Cannington for giving us this great opportunity. He thinks it‘s 

his historical manoeuvre. Well it‘s not. We said, let‘s take it. If 

they‘re going to give it to us, let‘s take it and tell the people of 

Saskatchewan just how terrible they are. And we can tell them 

in the morning, in the afternoon, in the evening, and late at 

night. And, Mr. Speaker, I‘m telling my colleagues, let‘s do it. 

 

So not only two years, $2 billion in debt; two years, two 

extension of hours, a motion to extend the hours, to me that 

simply spells one thing: incompetence. Incompetence on their 

part. And I say at the outset, they don‘t have any business 

experience as shown by the Premier‘s business experience. 

They don‘t have any financial ability to manage this province as 

shown by the Minister of Energy and mines, the member from 

Kindersley. And yet all this flock of chickens are following 

these two leaders. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I say to them, why don‘t you allow us the 

extra four or five days? What are you afraid of? Give us the 

extra four or five sitting days, and we‘ll make sure that your 

Bills are going through, and let‘s rock and roll. Let‘s rock and 

roll. But, Mr. Speaker, they won‘t do it. They will not do it. The 

20th of May is the drop-dead date because, Mr. Speaker, they 

don‘t want any more questions from this opposition because we 

have them on the run, Mr. Speaker. We have them on the run, 

and they‘re afraid to come in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Everywhere across the province, the unions, the teachers, the 

Aboriginal people, the many farmers that are out there, the city 

folks are saying, well we tried these guys and they just failed 

miserably. Given the opportunity, they turn their backs on us, 

and there‘s going to be a price to pay, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again I‘ll summarize to the people of Saskatchewan that are 

listening. Once again, incompetence by the Sask Party. And 

where else in the world do you give your opposition in politics 

400 minutes to say what‘s wrong with you? Well those guys 

just did. And again for the fourth time I‘ll tell the member from 

Cannington, thanks, you‘re now back on my Christmas list for 

that one. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, not only have they miserably wrecked the 

financial fortunes of Saskatchewan, they have destroyed the 

Crowns, Mr. Speaker. They are trying to manoeuvre their party 

to another election victory by trying to stop the Conservatives 

from running. And now the latest insult, they can‘t run the 

House, Mr. Speaker. They can‘t run the House. So it‘s time to 

get rid of them, Mr. Speaker, and I‘ll be voting against their 

motion every single day in every hour of the extension that I 

have . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Member‘s time has elapsed. I 

recognize the member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‘s a 

pleasure to rise in this debate following in the wake of the 

member from Athabasca. Certainly the guy gave a heck of a 

speech, but we‘ll see what we can do to live up to that. I guess, 

yes, it‘s a tough act to follow. Tough act to follow for sure. But 

I want to say right off the top, Mr. Speaker, that we‘re in this 

debate right now. It‘s a pleasure to rise, as ever, in terms of 

participating in the proceedings of this legislature. 

 

But it‘s certainly no pleasure to participate in this debate 

because this debate that we‘re in right now, Mr. Speaker, is 

symbolic, it‘s emblematic of what‘s wrong with this 

government. They can‘t manage their budget, so they try to 

fudge it through the books. And they try to strip the Crowns of 



5032 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

equity and they try to, you know, get it past the people, but at 

the end of the year it‘s still $1 billion in the hole. This budget 

that we‘re in right now, we think the same thing‘s going to 

happen with that, but it‘s likely going to be on the expenditure 

side. 

 

So there you have two budgets in a row where they can‘t 

manage their affairs. But of course it‘s not them that pays the 

price, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it‘s the people of the province that 

pay the price. And it‘s like that with their legislative agenda as 

well in that they can‘t manage their affairs. So who pays the 

price for that? You know, they may think this is about sticking 

it to the opposition somehow, but the opposition has a role in 

this Assembly to hold the measures and the actions of the 

government up to scrutiny, be it on the legislative side or on the 

budgetary side. 

 

And in terms of what‘s happened in this past budget in 

particular, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with each day that passes by, 

there are new things that come to light that of course they 

glossed over in the main budget speech, that they glossed over 

in terms of the fancy speeches that the writers in their caucus 

office had them get up and deliver like the hybrids that my 

colleague from Athabasca was talking about, those hybrid 

chicken seals. 

 

So in terms of each day that goes by and the new things that we 

find out about what this government is doing, and then having 

an opportunity to raise that in this Assembly, as is proper in a 

parliamentary democracy, of course it makes sense that those 

members opposite would want to deny that opportunity. 

Because it‘s becoming very clear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

when they get into a jam, it‘s always somebody else‘s fault. 

And it‘s always somebody else that pays the price. 

 

So in terms of not wanting to have an extra week of question 

periods, I can see how that goes, Mr. Speaker, because they‘re a 

bunch of . . . It‘s an exercise in running and hiding. They‘d 

rather do things, you know, in the midnight hour or first thing in 

the morning. And they‘d rather try to jam the media that works 

very hard to get the story out, but they‘re of course 

overstretched as it is. They want to manipulate the cycle of this 

legislature so that they can get as much through in a given day 

as possible. 

 

And as the member from Athabasca said, we‘ll be there kicking 

and fighting every step of the way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because on the basic point of whether or not this is good for 

democracy or not, it‘s not. It‘s not good for democracy. The 

structure of this House, the rules that were set up to govern the 

proceedings of committee, they were set up to govern the 

passage of a budget through this House, to govern the passage 

of legislation through this House. They were set up for a reason, 

and they‘re set up over time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But again this is where we see these members opposite making 

history. You know we‘re heading up for our second 

billion-dollar deficit in a row, you know, two billion-dollar 

deficits in a year. The one last year was the second worst in the 

history of this province, and we‘ll see where we wind up with 

this one, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But in terms of imposing closure on this Assembly, in terms of 

curtailing, limiting, cutting off the debate, the scrutiny, the 

accountability that this Chamber should render for the people 

that send us to this Chamber, in terms of a government that 

brings in closure, they‘re setting a record in that regard too, Mr. 

Speaker. They‘re making history in that regard. And I think the 

people, come the time with the election, they‘re going to take a 

full measure of that, and they‘re going to tell them what they 

think of that. 

 

And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is part of a parcel that goes 

through things like the way that that caucus over there got their 

fingers into the process around the Chief Electoral Officer. And 

they can make the different arguments, but when somebody like 

John Whyte — who‘s a renowned constitutional scholar, one of 

the brightest minds that has worked in this province in public 

policy, has worked in this government in the province in terms 

of working with some of the brightest young minds at the law 

school at the University of Saskatchewan — when somebody 

like John Whyte feels compelled to come out and say, this is 

bad for democracy, what these people are doing with the Chief 

Electoral Officer, you have to wonder what the members 

opposite think of that. 

 

Do they just sort of laugh that off because the only thing that 

matters is that they have their way, and the traditions and the 

practices of parliamentary democracy be . . . you know, to heck 

with them? Do the members opposite look at something like the 

letter that John Whyte wrote in The StarPhoenix and the 

Leader-Post, do they look on that with pride? You‘d hope not, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. But what happens is that in terms of the 

effect of that letter, here we are — another anti-democratic 

measure by the government opposite. 

 

You look at the way that they have been progressing through 

court in terms of what‘s happened with the Tory metro fund, the 

PC [Progressive Conservative] metro fund, and the games that 

they‘ve played to try and keep the PCs off the ballot. And I 

know that there are some members over there that have some 

long-standing vendettas with individuals in the Progressive 

Conservative Party. But of course they fight this game through 

the courts to try and deny the Progressive Conservatives access 

to that money. 

 

And do you know what, Mr. Speaker? They tried to have 

themselves severed from that lawsuit, but there they stand. And 

that is going to proceed. And it‘s going to take its time, but the 

truth will out in that circumstance, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

again whenever you‘ve got a government that is messing 

around with the basic rules of engagement, with the basic 

machinery of parliamentary democracy — such as who can 

field candidates, such as the Chief Electoral Officer — 

whenever you have a government doing things like that, it‘s not 

surprising that we‘re here today debating the second closure 

motion within, you know, within a year. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wonder, you know, come the 

November 7, 2000 election will be right around Remembrance 

Day, and different of my colleagues have talked about the price 

that has been paid over the years by different of our forebears to 

secure and to defend democracy in this country. And in terms of 

fair play and open and honest and accountable elections, you‘d 

think that would be fundamental to the runnings of a 

parliamentary democracy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But with their 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5033 

actions, they show that they‘re into something very different, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it is part of a parcel with the way that they run their budgets 

and the way that they run their legislative agenda, where it‘s 

never anybody‘s fault but somebody else. Never can they take 

responsibility for their actions, Mr. Speaker. Never do they 

want to have the extra scrutiny entailed in an extra five days of 

question period. No, that‘s not what they want. They want to 

stack it up so that we go from 8 in the morning till 12 at night. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, we‘ll be here. We‘ll be here for that 

every step of the way. But I think the people see through that 

and they see through that increasingly, that they were promised 

something very different by the member from Swift Current 

who came out in the last election and said hope trumps fear. 

Hope trumps fear, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well I‘m afraid that 

what we‘ve seen from these members opposite is something 

much more on the fearful side than anything to do with hope. 

 

And the fearful side has to do with the way that they jammed 

the budget through, the way that they don‘t bring everything up 

to the surface in terms of what‘s happening with the budget, and 

the way that things are coming forward day after day because of 

course they make the mistakes, the people pay the price, and 

then of course we as the opposition hear about it. 

 

And in terms of having an opportunity to bring those issues 

forward in this Chamber through question period, every day 

new issues come forward because they‘ve been, they‘ve been 

trying to sneak it under the shelf, sneak it under the counter. 

And the problem is of course they want to curtail the question 

period so that they can deny that accountability to the people. 

Well it‘s no big surprise in that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Again in this budget, you know, what did we see? We saw the 

central vehicle authorities being taken away from the CBOs, 

you know, again a relatively small measure in the scheme of a 

$10 billion budget but something that affects mightily the 

ability of CBOs to do their business. 

 

And you have to wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker. CBOs of course, 

when these people first came into government, they had a big 

CBO consultation exercise. They had a big summit. And you 

have to wonder, well how is it that they had all this sort of 

feedback and connection with the CBOs and then they go 

sneaking around come budget time doing things like this? 

Things that are very hurtful to the way that these very valuable 

community-based organizations get the job done for people in 

the community, be it, you know, kids going to Aboriginal Head 

Start or to KidsFirst or to daycare or to, you know, the things 

that family services used them for or the different sort of 

youth-focused CBOs — all organizations that operate on a very 

tight budget to begin with, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[18:45] 

 

But of course now they‘ve got to put more water in the soup 

and to see how they‘re going to keep their doors open another 

day, thanks to that government over there — that government 

that didn‘t have the guts to bring it out in terms of the minister 

talking about the measures coming forward in the budget. We 

see it come forward in things like the Dutch elm cuts and the 

West Nile program — again cuts that are, you know, maybe in 

the sense of the media equation of a budget that are penny smart 

but, in terms of the preventative aspect of them, are pound 

foolish, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And in terms of West Nile, if you look at a program that has 

been so successful and then you use that as grounds to cut it, 

you know, you wonder what the logic process is over there, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Is it that up is down and down is up and 

everything‘s sideways over there, Mr. Deputy Speaker? So 

West Nile‘s a big success? You better cut it. 

 

We see them stalling on the delivery of funding for CBOs. We 

hear this from different parts of the community where they‘re 

starting to wonder if it‘s a tactic where, by holding off the 

provision of funding for CBOs . . . is this some kind of a tactic 

geared at starving them out? Again these are organizations that 

do great work on the front lines in a lot of difficult 

circumstances. But is it because they‘re trying to starve those 

CBOs out and they‘ve got some kind of an agenda around those 

that are friends and those that are not because that‘s something 

we‘ve seen in other sectors with this government as well, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

We see it with SCN where again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms 

of being penny smart and pound foolish, this is exactly what 

happens there in terms of the trigger effect of the broadcasting 

licence, in terms of the fact that you‘ve got people coming 

forward today from the board saying we weren‘t consulted; 

we‘re the board that you‘d appointed and you didn‘t consult us 

even. 

 

And that‘s another hallmark of this government, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and it‘s another reason why they want to run and hide 

from question period. And I understand that. But the people will 

have their say. They can play their games in here, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but it‘s the hallmark of a government that‘s on its way 

out. It‘s not a hallmark of a government that‘s proud of its 

actions. It‘s not the hallmark of a government that wants to 

make the case to the people of Saskatchewan. It‘s not the 

hallmark of a government that believes in hope trumping fear. 

It‘s the hallmark of a government that runs and hides and tries 

to sneak things past and tries to manipulate the process so they 

can jam things through. 

 

And they can do that for so long, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 

there‘s a price that gets paid in the meantime for that by the 

people. But there‘s a price that‘s going to get paid by them at 

the polls, you can bet for sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, come the 

day of reckoning at the election, at the ballot box. 

 

You look at what‘s happened. There are the big things that have 

taken place in terms of the reneging on the promise for property 

tax relief, for the revenue sharing with the municipalities, and 

the way that we‘re going to be paying increased taxes for that in 

the days and weeks ahead in municipalities, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And certainly others have talked about that at greater 

length. 

 

But you also see things like the elimination of the Ukrainian 

language consultant out of the Department of Education. You 

know, something that‘s been a success for decades now, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that gets eliminated by this government in 



5034 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

haste to pay for the mistakes they‘ve made in terms of not being 

able to run last year‘s budget. And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

this isn‘t something that they sang from the mountaintops. It‘s 

not something they had big news out in the rotunda for it to 

announce and, you know, bring in the third party validators and 

have a grand old time. Of course, this is something that they 

tried to slink in through the process, to lose it in the vast $10 

billion of expenditure that is a budget. 

 

But of course the community catches up and we hear about it. 

We hear about it from the people to whom this program‘s 

mattered greatly over the years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we 

wonder how it is that these members opposite would want to 

curtail question period. Well it‘s because they want to avoid 

questions like that. 

 

You look at what‘s happened with labour, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and again, in terms of the way that these people do not consult 

or they feel they‘ve got some kind of a divine right to do 

whatever they want to do. If you‘re a working person in this 

province, if you‘re organized labour, it‘s very clear from those 

members opposite that they want nothing so ever to do with 

you. And it‘s funny, you know, we sort of understood their 

animus towards other parts of organized labour, but even in the 

building trades, where there are a lot of those building trades 

members voted for people over there in that last election, and 

they came forward with Bill 80. And to pay the very few, 

they‘ve very much angered the many. And there‘s going to be a 

day of reckoning come for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But in terms of the building trades, they are having their say on 

Bill 80. And the members opposite can play their games, but 

that fight will go on. Or you look at what‘s happening in the 

health care workers‘ bargaining and the way that that 

government opposite has bargained in patent bad faith in terms 

of those collective agreements. And again they will try to jam 

those health care workers that are on the front lines doing a very 

important job, but they can jam them all they like. They can try 

to manipulate the process, but the truth will out, and those 

people will have their say come the election day as well. 

 

You can look at the tripartite co-operation that we‘ve tried to 

engender with the Saskatchewan Labour Market Commission. 

And it‘s taking business and labour and government working 

together to try and build something around labour force 

development, around labour market development in this 

province. And of course that‘s obviously too much co-operation 

for those members opposite, so they tear it up. 

 

You look at what‘s happening out in First Nations and Métis 

country. You know in the fall, of course, we had the declaration 

of the Year of the Métis. And I‘m sure we‘ll see different other 

members out there come back to Batoche, and they‘ll talk about 

what great, what great friends of the Métis they are. And 

meanwhile, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we hear from the MNS [Métis 

Nation of Saskatchewan] that they‘ve laid off all but a half 

dozen of their staff because they can‘t get funding secured from 

the different levels of government. 

 

And we hear from the 111 deals that were signed for Aboriginal 

employment development and what a difference that made in 

the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And instead of building on 

that momentum and bolstering that momentum, what do the 

members opposite do? They tear it up. 

 

And the thing we can‘t figure on this side of the House, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is it a function of a minister over there who 

doesn‘t know his file, doesn‘t understand what his officials are 

briefing him on? Is it just some sort of blind malevolence on the 

part the members opposite because you would think that 

Aboriginal employment development would be a huge priority 

for this province, should be a huge priority for this province. 

 

But again when it comes time to back up their actions with 

words or back up their words with actions, this is what they do 

— they cut the program in the budget. They cut the First 

Nations and Métis business development fund. And today we 

heard from people that were saying, you know, we just need 

those economic development funds to get out there to take 

advantage of the great opportunities that are here in the 

province. But what do we get from them? We get a cut, and we 

get a program where they of course have yet to roll out the 

details. 

 

We talk about the environmental protocol. You know the 

members opposite like to talk about 16 years. Well here‘s 16 

years for you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is a program that went 

from 1994 till budget day this year, budget day this year. And 

how did that program come to an end? It was a phone call from 

the deputy minister to Vice-chief Whitefish, the FSIN, saying 

your program is cut, $282,000 are gone, and the five staff that 

were in place to help develop capacity, to help FSIN backstop 

74 First Nations throughout this province that are party to the 

FSIN in terms of the work that they do, that‘s not important. It 

doesn‘t merit a face-to-face meeting. It merits a phone call on 

budget day saying, you know, your program is done. 

 

And these are members opposite that like to lecture, that have 

liked to lecture in the past about consultation and how you do it 

right and do it not. And we certainly weren‘t perfect on that 

score, Mr. Speaker, but I‘ll take our record on consultation over 

theirs any day of the week. 

 

Or you look at what happened with the taxation of tobacco. 

Again you know, this is something where you think . . . you 

know, the members opposite, they must want to make work for 

lawyers because instead of sitting down and consulting face to 

face, working through the FSIN protocol, what do they do? The 

Premier announces it at the Saskatchewan Chamber of 

Commerce luncheon. You know he doesn‘t have the guts to 

come into an FSIN meeting or to have the decency to sit down 

face to face. He announces it to the chamber. So it‘s pretty clear 

what kind of politics are being played there, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

I don‘t know. You look at so many of the measures of this 

government; it‘s clear that they can‘t manage a budget. They 

can‘t manage a legislative process. They can‘t manage the basic 

decency to have meaningful relationships with the different 

stakeholders groups across the province. So it‘s very clear why 

they want to run and hide from question period, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So I‘ll be voting for the motion, or voting against the motion 

. . . 

 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5035 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member‘s time has elapsed. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise for 

the second time in two years to speak to a motion to change the 

rules of the Legislative Assembly in respect to hours, rules that 

the Saskatchewan Party, when in opposition, embraced and 

endorsed — more than endorsed, embraced, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I rise for the second time in two years to speak after a 

motion of closure because the members opposite in the 

government do not want to hear the opposition of the day speak 

to their resolution to change rules that they embraced and 

endorsed. And the only significant difference of any sort 

between the circumstances today and the circumstances two 

years ago were that the members of the government have grown 

even less patient with hearing from the opposition in respect to 

our right to speak for the people of Saskatchewan on legislation 

which we know, other than the minister‘s second reading 

speech, no member opposite has any interest in speaking to and 

as far as we can tell over here, no member seems to have any 

interest in understanding or reading, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so it falls to us, it falls to us to speak to the legislation in 

debate — the sound of one hand clapping, Mr. Speaker. But the 

government, which doesn‘t want to speak to its own legislation, 

doesn‘t really want to speak at length to why they want to shut 

down debate, why they want to change the rules of the House, 

Mr. Speaker, is also impatient with any Member of the 

Legislative Assembly speaking to legislation or any member 

speaking to this resolution at any length beyond 20 minutes. 

And I know my colleague from The Battlefords had only begun 

to scratch the surface of the role that the opposition plays in this 

legislature and the reasons why a second motion in two short 

years to change the rules of this House on the part of the 

government was inappropriate to say the least, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to address . . . Because the Government Deputy House 

Leader — I think I have that right — the member for Meadow 

Lake, Minister for Municipal Affairs was kind enough, I‘ll put 

it that way, to quote from the last time I rose two years ago to 

speak to a motion to change the rules of the House. And I guess 

it was my short remarks of about three hours that caused . . . the 

immediate cause of the closure motion two years ago, Mr. 

Speaker. And the Deputy House Leader either intentionally I 

think or unintentionally perhaps did not get the point of the 

remarks that he quoted from, my remarks that he quoted from, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

He seems like an intelligent person, Mr. Speaker, and I don‘t 

say that just because he‘s a lawyer. They don‘t necessarily go 

together but in his case they appear to, Mr. Speaker. So I don‘t 

believe he unintentionally misunderstood what I was saying two 

years ago. But he found the quote, out of context, useful for his 

argument that the rules of the House should be changed once 

again to limit the hours or to extend the hours of debate but to 

maintain the minimum limit on the number of days, Mr. 

Speaker, that we are here doing the people‘s business. 

 

And what he said, to paraphrase his quotation of me — so to 

paraphrase myself — is that of course the majority in the 

Legislative Assembly, the party that has the confidence of this 

Assembly, has the right to pass through its legislative agenda, 

no matter how ambitious that is, Mr. Speaker. And a very 

ambitious agenda takes a little bit longer because the opposition 

have a duty to scrutinize these Bills, to discuss them with the 

public, to discuss them with interested stakeholders in 

particular. 

 

[19:00] 

 

Some members opposite who served in opposition for a number 

of years will remember that duty, spoke to it, spoke to it at 

length when there was a government, the NDP government that 

lived within these rules, Mr. Speaker — didn‘t change them 

every two years as the Sask Party government is doing. But of 

course a government has a right, given sufficient time, to move 

through even an ambitious legislative agenda, subject to — as I 

said and as the Deputy House Leader quoted me as saying — 

subject to the opposition‘s right to hold the government to 

account. 

 

And under our rules — which were rules of consensus, Mr. 

Speaker; they were agreed to by the Saskatchewan Party and the 

New Democratic Party, embraced enthusiastically by the 

Saskatchewan Party in opposition — under those rules, there 

was a proportionate amount of time in a day divided between 

the government‘s legislative agenda and discussion of that 

agenda and the opposition‘s ability to hold the government to 

account within this Assembly. 

 

And under the rules, it is extremely generous for the 

government, by one perspective in any case, Mr. Speaker. We 

sit here, under the rules, Monday, 1:30 to 10:30 with a two-hour 

break for supper. Tuesday the same. Wednesday, 1:30 to 5. 

Thursday, 10 to 1. Hours and hours here, Mr. Speaker, and 

almost all of it on the government‘s business. A little bit of time 

for petitions; there‘s an hour allowed. Never used up that time. 

This opposition hasn‘t. They did not when they were in 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. Twenty-five minutes a day for 

question period, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So here we have, within the rules, hours to look at, discuss, 

debate the legislation put forward by the government, and a 

limit on how long that debate can go on, Mr. Speaker. As 

everybody in this Assembly knows, 20 hours and that is the 

extent of the debate on the Bills. So the majority can always 

pass its legislative agenda given enough days here in the 

Chamber. 

And the days that have been set, Mr. Speaker, this last fall, this 

spring, are the minimum, Mr. Speaker. If those aren‘t enough 

hours in those days to pass the legislative agenda of the 

government, and they may not be, Mr. Speaker — because how 

the government has managed its time and because of the 

government‘s agenda and it‘s ambitious, if not in quality, Mr. 

Speaker, it‘s ambitious perhaps in quantity in the number of 

Bills, but because of the way the government has managed the 

agenda — if that‘s not enough days, Mr. Speaker, the rules 

provide for simply adding more days. 

 

Each one of those days, Mr. Speaker — and they could be on a 

Monday, a number of hours long, you know, almost eight, Mr. 

Speaker — means adding one question period of 25 minutes. 

And that‘s what this is all about, Mr. Speaker. The government 

doesn‘t want one more question period than the absolute 

minimum. 



5036 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

 

The Minister of Health doesn‘t want to answer one more 

question on health care than he absolutely has to, Mr. Speaker. 

The Minister of Justice doesn‘t want to try to get up and explain 

how a police investigation excuses the government of any 

concern about any conflicts of interest by members who have 

sat in that government caucus, any more times than he has to, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don‘t think the Minister of Finance wants really hard 

questions on how this budget can be taken seriously in light of 

the pressures that the government has to admit exist in respect 

to salaries on health care workers, salaries of teachers — if this 

is not an average year for fires; if abandoning the West Nile 

virus preventive strategy is not saving a penny and then losing a 

pound, Mr. Speaker. I don‘t think they want any more questions 

about the budgeting question period than they are going to have 

with the minimum number of days, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the Government House Leader has said as much. He has 

said, he‘s told the media that the Saskatchewan Party 

government doesn‘t want to add another week to the sitting 

even though that would take care of the entire legislative agenda 

without requiring a change in the rules of the House — rules 

that they supported and embraced — without requiring a motion 

of closure to shut down the opposition. That week would 

probably do it, Mr. Speaker. But one more week would be four 

more question periods, and that‘s what is of vital importance to 

the government here, is they not have four more question 

periods, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that‘s what I meant, clearly said two years ago when this 

government did exactly the same thing, that yes, they have a 

right to pass their agenda, and there‘s a way to do that within 

the rules, Mr. Speaker. And it‘s by accepting the other right that 

exists here in this Assembly, and that‘s the right of this 

opposition to question and to hold to account, Mr. Speaker. It is 

that balance that is unacceptable to this government. It‘s that 

balance is unacceptable to the government. 

 

What the government wants to do is add more hours to the days 

so that the 20 hours that are required on a Bill can be completed 

and fulfilled without adding a single question to a member of 

the Executive Council, Mr. Speaker. And that‘s what this is all 

about. It‘s as simple as that. It‘s not as if the opposition has 

impeded unduly the government legislative agenda. It may not 

be moving as quickly as the government would wish, Mr. 

Speaker, but it is unfair to suggest that the opposition has not 

allowed the government to pass Bills. 

 

The member from The Battlefords spoke at length about the 

hours and in some cases the minutes, the minutes of debate that 

had taken place on a Bill — mere minutes in some cases — 

provoking the members of the government to change the rules 

of the Legislative Assembly perhaps in anticipation that their 

agenda was too ambitious for the minimum number of days. 

Which I would encourage the government, one of these years 

instead of changing the rules, to recognize that it is a minimum 

number of days, and that they can sustain a few questions from 

the opposition, Mr. Speaker, because that is why we are here — 

to ask the questions that they don‘t want to speak to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if that wasn‘t the case, we wouldn‘t have to sit at 

all. The government could do everything by regulation. They 

could make speeches and ministerial announcements. But in our 

tradition we recognize the value of an opposition to raise those 

questions the government doesn‘t want raised, Mr. Speaker. 

And surely four more question periods or eight more question 

periods would only serve the public at the discomfort of some 

of the front bench opposite, Mr. Speaker, no doubt. But I think 

they could take it, Mr. Speaker. I really think they could. 

 

And I think this is too easy, Mr. Speaker. And government 

shouldn‘t be easy in a democracy. And I think the members 

opposite, particularly those who have sat in opposition, would 

have agreed with that at one point, Mr. Speaker. But now they 

want it to be easy. And they want it to be too easy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I won‘t use — I haven‘t heard the entire debate; maybe the 

word was used — I won‘t use the word dictatorship. I think it‘s 

a little strong, Mr. Speaker. But the motive, the motive behind 

this, that government should be easy for the government, is the 

motive behind dictatorship, Mr. Speaker. And within the rules 

of this House, Mr. Speaker — and that includes the rules on 

how to change the rules when you don‘t like them — within the 

rules of the House, Mr. Speaker, this government with this 

motion, the second time in two years, is getting as close as they 

possibly can. At least I hope as close as they possibly can, Mr. 

Speaker, because this type of behaviour is disturbing enough. 

 

And as I said, Mr. Speaker, I do not believe that we are, as an 

opposition, holding up unduly the legislative agenda. This 

government has introduced 39 Bills at this session — their 

choice, Mr. Speaker. Does every one of these Bills have to be 

passed? If they do, Mr. Speaker, then there are remedies to that 

because you can extend the number of days. 

 

If every one of these Bills is so vital — now maybe some are 

not so vital, Mr. Speaker; I won‘t pick out any but we may have 

spent some time on some Bills that maybe could have waited 

for another day — but in any case, 39 Bills this session, not 

including eight Bills that were introduced just last week or just 

this week. And this does not include Bill 80 which was carried 

over from a previous session, Mr. Speaker, but about 

concerning which there is no more debate. It‘s had its 20 hours. 

So that doesn‘t . . . it really isn‘t that relevant. 

 

Two Bills were passed and received Royal Assent in the fall 

session and the opposition saw the value in moving forward on 

these Bills quickly. One had to do with hand-held devices, 

cellphones and similar devices in vehicles when they‘re being 

used by the driver, and that that practice should be discouraged 

by law, and the Assembly agreed and that moved forward 

quickly. And a 911 amendment Bill which moved ahead 

quickly for the same reasons. 

 

Eighteen other Bills have been passed now, Mr. Speaker. 

Eighteen Bills have been passed, almost half of the 39. And 

when you add the two, 20, over half of the Bills have been 

passed and 18 Bills await Royal Assent. Two of the Bills, of 

course, the cellphone Bill and the 911 amendment Bill have 

received Royal Assent. Two Bills are still in committee: Bill 80, 

but, Mr. Speaker, that‘s not taking up any time in the Chamber 

or is it going to be taking up very much time in committee; and 

Bill 119 which has to do with ticket sales and the scalping of 

tickets, Mr. Speaker. In committee, Mr. Speaker, but again 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5037 

those two Bills aren‘t going to take up any time in the 

Legislative Assembly at all. 

 

So my rough math, Mr. Speaker, is that there are less than 20 

Bills before this House in adjourned debate, and eight new Bills 

have been introduced this week that haven‘t received second 

reading, Mr. Speaker. The members of the opposition are not 

holding up Bills that the minister has not given a second reading 

speech on because we can‘t have spoken, have not had the 

opportunity to speak on those Bills at all. Those Bills have 

received zero minutes of time on behalf of the official 

opposition. We can‘t be holding up those Bills. 

 

So because there are less than 20 Bills still in adjourned debate, 

four weeks before the sitting‘s scheduled to come to an end, the 

government for the second time is changing the rules of the 

House, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that they can pass those Bills in 

that period of time and not, and not have a cabinet minister have 

to answer an additional question that he would rather not have 

asked in this Legislative Chamber. 

 

That is why, that is why we have this motion. That is why it is 

becoming a practice of this government to use its majority to 

change the rules of the House, Mr. Speaker. Once you would‘ve 

thought, well a new government — last time in 2008 — new 

government, ambitious agenda, didn‘t plan the agenda very 

well. Didn‘t allow enough days to pass those Bills. Kind of got 

jammed up, Mr. Speaker — and perhaps you could blame the 

opposition — jammed up by a sophisticated opposition, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[19:15] 

 

That was a good excuse, perhaps last time, not unacceptable 

one. But this, Mr. Speaker, there‘s no excuse for this. They‘ve 

been around the block a couple of times now, Mr. Speaker. 

They know better. They know how it‘s done. They know what 

the trade-offs are. This time we just see a government that will 

use its majority to impose its will on this Legislative Assembly 

and on the people of Saskatchewan. We‘ve seen it with the 

Chief Electoral Officer. We‘ve seen with refusal to answer 

written questions, and we‘ve seen it in this action here again, 

for the second time in what is now course of practice for this 

government. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member‘s time has elapsed. I 

recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It‘s a 

pleasure I join my colleagues to refer to some of the comments 

that they have and talk about the motion for closure. And I 

mean if you look at extending the hours and the whole process, 

the process that they want to do, and I think it goes back to the 

duty to consult, to talk to people in a meaningful way. And I 

think the people are starting to see a message, and it‘s 

unfortunate for the people of our province. 

 

It was a trusting . . . They put a lot of trust into the members 

opposite that they would do the right things. And I think people 

every day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are turning around. I‘ve had 

some people say, you know, I supported them; I did this. Some 

even bought memberships, and they‘ve said, I‘ve destroyed my 

membership; I will not support them again. I put the trust. 

 

And I said, don‘t worry about it. Don‘t worry about it. You 

trusted them. You can always give them a message later on. 

They turned their back on you, so you have the opportunity to 

turn your back on them — walk away, no hard feelings. And I 

think people are starting to think about it. They truly did 

support and thought there would be a change. But, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I think that it‘s coming very clear to the people out 

there . . . And maybe they can‘t see it, and that‘s fine. That‘s up 

to them. They can sit where they want and this just goes one 

step further to showing exactly what the people are unhappy 

with. 

 

You can‘t take a group of individuals that are supposed to work 

in a positive way for people in our province, and you want to 

make sure that your view, your message . . . And I mean I‘ve 

heard different things today being said, whether you call it 

bullying, you could call it every . . . Somebody just wanting to 

just have their way. Spoiled, whatever. I mean you hear 

different things. I mean my colleagues have expressed it very 

well and are calling it. 

 

And I think people out there are truly starting to get upset. 

They‘re tired. There‘s no consultation. There‘s insultation, but 

no consultation. Let me be very clear on that. And people are 

tired of it. They are just tired. They‘re not being heard by a 

government that‘s supposed to be there for the people. It‘s very 

frustrating for a lot people, and I mean we‘re hearing it. I don‘t 

know what the members opposite are hearing out there, but I 

don‘t know. Like it‘s bizarre, but maybe they don‘t want to see 

it. I don‘t know. 

 

But they have their leader, the Premier. He‘s responsible for all 

this. The finances, the financial mess lays on his shoulders. He 

is the leader. You look at decisions that he‘s made and under his 

leadership, the government. They‘re supposed to be doing 

positive things for the people of our province. 

 

And you can spin — and I know, I‘ve watched them — and 

they spin things the way they want. They ought to go to Sears 

and buy a Kenmore, the new spinner machine. They go six 

different ways. It‘s amazing to watch. I watched a commercial. 

That‘s about what they should be doing. 

 

But you know, you think about at the end of the day, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, it‘s the people of our province that suffer. It‘s 

not about the politicians. We‘ve got a job to do. We‘ll be here. 

We‘ll sit here and, like the member from Athabasca said very 

clearly, he doesn‘t mind. 

 

They want 400 minutes of negative and giving a chance to show 

their true record. We‘ll show their record, what they‘re about, 

what they‘re doing, what they‘re not doing. And they made a lot 

of promises. It‘s going to be interesting to see, Mr. Speaker. 

And I mean, all I can say on this point is I think the people in 

2011, November the 7th, will send the message. 

 

And they can sit there and, you know, they laugh and they think 

it‘s funny when we bring up issues. I don‘t find some of the 

stuff that we‘re bringing up funny. I have no . . . It‘s frustrating 

for people back home. It‘s all over the province that are having 

issues, whether it‘s the cost of rent, utilities, all the different 

things that are impacting people — medicine, health care, 



5038 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

roads, jobs. It‘s not all the spin that they‘ve got that 

everybody‘s happy in the province. 

 

And, you know, you have to be honest. I have to believe in the 

system, that even the members opposite got elected because 

they wanted to do something good for their communities and 

their constituencies. They‘ve got to get up and speak up, say 

something. Represent the people, fight for them — whether it‘s 

health care, doctor shortages — speak up. You don‘t have to 

accept everything that a few people say. Speak up for the people 

that elected you. But if you won‘t, I reassure those people, we 

will. We‘ll be visiting in the outreach in the rural areas, in the 

urban centres in the members opposite. We‘ll visit there. We‘ll 

find out. We‘re hearing stuff. It‘s not all positive as they think. 

 

So you know, this motion just shows you. We‘re going to 

extend the hours. And they want to give an opportunity, I guess, 

to get the business done. Well, you know, you look at . . . and a 

lot of my colleagues have expressed it very well with the 

number of Bills that have gone through the process. We‘ve 

debated them. We‘ve moved them to committee and they‘ll end 

up being law. And some have passed. And I have to be honest 

— some of those Bills are protecting people. They are out there. 

They‘re a tool that the police enforcement are using, and they 

work. That‘s the positive side of it. It worked. There are some 

things where we agree. We have to work. 

 

But to see the constant bullying; it‘s going to be their way. You 

don‘t like it, well here‘s what we‘re going to do to you. I don‘t 

think the people back home appreciate. I don‘t think anyone 

does. There‘s a lot of work gets done here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

lots of work. People are asked to put in extra hours. Well when 

we make those decisions, I sure hope we understand who all 

we‘re impacting. It‘s not just saying, oh well let‘s just do it. 

We‘re going to push the chest out, and we‘re going to show 

who‘s in charge. Well you know, that isn‘t going to cut it and it 

isn‘t going to work. 

 

And it‘s unfortunate. The Saskatchewan people are going to 

suffer for it. And people can say their different opinions. 

There‘s two sides to every story I guess. And that‘s right. But I 

know I‘m glad I‘m on this side, not trying to go back home and 

explain the mess that the government‘s doing. Be very clear, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And the 

members want to say that‘s fine. Thank you. I‘m glad I‘m on 

this side. You can make all the comments you want. That‘s 

good. I‘m glad, very glad. You can all sit there and say that. It 

wouldn‘t bother me, thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, there‘s so much work that has 

to be done, and we‘ve been working with them. I‘ve watched 

some of the process and some of the debate. And like I said, 

some things that have gone to committee. They‘re law. So the 

system does work. There‘s a way to work together. The people 

expect that. We‘re not holding things up, we‘re working with 

them. We‘ve proven that. Things have moved forward the way 

it‘s supposed to work. 

 

So to come out with information that you want to extend the 

hours rather than extend the days, that makes sense. If you need 

more time, that makes sense. Let‘s do that. Some of my 

colleagues expressed that very well. It‘s important. There‘s 

work to get done the government wants. Well let‘s extend the 

days. 

 

But that gives us an opportunity also to talk about what‘s going 

on. Question period, sharing more of the concerns with 

community members. People are concerned out there. They‘re 

looking at their finances. They‘re looking at their rent, their 

utilities, their health care, their roads, their housing. There are a 

lot of things going on. Addictions, mental health, having a job, 

getting called back to go to work — there‘s a lot of things 

happening. 

 

And this government is responsible for it. I think the people, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, will send the message — and members 

opposite can make all the noise they want — but at the end of 

the day, the people will speak. And I hope the people truly send 

the message, we trusted you; we gave you a chance. We did. 

Now they‘re going to send you a message. And take it for 

granted, and I‘ve heard some of the members opposite. They 

make their comments, oh yes, whatever is going to happen, as if 

the people want . . . Just don‘t be surprised. Don‘t take the 

people of our province for granted. You know, and I see that 

side of it. And sometimes, you know what? That‘s fine. 

 

But I know people are very concerned, and the issues that are 

affecting them and their families, they don‘t find it funny when 

it‘s tough when you have to make decisions. What are you 

going to do? What bills are you going to pay? The rent, what 

groceries, clothing — there‘s a lot of things affecting family 

people. 

 

Whether it‘s health care, you see at some of the stuff, the 

consultation that was not done. Very clearly to the 

chiropractors, you look at the cuts that have been made there. 

You look at some of the other cuts that have been made; very 

clearly this government doesn‘t want to consult. It just delivers 

the message and says, this is what we‘re doing and that‘s it. 

There‘s no duty to consult — sharing, talking to stakeholders, 

and making sure people understand, and making a good, 

informed decision — that‘s what really is troubling. 

 

A lot of people out there, there is no . . . They don‘t go out and 

talk to the communities. They just make their decisions based 

on whatever they want. They want to ram down what they want 

and if you don‘t like it, well look out. 

 

And look out if you are an employee and you work for a 

ministry and you bring issues forward or concerns. Well watch 

what they do. They‘ll show they‘re going to make an example 

of people. We‘re going to show it. That to me goes to show 

exactly what people are feeling. And I think the people are 

going to make a stand, and they‘re going to send this 

government a message. 

 

You can‘t take on fights with everybody. And you go out and 

you fight with every group and you turn your back on every 

group. It‘s going to come back, and you‘ll pay a price for it. But 

no, you know, for now they‘re the government, and they‘ll do 

what they want. And that‘s how they see it, and you can see 

that. 

 

But I have to believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the members 

opposite, some of the backbenchers will come forward and start 

saying their mind, hey, we have to do better for the people of 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5039 

our province. We can‘t let two or three people make all the 

decisions. There has to be a process to share. A process to say, 

here are the issues; here are the concerns. These are facts. 

They‘re not just made up. So you know when you look at a 

process that we‘re going to go through, sure we‘re going to be 

here for long hours. We‘ll do it. We‘ll gladly do it. It‘s not 

going to hurt us. We get paid to be here. 

 

But you know, I‘ve listened to some of my colleagues and some 

of the concerns that they have. And let‘s be honest. Some of 

them have been here 24 years and some less, and they‘ve got 

good points to make. There‘s some things going on here that, 

you know, truly in two years if you look at this, a motion like 

this has been within two years. You know, it might be two years 

or just over two years, but the point is this is a tool that‘s 

supposed to be used, I think, when times are really troubling 

and the business is not going on. I don‘t know all the details to 

it, but from what I‘m hearing you would think . . . But I‘m 

hearing it and I‘ve seen it. There‘s co-operation and Bills are 

getting on. 

 

And some of these Bills have very little time in debate. They‘re 

supposed to be having an opportunity to debate them. And 

there‘s the time. And sometimes, you know, you ask some good 

questions, and the people want you to ask those. And they say, 

you have an obligation as official opposition to ask the 

questions; here‘s what we want you to ask. And the government 

has an obligation to answer those questions, to make sure that 

legislation that‘s going to affect the people of our province, that 

the members opposite that are in the official opposition have the 

ability and can ask those questions of the government and hold 

them accountable. 

 

Because the government has to be held accountable by the 

official opposition for the people. It‘s important. And you 

know, I think, like a process, members opposite were there at 

one time. And I think one of my members said he‘s been here a 

while — he was in opposition; he was part of the government; 

now he‘s in opposition again. And he talks about a process. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to see some of the aggressive move 

that this one is — and I think it is aggressive — and is it 

warranted? I think at the end of the day the people are going to 

make it very clear, like what are you talking about? You have 

an opportunity to debate and 20 hours debate on a Bill. And I‘ll 

be honest. I don‘t think . . . Yes, there‘s time where you want to 

make sure that all the concerns and the people are consulted and 

they feel comfortable with legislation that‘s going to be passed 

by this House. Well people have to feel confident that that 

process has happened. We have an obligation to make sure that 

process has happened. Very clear. An obligation. 

 

[19:30] 

 

And I‘ll use this as an example again. I‘ll go back to this. It‘s a 

trust. That trust thing is unbelievable out there. People put trust 

in the government. They put trust in opposition to ask the tough 

questions, to not be bullied, to make sure that the questions that 

need to be asked are asked. That the government is held 

accountable when they mismanage the way this government 

and the Sask Party government has mismanaged the finances. 

The people want them held accountable. They had a savings 

account. They had a surplus of money; it‘s gone, very little left. 

People are asking, what‘s going on? 

 

Look at their own budget documents. They‘re showing 

projections of the deficit going up to 2014, if you look at it. 

Page 62 I believe is the page. 

 

If you see all what the people need to know, that information 

needs to get out. And there‘s a process. The official opposition 

has a job to do, and we‘ll make sure the people understand. And 

when you extend the days, those questions will get out and 

we‘ll hold the government accountable. But of course the 

government doesn‘t want to be held accountable; they want to 

get out of here. They don‘t want to extend more days so that 

you could show exactly what they‘re up to. No, no, no, no. You 

know, you could start to see some things happening. They don‘t 

want to be in here. They want to get out of here. So we‘re going 

to run from 8 in the morning till 12 at midnight, 16-hour days. 

And for what? They‘ll have to answer that. I know I‘ll share my 

views of it. And it will get done. 

 

And those members can yell all they want, you know, and may 

not like it, but tough, tough, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You know, 

you ask for it; you get it. 

 

And I hope the people truly send a message to them. They‘re 

asking for the people‘s opinion, I hope. And, you know, you 

take some of the areas of the . . . And I guess the duty to 

consult. And I guess, like I said earlier, it‘s not insult, but they 

don‘t get it. They don‘t understand. They think it‘s the same 

thing. Well we did that. Well on some of our community 

members, you‘ve done quite a job of insulting them. 

 

So I mean, Mr. Speaker, you know, it‘s very frustrating to 

watch some of the leadership out there, and some of the 

community members are very frustrated. They don‘t feel like 

they‘re getting consulted. Like this Bill, like everything else 

that they try to ram down. They go out and say, oh yes we did. 

Who do they talk to? Themselves? How many of even the 

official opposition backbenchers got in on the conversation? I 

don‘t think too often they get in on it. 

 

So I look at the end of the day and I wonder if the official 

opposition backbenchers don‘t get an opportunity, and I don‘t 

know for sure they don‘t, but the way it sounds they don‘t, 

because some of their communities are being impacted and 

nobody‘s speaking up for their community. You know, so that 

goes to show you a trust thing again. And I think at the end of 

the day the people will send a message saying, we supported 

you, we trusted you, you would speak on our behalf, and when 

things would impact our constituency you‘d be fighting and 

arguing at the table. 

 

Well we‘ve seen what‘s going on. And you could see it very 

clear by some of the communities that are impacted by having a 

Sask Party member representing them. They‘re not getting . . . 

They‘re very frustrated to see some of them coming forward, 

community members that feel like their government‘s supposed 

to protect them; that representative that represents them in this 

House is supposed to bring their message forward. To see the 

frustration and, I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, hope. 

 

And I tell people that. There‘s hope. Hang on to the hope. 

Things will change. And there is hope out there that things will 



5040 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

change, that the government will start doing what it‘s supposed 

to do on behalf of the people it represents. Not just a few people 

making decisions that . . . They don‘t even consult with anyone. 

They don‘t talk to anyone. They just make a decision after the 

fact and say, well if you don‘t like it, live with it. That is 

unacceptable. 

 

People should not have to feel that and to feel threatened. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, people should not feel threatened to be able to 

voice their concern to a government when someone is unhappy 

with the way they‘re being treated or how a department treats 

them or how the government is treating them. They shouldn‘t 

have to feel threatened or scared or nervous. And I‘m telling 

you, some of the people I‘ve talked to, they don‘t want to come 

forward. They‘re nervous. But some of them are starting to say 

they don‘t care any more. I don‘t care. If I lose my job, I lose 

my job. Things are happening that somebody needs to hear 

about. Decisions are made. We don‘t know how and why. 

That‘s all going to come out. It will come out. 

 

And, you know, when you go on the attack and you go after the 

people that are willing to bring their concerns forward, instead 

of trying to work with those concerns, you go after the 

individuals that are bringing the information . . . And we‘ve 

seen what‘s gone on here in the last while and it‘s pretty bad. 

It‘s appalling that anyone, whether they work for a government 

ministry or a government agency or work in the province, 

would have to feel the threat and worried about their job, for 

their families, and if they come forward with information that 

might be an area of concern, that has to be addressed. 

 

So we‘ve seen the pattern of this government. It‘s a trust thing. 

It‘s the mismanagement of the finances. The list goes on and 

on. It just doesn‘t end, you know? It doesn‘t end. You‘re seeing 

all the different things happening. The duty to consult and 

accommodate, the PST [provincial sales tax], the revenue, the 

so-called sharing, well the promises made . . . How many 

promises have been made to the people that that Sask Party 

government and Brad Wall and his leadership have not kept? 

That‘s appalling. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would remind the member to use 

that member‘s constituency and not his name. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — The Premier, under his leadership and his 

government, to go ahead and do some of the things that they 

have done, the promises made, and they‘ve turned their back on 

the people. You know, the Premier and the Sask Party 

government. And you see what they‘ve done, the problems that 

they‘ve made and the . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member‘s time has expired. I 

recognize the member from Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‘m 

pleased to rise today to speak in support of democracy and in 

opposition to tyranny. Now members opposite might not like 

the word; they might think it‘s harsh. But in this case it fits and 

I‘m going to detail a chronology of failure put forward by this 

government. 

 

They‘ll bully, they‘ll mismanage, and you can‘t trust them. 

That‘s the theme of this speech. And it‘s true. It‘s true on a 

number of occasions. Now speaking specifically about bullying, 

it starts at the top. It starts at the very top when you‘ve got a 

Premier in the province of Saskatchewan who‘s such a bully 

that he bullies the Progressive Conservatives out of their lunch 

money. He took their lunch money, Mr. Speaker. Now it just 

happened to be $3 million. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? Why 

is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 

member just gets to his feet and he starts using derogatory 

language towards a member of the House. Mr. Speaker, he 

starts to claim that the Premier is a bully and that he‘s bullying, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that you rule that member out of 

order, that he withdraw those remarks and apologize 

unequivocally. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the . . . Why is the 

member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, to respond to the point of order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, what the member was doing was referring to 

actions and behaviours, Mr. Speaker. And those actions and 

behaviours demonstrate a characteristic that he said was 

bullying, Mr. Speaker. During debate, Mr. Speaker, we have the 

ability to debate characteristics and behaviours of individuals. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the particular method in which the member 

was using to illustrate was an illustration of a set of behaviours 

and how those behaviours are characteristically the same as 

somebody that‘s a bully, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, I think 

that if you listen carefully, read the transcripts carefully and 

look very carefully at them, Mr. Speaker, you‘ll see that he‘s 

referring to a set of characteristics or behaviours. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I listened to the two arguments. I find 

that the member was talking about a member. He can use the 

terms possibly against the government but not a member, so I 

would ask that the member would withdraw their remarks and 

apologize. 

 

I recognize the member for Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — I withdraw the remark and apologize. 

 

Now the government led by the Premier of this province act like 

bullies. They do it all the time. They do it as a government. 

They do it as individuals. And, Mr. Speaker, it‘s shameful; 

shouldn‘t have to put up with it. And the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan deserve better. They deserve better than that. 

 

Now we have a Minister Responsible for Education in the 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5041 

province of Saskatchewan who, when hard-working, 

well-intentioned people come to protest some of the policies of 

this government including the inequitable support for Catholic 

schools in this province, they come and they want the 

opposition to ask questions on their behalf, and they sit in the 

galleries of this legislature, and the Deputy Premier, the 

Minister Responsible for Education, tries to intimidate them. He 

sits there in his chair and glares at them. He doesn‘t want them 

here. He doesn‘t want them . . . He doesn‘t want us to ask 

questions on their behalf. And it‘s shameful. 

 

Now that‘s not the only case where he‘s been caught bullying 

people in Saskatchewan. He has also done it when it comes to 

educational assistants. What happens? He leads a piece of 

research in his department that leads him to believe they should 

cut educational assistants all over the province. And it gets 

leaked out. The plan comes out, and what does he do? He 

phones around the province and bullies them. He phones people 

in Saskatchewan and bullies them because they don‘t agree. 

 

And neither do I, Mr. Speaker. I don‘t agree either. And there 

are a lot of educational assistants in Prince Albert that don‘t 

agree either. A number of teachers in Prince Albert, I would say 

99.9 per cent of them, don‘t agree with this government and 

they sure don‘t agree with being bullied. So there you go. There 

you go, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now that they don‘t like it, they should stop doing it. If they 

don‘t like it, they should stop doing it. 

 

You know who else they try to bully? They try to bully the 

opposition. On a daily basis, they try to bully the opposition. 

They introduce this motion today to try to bully the opposition. 

 

You know why? They don‘t like scrutiny. They don‘t want us 

asking questions. When they made all sorts of cuts last fall and 

we asked to ask questions in committee of who‘s being cut, 

what programs are being cut, what services will no longer be 

offered to Saskatchewan citizens, what did they do? They bully 

it. They bullied us and they bullied the people of Saskatchewan 

by extension. 

 

Now when else did they do it? They did it with the Chief 

Electoral Officer. They have absolutely no intention of agreeing 

to a recommendation by the Board of Internal Economy who 

put forward a candidate that wins a competition of the job. He 

wins the competition fair and square. And what do these . . . 

well they took it to their Premier. And he didn‘t like him. He 

didn‘t like him for whatever reason. Perhaps it had to do with 

investigations. Who knows? What do they do? They propose a 

change in the middle of question period and try to bully the 

opposition into accepting that change — absolutely, absolutely 

shameful. 

 

Now I mentioned that I would speak about how they bully 

people, how they can‘t manage, and how you can‘t trust them. 

Now certainly the people of Saskatchewan have been made well 

aware — well aware at this point — about how they can‘t 

manage. They can‘t manage a two-house paper route. They 

can‘t manage budgets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‘ve had record revenue in Saskatchewan over 

the last couple of years, record revenue. But you know what 

else we‘ve had? Record deficits, record deficits. And how do 

you get two at the same time? Virtually impossible but I‘ll tell 

you how — Sask Party math, Sask Party math. And it proves 

how absolutely terrible they are at managing the province of 

Saskatchewan, managing the finances of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and managing programs on behalf of the people. 

They can‘t manage anything. 

 

They can‘t manage health care, can‘t manage health care. The 

most important file in the province within that Department of 

Finance and they can‘t manage it. They make a promise before 

the election that they would hire more doctors. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the doctor vacancies are up 50 per cent in rural 

Saskatchewan. Now how is that managing health care in 

Saskatchewan? It‘s not working. It‘s not working. 

 

You know what else they can‘t manage in health care? Wait 

times. They can‘t manage wait times. In fact when I mentioned 

it, on the day of the budget the Premier made remarks that he 

had to apologize for because he doesn‘t like the fact that they 

can‘t manage health care. And he doesn‘t like the fact that in his 

own constituency, in his own constituency wait times have 

nearly doubled, very close to doubled in his constituency. And 

I‘m sure he gets lobbied. I‘m sure he gets questions asked of 

him. The number of people waiting for surgery in the Premier‘s 

own riding has gone up by 90 per cent. That‘s close to double. 

I‘ll explain it as clearly as I can because they are not very good 

with numbers, Mr. Speaker. They‘re not very good with 

numbers. 

 

[19:45] 

 

And in case they hadn‘t heard, I‘ll explain the situation in the 

health region that encompasses the city of Prince Albert, the 

P.A. [Prince Albert] Parkland Health Region because, as I had 

referenced on that day of the budget, the surgical wait times in 

the P.A. Parkland Health Region have also nearly doubled. 

They have gone up by nearly 90 per cent and so that is nearly 

doubling as well. And so the Premier lashes out. He lashes out 

and he has to apologize on budget day. First time in anybody‘s 

recollection, certainly in 105 years of this legislature, the first 

time anybody could ever remember that the Premier would have 

to apologize for remarks he makes in the legislature on budget 

day — hard to image, hard to imagine. 

 

You know what else they can‘t manage? They can‘t manage the 

forestry industry. They can‘t manage. They make promises 

before the election about how they are going to work with 

northern communities, how they are going to work with 

parkland communities, how they‘re . . . a vote, quote: ―A vote 

for Darryl is a vote for the mill open and people working.‖ He 

took that ad out in the newspaper. And what happened? They 

didn‘t have a plan. He says a vote is a vote for the mill open and 

people working. So you would think that it‘s incumbent upon 

you to have a plan. Sure you can rip up the existing plan and 

insult a multinational company. You can do that. They‘re used 

to insulting companies in forestry. 

 

But you should ought to have your own plan. If you‘re going to 

rip up somebody else‘s plan and you make a promise, you 

should ought to have your own plan. And it‘s quite clear after 

the Enterprise sector team has met twice and provided — I 

don‘t know — maybe one recommendation . . . I‘d be hard 



5042 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

pressed to imagine which one because it hasn‘t come to the 

floor of this legislature. Two and half years, they haven‘t done a 

thing for forestry except close down the industry all over the 

province. They presided over that. 

 

All they had to do to help forestry in Saskatchewan, all they had 

to do was divide an FMA [forest management agreement] 

properly. That‘s it. It wouldn‘t cost them a cent, wouldn‘t cost 

them a cent. Just divide it so that somebody who would actually 

involve themselves in the industry in Saskatchewan by making 

a huge capital purchase . . . The minister responsible insults the 

company, insults the president, and then won‘t give him an 

allocation of wood. So that‘s how they managed the forestry 

industry. 

 

And here we get to, again, the very reason, the very reason 

we‘re debating this motion today, the very reason they‘ve had 

two failed budgets — they can‘t budget to save their lives — is 

because it starts at the top, Mr. Speaker, it starts at the top. 

 

And why do I say that? Why do I say that? Because the Premier 

received the golden parachute when he left here, when he was a 

staffer here in 1991, after the election was over, after the 

Progressive Conservatives lost. He got a golden parachute 

because he worked here, got $150,000 for a guitar museum in 

Swift Current, in his hometown. 

 

And you know, I‘ve been to a few dances at the old pub there in 

Swift Current. They‘ve got a pub there that has live music very 

often, and people in Swift Current love country music. They 

love it, two-stepping all over the place, Mr. Speaker. But you 

know what happened? You know what happened? It closed 

down. The guitar museum closed down because the Premier 

can‘t sell country music in Swift Current. It‘s unbelievable, Mr. 

Speaker. And so if you can‘t sell country music in Swift 

Current, you probably can‘t manage the finances of the 

province of Saskatchewan either. 

 

And you know what he went on to do after that, Mr. Speaker? 

He went and opened up a Last Stand Adventure Company, 

which would have the Premier of the province leading people 

on a cow trail, riding a horse, and offering some sort of 

adventure for people in rural Saskatchewan. And that failed too. 

 

Now we‘ve had quite a debate this week about whether or not it 

was a bankruptcy, whether it wound down, whether it went 

broke, whether it‘s busted, whether it went belly up. We‘ve had 

that debate here. And you know what I‘m hearing? It doesn‘t 

matter to people. It doesn‘t matter to people. It‘s insolvent; 

that‘s all people know. It no longer exists. And it no longer 

exists because he‘s proven, he‘s proven with the budgeting 

process in the province of Saskatchewan, he‘s proven with the 

guitar museum — where he can‘t sell country music to 

Saskatchewan people — and he‘s proven with The Last Stand 

Adventure Company that there‘s nothing he can manage. 

 

And he‘s got a shelf life of about two years at anything he does, 

and things start to tank. That was true with the guitar museum, 

although it happened a little quicker than that, true at The Last 

Stand Adventure Company, and true with the finances of the 

province of Saskatchewan. We left him a $2.3 billion, $2.3 

billion and ran a $1 billion deficit two years later, two short 

years later. That‘s all his shelf life is. And the people of 

Saskatchewan have got that figured out. 

 

Now trust. It‘s important, I think, in this line of work, that the 

people you work on behalf of trust you. And I would argue, and 

so do a growing majority of people in Saskatchewan, that you 

can‘t trust these guys. You can‘t trust the Premier. And why is 

that? Why is that, Mr. Speaker? Because they took out 

billboards. The Premier took out billboards and put his face on 

them and put the Saskatchewan Party logo on the bottom. And 

you know what those billboards say, Mr. Speaker? They say 

that there‘s a debt reduction of 40 per cent in the province of 

Saskatchewan. That‘s what they say. 

 

And this proves my point, Mr. Speaker. This absolutely proves 

my point. It proves my point that these guys agree because it 

comes from the top. It comes from the top, and these guys are 

all followers of the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan 

who would take out a billboard that says there‘s been 40 per 

cent debt reduction, when their own budget document proves 

otherwise. I don‘t know if they haven‘t stayed up long enough 

to get to page 62 in their own document, but it says that the debt 

of the province of Saskatchewan grows by over $4 billion over 

the next four years. 

 

Now a little honesty in advertising would be helpful, Mr. 

Speaker. There‘s a reason why the people of Saskatchewan 

don‘t trust them. They don‘t trust them because they‘ll sit in 

here and applaud an advertisement that‘s absolutely false, 

absolutely false. And they all applaud it. They all applaud it. 

Now that‘s because there‘s leadership from the top. That‘s 

because of the leadership from the top. The Premier is 

absolutely disingenuous. 

 

Now why else can‘t you trust them, Mr. Speaker? Because 

before the last election, the Health minister was asked 

specifically, are you going to bring in essential services 

legislation in health care? And you know what he said? He said 

no, I don‘t see that we would need that in health care. And you 

know what he did within a month of taking office? They 

introduced the legislation, Bill 5, one of the first pieces of 

legislation introduced by this government. And so why, if 

you‘re a health care worker in the province of Saskatchewan, 

would ever trust these guys? Why would you trust them 

because you know it‘s not true. You know the first thing that 

they say before the election is that they won‘t do it, and the first 

thing they do after they‘re elected is carry through with it. 

Now why else can‘t you trust them, Mr. Speaker? Why else 

can‘t you trust them? This is a very interesting tale I‘m about to 

unfurl. I have a friend who‘s a chiropractor, lives outside of 

Prince Albert, has a practice in a small town outside of Prince 

Albert. She was a Sask Party supporter. She went to the 

Premier‘s golf tournament in Waskesiu, and she asked him 

specifically, Mr. Premier, are you going to de-insure 

chiropractic care in Saskatchewan? And you know what he told 

her? You know what her told her, Mr. Speaker? He said no. He 

said we respect chiropractors. It‘s the future of health care in 

Saskatchewan, and we‘re not going to do it. We‘re not going to 

do it. 

 

And what happened, Mr. Speaker, what happened and why 

can‘t you trust these guys? Because they‘ve got a top-down 

approach of being disingenuous. Why can‘t you trust them? 

Because at the Premier‘s own golf tournament, at his own golf 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5043 

tournament, he would tell a chiropractor that they‘re not going 

to be de-insured and within a few months they‘re de-insured. So 

why would anybody, why would anybody in Saskatchewan 

trust them at their word? It‘s impossible to know how you could 

trust this government, trust the Sask Party government with 

anything they say when at the very top they‘re disingenuous — 

the very top. 

 

Now I‘ve spoken of chiropractors, and another reason why you 

can‘t trust this government is because chiropractors and the 

Sask Party negotiated a deal. They negotiated a deal to offer 

services in the province of Saskatchewan. And you know what 

happened? After they negotiated the deal and signed on the 

dotted line, the Saskatchewan Party government ripped up the 

deal. They ripped it up. So if you can operate in good faith as 

most business people do, you can operate in good faith and the 

Saskatchewan Party government will rip up your agreement 

because they have a change of heart or the Premier wants to go 

back on his word at his own golf tournament. 

 

You know why else you can‘t trust, another reason why you 

can‘t trust them, Mr. Speaker? You know why else? Because 

they have a Finance minister who says that there‘ll be $1.9 

billion worth of potash revenues for the Government of 

Saskatchewan in his previous budget. That‘s what he said — 

1.9 billion. And you know why you can‘t trust him? Because 

the person who‘s responsible for Energy and Resources in the 

province of Saskatchewan says no, he‘s wrong. He‘s absolutely 

wrong. There‘s going to be 3 billion. There‘s going to be $3 

billion worth of potash revenue for the province of 

Saskatchewan. And he says it right on the floor of the 

Assembly. 

 

Now I‘ve heard then in committee the other night, he said that 

you can‘t find where he said it. I was 20 feet away from him 

when he said it. He said it right here in this Assembly. It‘s in 

Hansard. So why do you think you can‘t trust him. Because 

he‘s off by not 3 billion, not 3 billion, because we didn‘t have 

any income. He‘s off by 3.204 billion because we had to pay 

potash companies to take potash out of the province of 

Saskatchewan, the only place in the world where you have to 

pay companies to take resources out of your jurisdiction. 

 

And so that‘s another reason why you can‘t trust this 

government, why you can‘t trust this government. 

 

Now specifically to the motion before us this evening, quite 

clearly you can‘t trust them on the rules. Because I think the 

House Leader himself for the government took a trip to 

Australia to learn the rules there, the ones that we ended up 

implementing here for the committee structure. He flew all the 

way to Australia to learn the rules when he was in opposition, 

and he got back. And he should understand the rules because he 

helped write them. And what does he do? They agree to the 

rules when they‘re in opposition, but they don‘t suit them when 

they‘re in government because they don‘t want the scrutiny of 

the Legislative Assembly. They don‘t want the scrutiny of the 

opposition. They don‘t want the scrutiny of the people. 

 

But they‘re going to face the wrath of the people, Mr. Speaker. 

They‘re going to face them. They‘re going to face them at the 

polls. They‘re going to face them in the next election. In 

November of 2011, they‘re going to be very sorry that they 

decided to bully Saskatchewan people, that they decided to 

bully the opposition in Saskatchewan, that they thought it was 

okay to bully people — educational assistants, school boards, 

Catholic school board leaders. They‘re going to be awfully 

sorry that they thought they should bully everybody in 

Saskatchewan because they don‘t know what they‘re doing 

because they can‘t manage the budget in the province of 

Saskatchewan. It‘s embarrassing. It‘s sad. But that‘s their tale, 

Mr. Speaker, and it‘s unfortunate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Member‘s time has expired. 

Recognize the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there‘s more than just 

bullying going on within the legislature here. This basically, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is about Bills that this government has 

introduced, and this is about the inability, the inability of this 

government to do the work of government. And in order, in 

order to get through that, they are bullying and are showing a 

disrespect for the very democracy that is, that is within this 

Legislative Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in total this government introduced 39 

Bills, and that‘s not including the eight they introduced over the 

last week. This also does not include Bill 80 — and I will be 

getting back to that — which carried over from the previous. 

And again, that again is something which they told all their 

friends that they would pass. And they didn‘t pass it and 

somehow blamed us last fall for not passing that Bill. And so 

now they are on the ropes on this one because now everybody is 

watching them to pass Bill 80 in this session. 

 

[20:00] 

 

But I think they‘re feeling the heat on Bill 80 — and again I‘ll 

come back to this — because everybody knows that Bill 80 is 

bad. You go anywhere throughout . . . in terms of the city of 

Saskatoon, and there are Bill 80 signs everywhere. People 

understand that Bill 80 is bad, and I know that the Minister of 

Labour understands that too. But he is not doing what is good 

for the people of Saskatchewan; he‘s doing what is good for his 

friends. That‘s what he‘s doing. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was getting on. Now two Bills have 

been passed with Royal Assent in the fall session and that‘s Bill 

116, the cellphone Bill, and Bill 99, 911 amendment. Eighteen 

Bills have been passed and are now waiting Royal Assent. As I 

mentioned before, Bill 80 is in committee, and Bill 119, the 

ticket sales and scalping. So that leaves 19 Bills before the 

House with adjourned debate. Eight new Bills have been 

introduced within the last week and have not received second 

reading. 

 

But I would tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that what this is 

about. I‘ve been around, the last few days, around the city and 

my constituency. I was to an anniversary, a Catholic women‘s 

conference, and just in the constituency office and, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, words like hypocrisy, trust, and unbelievable are being 

spoken out amongst the people now. That was hypocrisy, trust, 

and unbelievable as referring to by the good people of 

Saskatoon about what is happening, not only in this legislature, 

but what is happening with the Sask Party government, a 

government that they elected. But on many occasions now, Mr. 



5044 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

Deputy Speaker, we‘re saying that these people are saying, no 

more. No more; I‘m not voting for you ever again. Never voting 

for you again. 

 

And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, being one to want to 

know, I want to ask people, why are you saying that? And of 

course that‘s when they start off about that, and that‘s where, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the words of hypocrisy, trust, and 

unbelievable come in. Hypocrisy, trust, and unbelievable. They 

come in because when I ask people for more definite reasons 

why they‘re not, those are the words that come in. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but what has been the telling 

characteristic and it makes . . . It does not surprise me that we 

are tonight where we are at, debating the very democracy, and 

us having to fight back and push back because the opposition is 

not being allowed to do its work. That is what this is all about, 

the opposition not being allowed to do its work and not being 

here acting on behalf of the people of this province. 

 

And even though people at times do not understand all the 

intricacies of this legislature, they are now becoming aware and 

asking the questions. And they are seeing what is happening 

here, and that‘s why they talk about trust and they talk about 

hypocrisy. And they say this is unbelievable what is going on 

here because even they understand the rules. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people for the most part want us to 

do our work. They don‘t necessarily want to know all the rules 

of this legislature and how it works, but they would like to see it 

functioning. And they have questions when they come here, and 

they are coming, as we have noticed, on a regular basis and 

sitting in the Assembly here and watching us do our work. 

 

But as I was talking about the telling characteristic of this 

government. And we saw it from the early days, but now it‘s 

becoming entrenched, and that is lack of consultation. There is 

no consultation. And this, when you refuse, it is easy to make 

that connection. And I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it took me a 

bit of time, but when you understand lack of consultation, that 

that drives at the very heart of democracy. And so it is no 

surprise then that when they fail to do the work that they would 

like in governing, that they have to use other tactics to get it 

through, and to silence debate on those things, to say that you 

do not have the right to have those hours, or we can‘t manage it 

so that you can have the right with those hours, we will just ram 

things down. And that‘s lack of consultation. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people just returning to Bill 80 

who received a phone call and were told, here‘s what‘s going to 

happen, after having the Premier‘s own picture in their 

magazine, where no doubt he was saying this. We‘ve heard 

many times here, telling people on essential services for 

example that you would not have essential services, bringing it 

in, one of the first Acts after that government was elected. And 

so on Bill 80 there‘s a phone call and people are called in, and 

saying, here‘s what is going to happen. When questions like 

that are posed to elected members on that side, to that 

government, and they say, there‘s no need for that. 

 

But that is what this is all about. This is all about the lack of 

consultation. And they don‘t understand what that means to 

consult. They don‘t understand democracy. So is it any wonder 

that we are in the kind of situation we are right at this minute 

here, right at this minute in this debate, arguing? Because that is 

what we are arguing about — we‘re arguing, we‘re discussing, 

we‘re debating democracy because that is lacking. That is 

sorely lacking right now. 

 

And that‘s why the people in Saskatoon are talking about trust 

and they‘re talking about hypocrisy. And they‘re saying that 

this is unbelievable what is happening, people all around, 

because they read daily in the newspapers, they read daily about 

this government and what they have done with the money that 

was left them — $2.3 billion gone down the drain. Gone down 

the drain, almost as if you can see that water just taking the 

province of Saskatchewan. And it‘s all going down the drain, 

leaving this province without that. 

 

So everybody was their friends when they found this money 

laying around and they were spending. Everybody was their 

friends. But when it came to the tough time to have to govern, 

we have the problems that the Minister of Health has gotten 

himself into. On a daily basis, he has to stand up and say, well 

we‘re not doing that anymore. We‘ve got another new plan. 

And his favourite one is that he wants things done after the next 

election. That might be a bit of a problem. That might be a bit 

of a problem when people say that we don‘t trust you. That 

might not be a bit of problem. 

 

And they say, how about hypocrisy? Hypocrisy is, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is when you say one thing and you do another. Now 

there‘s other words for that, but people are seeing that as 

hypocritical. Hypocritical. That you could say to their face, 

months in some cases, months in some days, one thing and then 

go and do another. So these folks are going to have a lot to 

answer for. 

 

Now in terms, in terms of that, we see all around the world 

different things happening. We see under the labour legislation, 

which I am a bit more familiar with here in Canada, where the 

Supreme Court has struck down a number of cases. We still see 

this government marching against the flow, against the tide, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, instead of showing some leadership. 

 

And what is it, what is it that I‘m saying that they should show 

leadership about? To consult, and democracy. Democracy in the 

workplaces. And they are failing, and they‘re failing miserably. 

And they‘re failing because even the International Labour 

Organization is saying they failed. They failed on the basic 

thing of consultation. They failed to discuss this with people, 

and that is because there‘s no respect over there for democracy. 

There‘s no respect. They talk about, they talk about freedom of 

choice and democracy, but they‘re simply words. 

 

So you have the president of the largest country, one of the 

most powerful countries in the world, having legislation where 

he does truly democratize the workplace, and here our 

definition of democracy is something that draws the attention of 

the ILO. Now I didn‘t hear the ILO writing a letter or making a 

decision to Barack Obama in the United States. He didn‘t do 

that there, but he did to our Minister of Labour and he did to 

this Premier and he did to this government. Because they have 

lost the faith of people, and now they‘re being recognized 

around . . . So they‘re getting the international recognition, but 

that‘s the kind of international recognition that they are gaining. 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5045 

 

So in terms of consultation, it is non-existent, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But these are only things that they seem to . . . because 

there is a total disrespect for unions. And as such, they 

somehow want to separate the unions from the working people 

of this province, and it doesn‘t work because people see that. 

They‘re in unions and they believe in those unions because they 

voted democratically to get into those unions. And now they 

want to split this up and play to a small group, play to a small 

group of people that when they can say, oh well, they criticize 

us, the unions. That somehow makes them the union bosses or 

something. We all know that old game, but people see through 

that. 

 

And they‘re playing the same old game and thinking that, oh 

we‘ve got a lot of support. But they don‘t because people are 

seeing through them now. And they‘re talking about the 

hypocrisy of that, and now they‘re asking questions. And now 

they‘re even asking questions about, how do you run an 

occupational health and safety department when, in fact, you 

say you want to go to war with unions? And we‘re talking about 

life and death issues here, and they feel that this government 

has no respect for them when it comes to that. 

 

An abysmal record on occupational — while I‘m on that — an 

abysmal record on occupational health and safety that shows 

that more people are getting killed at work every year. And they 

are talking about Mission: Zero. Now how does that square to 

people who say, who hear, we‘re going to war with labour? 

We‘re going to war with the working families. When they get 

up, and I can‘t imagine what . . . Perhaps around the breakfast 

tables or the supper tables, that Dad, are you in a union? Mom, 

are you in the union? Yes. What does that mean when the 

Premier‘s going to war with unions? What does that mean? 

 

And then to have people feel comfortable, whether that be the 

workers in the Department of Labour or whether that be people 

in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, wanting to know, how do 

we feel confidence in this? How is it that our lives are being 

protected when that is the premise that they start on? We‘re 

going to war. Now that in my . . . We go to war with 

Afghanistan. We go to war with the Taliban. But, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, how does that square with going to war with the 

people of this province? 

 

And those are the words that they use, and then they expect that 

people won‘t say hypocrisy, talk about hypocrisy, trust, and 

unbelievable. 

 

Now there are many things, there are many things that they 

have . . . where the trust factor comes in — many things. The 

educational assistant cuts. The educational assistant cuts are a 

trial balloon that‘s floated, but there are education districts that 

have implemented that and are going . . . because they‘re 

confused what is being meant by that. 

 

And what about the health care bargaining concept that the 

workers in our health care facilities are a team? Where is that? 

Where is the concept that it‘s a team when we have over two 

years or more now where the health care workers, 25,000 — 

who are incidentally women, about 80 per cent women — are 

without a contract? And there seems to be no concern regarding 

that, no concern regarding that and what is happening there. 

 

Now again just a return to the lack of respect around health and 

safety because there‘s another two issues in terms of what is 

telling, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the reaction of that 

government and how they react to situations. Because when we 

had an issue around the crane here, there was, where you did get 

that information? And you know what? The first thing they 

should have done is they should have said, let‘s go out there and 

find out what‘s going on because the safety‘s more important. 

But you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the first thing 

they thought about was? How did you know? How did you 

know what you know? Who told you? There was a question. 

That was an answer to a question. 

 

And isn‘t that similar to Corrections where the first reaction 

was, when we have a sex offender out loose, when the first 

reaction to that is, is fire somebody. Now I don‘t . . . I read the 

newspaper and I listen to the media and I know that that party, 

in their reaction would have been, had the shoe been on the 

other foot, had the shoe been on the other foot. And that is 

hypocrisy. That is what hypocrisy is and that‘s what people see 

as hypocrisy. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I haven‘t even touched about the 

finances which everybody understands. 

 

And on a daily basis they hear the Dutch elm thing. Now when 

that Dutch elm issue came up . . . In Saskatoon we‘re very 

proud of our trees, very proud of our city. And here it was that 

somehow . . . And now they‘re saying that because they gave 

some money back, that somehow this is solving the problem. 

People understand that that is a long-term issue, that you have 

to be vigilant about that continuously. And they‘re treating it 

with disrespect. Even when it comes down to the beauty of the 

city of Saskatoon, they have no respect for that because they 

have to cut that. 

 

And why do they have to make these cuts? Why do they have to 

make these cuts? Because I think, as my friend said, they 

couldn‘t run a two-house paper route. That‘s what‘s happening 

here. 

 

They can‘t run a two-house paper route because they can‘t run 

the finance of the province. When they find all the money and 

they are spending and they‘re heroes because they‘ve got all 

this money that people had to put together, then they‘re great. 

They‘ve got a lot of friends. But a lot of people now, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker — and they know this, they know this because 

they‘re hearing it, they‘re hearing it themselves; they‘re not 

heroes any more — what people are talking about is hypocrisy, 

trust, and it‘s unbelievable what they‘ve done. 

 

Where did all the money go? Where did all the money go? 

Where are all these things that they‘re talking about? They‘re 

nowhere to be seen. 

 

And now what they‘re talking about, they‘re talking about and 

asking questions about a couple of businesses that went 

bankrupt, a couple of businesses that went bankrupt and that the 

Premier was involved. That‘s the kind of things they‘re talking 

about. And they‘re also talking about some tabs, attention — 

that say, attention, Brad Wall. And they‘re liquor tabs, and 

could you go pick up some alcohol. 



5046 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

 

Those are the kinds of things people are starting to talk about 

because they‘re thinking, maybe we made a mistake. Maybe we 

should have found out about this because, you know, there was 

a lot of other leaders that came to this legislature without some 

of those kind of backgrounds. 

 

And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things that is 

unbelievable is that we all, that we all of us here believe in the 

vote. We believe in the vote. And the officer that‘s in charge of 

that is the Chief Electoral Officer. And that person is an 

important person in the province of Saskatchewan. And even 

with that, even with that they‘ve got that all messed up, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. They‘ve got that all messed up and they‘re 

jumping around just like a bunch of frogs on that one. Just like 

a bunch of frogs on that one, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[20:15] 

 

They can‘t even get the appointment of a Chief Electoral 

Officer right because the member from Saskatoon Southeast 

makes a decision in the committee, and then the Premier says 

it‘s not on and out goes an agreement from the Board of 

Internal Economy. And that‘s what this is all about. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the summary on all of this is they 

don‘t like consultations. They don‘t like questions, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I‘d say they don‘t like opposition because they just 

blow over any opposition and say, we have to pass these Bills 

and we don‘t care if there‘s debate on them. And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I would say they don‘t like democracy because of 

what we‘re seeing here. What we‘re seeing here day after day is 

the lack of democracy, is what is happening here on any of 

these issues. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I was saying earlier, in going 

around with my constituents, going around the city, being at the 

anniversary, where there‘s a cross-section of people at the 

anniversary, and they were talking. And they were coming up to 

me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they were talking about this 

government. And within that discussion they were talking about 

hypocrisy. They were talking about trust, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and . . . unbelievable of the things that this government is trying 

to do and that they‘re trying to get away with. But people are 

seeing through that. 

 

And they‘re talking about the finances draining as if draining in 

a sink, and just in a nice, swirling pool with the finances going 

down — all down — and the debt rising. And they ask about 

that billboard, that famous billboard: we‘re reducing debt. And 

they say, how long? Is that true? Is that billboard true? And 

there it was everywhere — everywhere — this billboard in the 

city of Saskatoon, messing up the skyline. There it was 

everywhere you went. Sometimes two, one on either side of the 

street. Enormous amounts of money being spent on a billboard 

that said, debt reduced. 

 

Well debt is going up. Debt is going up. The member who 

spoke previously before me said on page 62 . . . If that 

government had got to that point they would understand. And 

now people are saying, well what was that billboard all about? 

Can we trust this government when they put up a billboard and 

spend the amount of money on the advertising that they did, 

both on television and radio and on billboards? They told us the 

debt was going down. 

 

What is happening? Why is the Dutch elm disease getting cut or 

the program getting cut in the city of Saskatoon? Very simply. 

And I stand and I look at them and I say, well you‘ll have to ask 

the government that. Go ask the members from Saskatoon what 

is happening. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they‘ve lost trust. They 

think this is hypocritical. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to me they 

say it‘s unbelievable. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member‘s time has elapsed. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Normally when I 

begin a speech, Mr. Speaker, I say that it‘s a pleasure to enter 

into the debate on the issue being discussed. In this situation, 

Mr. Speaker, I can‘t share that feeling with the Assembly and 

with members of the public. It‘s always an honour, Mr. 

Speaker, it‘s always a privilege to be able to stand in this 

Assembly and speak on behalf of our constituents and the 

people that we represent. It‘s always an honour to engage in 

democratic debate where you have two opinions, where you 

have two opposing opinions that are presented in the Assembly 

and are discussed. That‘s the nature of our adversarial system. 

It‘s a system that‘s served our province and served other 

countries and jurisdictions around the Commonwealth very well 

for many years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the system does not work well, Mr. Speaker, when the 

majority runs roughshod over democracy and does not take into 

consideration the role and the rules set out, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure that the minority in any legislative setting is able to do 

its job properly, effectively, and allow them to properly 

represent the people in our constituencies and the greater 

province as a whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just when I think I‘ve seen the perfect example of 

Sask Party government incompetence, just when I think I‘ve 

seen the perfect example of the Sask Party government getting 

it wrong, they always outdo themselves. They‘re always 

willing, Mr. Speaker, to take incompetence to a greater level. 

They‘re always willing, Mr. Speaker, to take their inability to 

manage anything properly to another level. Mr. Speaker, it‘s as 

though they‘ve taken a sports analogy that they should always 

— like an average interview from a hockey player — give 110 

per cent, something like that. 

 

They‘ve applied this philosophy, Mr. Speaker, to messing up, 

because time and time again, whenever they‘re given the chance 

to do what‘s right, they do the opposite. Whenever given the 

chance to manage things properly, they do the opposite. 

Whenever given the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to demonstrate 

that they are worthy, that they are deserving of the trust of the 

people of Saskatchewan, they do the opposite. Time and time 

again that is the track record of this Sask Party government a bit 

over two years into their four-year term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my initial comments I made a few references to 

democracy and the parliamentary system. As all members of the 

Assembly will know, the rules that have developed in 

Saskatchewan have developed over time, rules that have been 

put in place, Mr. Speaker, so that both the government and the 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5047 

opposition from the get-go, from the start of a legislative 

session, are able to understand what the rules are and plan 

accordingly — understand what the rules are and plan 

accordingly. But sadly the track record from the Sask Party 

government is being aware of the rules and not planning 

accordingly. 

 

We‘ve seen this, Mr. Speaker, this horrible track record on a 

number of fronts. And I‘ll get into some of those examples 

shortly, Mr. Speaker. But I think in my opinion, what we‘re 

seeing today with this motion of closure and a motion to extend 

the hours of sitting outside of what were the agreed upon hours 

simply because members opposite are unable to manage their 

own legislative agenda, simply because members opposite are 

afraid and reluctant to have proper scrutiny of their actions in 

this Assembly, we‘ve seen a number . . . To me it speaks to 

larger problems that this government has with democracy, with 

transparency, with the rule of law. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of key examples 

that clearly illustrate the poor track record that this government 

has in doing the wrong thing, the poor track record that this 

government has in, instead of living up to the trust that has been 

placed in them by the Saskatchewan people, they are doing the 

complete opposite. 

 

The first example I would like to use, Mr. Speaker, is around 

the actions we‘ve seen by the Sask Party government with 

respect to the selection of the Chief Electoral Officer. Within a 

democratic system, if there‘s one position, if there‘s one 

position that is vital to have a transparent and honest, clear, 

open, and accountable democratic process, it‘s the Chief 

Electoral Officer. Mr. Speaker, this is the individual who sets 

the rules. This is the individual who enforces the rules. This is 

the individual, Mr. Speaker, who ensures that funny business is 

not going on by any candidate, by any campaign during a 

general election or during a by-election. The role and 

responsibility of this person is central to the democratic process. 

 

Well what we‘ve seen from members opposite, Mr. Speaker, we 

saw a process to appoint a new Chief Electoral Officer. And the 

way this is normally done, Mr. Speaker, there was a 

representative from government, there was a representative 

from the opposition, and as well as the Speaker was involved in 

this decision. So, Mr. Speaker, individuals from both sides of 

the House as well as the Speaker whose primary goal ought to 

be the defence of democracy and ensuring that the rights of all 

members of the Legislative Assembly are respected and are 

held in the utmost level of importance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after there was a recommendation from both sides 

. . . This includes the Justice minister, Mr. Speaker, an 

individual who sits at the cabinet table, an individual who ought 

to have a level of clout, ought to have a level of trust placed in 

him by the Premier, Mr. Speaker. We saw a recommendation 

come forward that was fully supported by the Justice minister. 

And what happened to this recommendation, Mr. Speaker? 

Well certain members of the Sask Party caucus weren‘t happy 

with what their Justice minister did. That‘s right, Mr. Speaker. 

Certain member of that caucus opposite weren‘t happy with the 

recommendation, the process that was put into place to ensure 

that we had the best Chief Electoral Officer possible, to ensure 

that the democratic process in this province was respected. 

 

Now why, Mr. Speaker, members of that caucus, including the 

Premier, would hang the Justice minister out to dry, why they 

would deputize him and say, you have the role in this process to 

meet up with the opposition, to deal with the Speaker and 

choose the Chief Electoral Officer, why they would go from 

that position, Mr. Speaker, to one of kiboshing the 

recommendation that was made by their own Justice minister, a 

member that sits at the cabinet table, a member that is part of 

the caucus, why they would hang the Justice minister out to dry 

like that raises a number of questions. It raises questions that 

there clearly must have been a discussion around the caucus 

table where certain members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, did 

not like the recommendation, did not like the individual chosen. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as earlier debate in this legislature would 

indicate, the recommendations and their appraisals of the person 

that was put forward were top-notch. It was a clear position that 

this individual is quality and is up to the job and has been doing 

a good job. So why, Mr. Speaker, members opposite would turn 

their backs on that process, leave the Justice minister, as I said, 

hang him out to dry, raises a number of questions that I think all 

people in Saskatchewan should ask some serious questions of 

their local MLAs, if they‘re a Sask Party MLA, asking why 

they did not support a position that would ensure democracy 

remains transparent, open, and accountable here in the province. 

 

Another example, Mr. Speaker, just as there are rules in place to 

choose the Chief Electoral Officer, there are rules in place for 

how legislation, how committees, how the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan is supposed to operate, rules agreed 

to by both sides. So we‘ve seen the ignoring of the rules with 

respect to how this Assembly operates. We‘ve seen the ignoring 

of the rules with respect to how the democratic process is 

supposed to operate in the selection of the Chief Electoral 

Officer. 

 

Another area, Mr. Speaker, where we‘ve seen the ignoring of 

the rules is with the PC trust scandal. Mr. Speaker, we‘ve seen 

an incident here that is now before the courts where members 

opposite are involved in a court case because once upon a time 

there was a trust fund — a sizeable trust fund, a trust fund that 

has a considerable amount of money in it, Mr. Speaker — and 

members opposite have decided, it is alleged in documents, that 

control of that trust fund has been taken over by the Sask Party. 

And the other side would contest, Mr. Speaker, that the control 

of that trust fund ought to rest with the PC Party of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the bigger story about the divisions between 

the Sask Party and the PC Party of the province, that‘s a longer 

speech, and that‘s a bigger debate, and all people in 

Saskatchewan know the history of how that split came about 

and how, Mr. Speaker, many people took off one ball cap and 

simply put on another ball cap. But it‘s all the same people for 

the most part with a few new team members thrown in there, 

picked up as free agents, but for the most part, Mr. Speaker, 

same individuals fighting over one pool of money. 

 

But what would this trust fund allow? In the same way, Mr. 

Speaker, that a Chief Electoral Officer allows for an open and 

transparent and an accountable and an honest democratic 

process through elections, Mr. Speaker, access to funds that 



5048 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

political parties use is an important part of politics as well in 

terms of funding campaigns, ensuring that campaigns are well 

resourced and that political parties that are present can run a 

campaign as they want to. So to see members opposite tied up 

in a court case, Mr. Speaker, alleging that they improperly took 

the money from the PC Party, freezing it or using it for their 

own aims and their own purposes as the Saskatchewan Party, 

that‘s another troubling aspect for how democracy here in 

Saskatchewan is operating. 

 

So a clear track record is emerging. There is an ignoring of the 

process for the rules of this Assembly, the democratic rules of 

this Assembly agreed to by all members. There‘s an ignoring of 

the rules around the selection process for the Chief Electoral 

Officer, an individual that ensures that our democracy stays 

honest, stays transparent, stays open, an individual that ensures 

that individual members are held to account for how they 

conduct themselves, how they conduct themselves during an 

election. And, Mr. Speaker, we‘ve seen members opposite tied 

up in a court case alleging that members of the Saskatchewan 

Party improperly seized control of assets of another political 

party, thereby hurting the individuals in the PC Party of 

Saskatchewan from competing in an open and transparent, 

democratic process. 

 

[20:30] 

 

So members opposite, when it comes to actions that speak 

louder than words, Mr. Speaker, there‘s plenty of evidence to 

suggest the members opposite will talk about democracy, will 

talk about openness, will talk about transparency, will talk 

about the need for proper scrutiny, but when push comes to 

shove, whether it‘s through their actions in ignoring the rules of 

this Assembly, whether it‘s their actions in ignoring the 

agreed-upon process for the selection of the Chief Electoral 

Officer, whether it‘s their actions in allegedly taking money 

from the PC Party of Saskatchewan that doesn‘t belong to them 

in order to serve their own political purposes, Mr. Speaker, we 

see a clear track record emerging of a group of individuals 

opposite who do not respect democracy, who do not respect 

open and transparent government. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when these issues are brought forward to 

members opposite, you would think given the clear track 

record, given the members‘ opposite stated commitment to the 

democratic process, to transparency, to openness, and to 

accountability, you think, Mr. Speaker, when confronted with 

how they are ignoring and not respecting the rules of a 

democracy, one would think that there‘d be a degree of 

contrition. One would think there would be a degree of 

embarrassment. One would think there would be a degree of 

listening to the people of Saskatchewan, listening to them when 

they say we want you to respect the democratic process. 

 

But what is their response, Mr. Speaker? Meh — they shrug 

their shoulders — meh. And for Hansard I would spell meh as 

m-e-h. They don‘t care. They just shrug their shoulders. We‘re 

the government. We‘re the majority. If you don‘t like it, tough. 

That‘s the way we roll. If you don‘t like it, we don‘t care. This 

is what the members opposite say. If you don‘t like the fact that 

we can‘t follow rules, we don‘t care, says the Sask Party. If you 

don‘t like the fact that we have completely ignored the process 

for the selection of the Chief Electoral Officer, what do they 

say? Meh, we don‘t care, says the Sask Party. We‘re the 

majority. That‘s what they say. 

 

When you say to them, why would you take money, allegedly, 

that is not yours? Why would you take that from one political 

party for your own political purposes? What is their response? 

Meh, we‘re the majority. We can do what we want. In the same 

way that we‘re the majority in this Assembly and we can just 

push forward and put through any rules that we want, if we‘re 

the majority of a trust fund, whether or not those members 

belong on that trust fund, meh. What does it matter? What do 

you care? That‘s the response we get from the Sask Party 

government. 

 

It‘s not a response, Mr. Speaker, that addresses the real 

concerns the Saskatchewan people have about the democratic 

process and about what we all, as Members of the Legislative 

Assembly, signed up to do, and that‘s to represent the people of 

Saskatchewan with openness, transparency, and honesty. It‘s 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, when time and time again . . . I‘ve 

given a few examples on how members opposite don‘t have 

respect for the democratic principles of this Assembly and for 

many of the processes that are in place. 

 

It‘s also interesting when the members opposite have the option 

to support a motion, a motion calling for the release of the 

security files that were kept on Tommy Douglas, what is their 

response? Once again, meh, maybe we‘ll support it; maybe we 

won‘t. What does it matter? We‘re the majority. We don‘t care. 

Mr. Speaker, time and time again their response is one of not 

caring, not listening to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I would say, Mr. Speaker, it‘s never too late for members 

opposite to start doing the right thing. It‘s never too late for 

members opposite to begin a process of admitting that they 

were wrong, admitting that they have gone astray, admitting 

that they do not respect the rules of democracy. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think there‘s perhaps no better way for members 

opposite to start back on that path of democracy, start back on 

demonstrating some clear actions, than would be to support the 

Tommy Douglas motion because, Mr. Speaker, we‘d be 

hard-pressed to find another legislator here in the province, Mr. 

Speaker, than Mr. Douglas, who stood up for the principles of 

democracy, who stood up for the principles of fair and open 

debate, and who stood up for the rights of the minority. That‘s 

another speech. Perhaps I‘ll have an opportunity to speak to 

that, Mr. Speaker, at a later date. But I would urge members, 

it‘s never too late to do the right thing. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have, as I have illustrated this evening 

through a number of examples, we have a clear record of how 

members opposite have a reluctance to follow the rules. They 

have a natural inclination, Mr. Speaker, to demonstrate that they 

just simply don‘t care. Time and time again, when confronted 

with how they‘re breaking the rules — whether it has to do with 

the Chief Electoral Officer, whether it has to do with the hours 

of this Assembly — all they do, Mr. Speaker, is shrug their 

shoulders. Meh, what are you going to do? We‘re the majority. 

Tough. Tough luck, we‘re the majority. We can do what we 

like, and if you have a problem with it, that‘s your problem, not 

ours. That‘s what Sask Party members opposite say. 

 

So I ask myself, what are these individuals trying to hide? Why 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5049 

the arrogance? Why this approach of simply using their 

majority to disrespect the democratic process? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, in the two and a half years that they‘ve been here, as I 

said at the beginning, it‘s amazing time and time again how 

there is so many examples of how individuals on the opposite 

side completely mess up. When given the chance to do the right 

thing, they do the wrong thing. 

 

We saw this, Mr. Speaker, with the huge shift of going from 

having a surplus in this province to running huge deficits. We 

saw in a short period, a short period of how the Sask Party 

members opposite, through their own inability to manage, their 

own inability to make wise decisions have taken us from a 

situation of huge surplus to huge deficit. And many other 

speakers on this side have spoken to that point. 

 

More recently, Mr. Speaker, in this recent budget we‘ve seen a 

huge amount of financial trickery from members opposite, just 

as members opposite are willing to ignore the democratic rules, 

just as members opposite are more than willing to use their 

majority to shrug their shoulders and say tough luck, people of 

Saskatchewan, we don‘t care. We have the majority. We see 

them using that same majority to inflict some very ugly 

financial trickery on the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We see them, Mr. Speaker, midstream in a budget process, 

midstream in a term, I should say, of a number of budgets, 

changing the accounting practices, changing the way that things 

are done. And, Mr. Speaker, just as their actions on the Chief 

Electoral Officer, just as their actions on the rules of this 

Assembly with respect to hours, just as their actions 

demonstrate, they‘re trying to hide something — that they‘re 

not able to manage. In the same way, the financial trickery 

we‘ve seen on the accounting front also demonstrates an 

unwillingness to be open and transparent in the most 

fundamental and vital ways for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we talk about the hours, Mr. Speaker, that conceivably 

we‘ll be sitting here. And it wasn‘t long ago, Mr. Speaker, that 

they introduced another motion of closure extending the hours 

because of their inability to manage the House. Mr. Speaker, 

speaking for myself and I know speaking for my colleagues, 

I‘m not afraid of the hours. The hours are fine, Mr. Speaker. I 

know members opposite will be able to use these hours to watch 

a good number of Home Alone movies. I know members 

opposite will be able to use these hours to watch, to read a good 

number of Harlequin romance novels, perhaps the odd Nancy 

Drew mystery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from this side of the House we‘re prepared to 

work. We‘re prepared to do the hours. We‘re happy to do the 

hours because it‘s what the people of Saskatchewan demand. 

The people of Saskatchewan demand that their government is 

committed to democracy. Their government is committed to 

open, clear and transparent government. And that‘s what the 

opposition is standing up for time and time again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Member‘s time has elapsed. 

Recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it‘s a pleasure to weigh in 

on debate here today. In fact I should say, it‘s a pleasure is sort 

of the improper word, Mr. Speaker, because 

we‘re weighing in on a debate that shouldn‘t be occurring in 

this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, at a time that it shouldn‘t be 

occurring, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We should be focusing our attention right now as it relates to 

mismanagement in health care, mismanagement of our finances, 

mismanagement of cost of living and subsequent knocks to 

quality of life within our province under the Sask Party, Mr. 

Speaker. But we are here today debating and discussing a 

motion, a motion unfortunately that challenges the very 

democratic system within our Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‘re dealing with a government, the Sask Party, that is 

undemocratic on so many fronts, Mr. Speaker. And it‘s 

disappointing to people across the province to realize that they 

have elected a Premier and a government that aren‘t willing to 

uphold democracy within Saskatchewan. They‘re disorganized, 

Mr. Speaker. They can‘t manage. We see incompetence in file 

after file after file. We see a government that‘s not willing to 

consult on any matter, Mr. Speaker, on any matter. This 

government and this Premier, the Sask Party, thinks they know 

best on every file, Mr. Speaker. And it‘s to the huge detriment 

of Saskatchewan people because we‘re large believers and huge 

believers that the answers as it relates to the needs and solutions 

and challenges and opportunities are understood best by those 

that are experts, by those for whom they affect. And we have a 

government here that‘s not willing to consult on any front, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Further to that, we have a government that‘s shutting down 

transparency, that‘s shutting down accountability to people for 

whom they‘re elected, Mr. Speaker. And this is a sad day in 

Saskatchewan‘s legislature. We have a Premier and the Sask 

Party who are hiding, hiding from facing Saskatchewan people, 

organizations, institutions, taxpayers on important questions, 

Mr. Speaker, important questions that matter to them, and we 

see unilateral, undemocratic moves by this Premier and the 

Sask Party government, an attempt to thwart and prevent those 

very questions from being asked in this Assembly. 

 

And people from across this province have question after 

question after question that they want raised of this government. 

We hear it every day. Today we heard it down in Swift Current, 

Mr. Speaker. We hear it down in Weyburn. We hear it, I 

suspect we‘ll hear it in Canora this week. We hear it in Estevan. 

We hear it across this province in every corner, Mr. Speaker. 

And what we know is that there‘s a government that won‘t 

answer to the public. They hide, Mr. Speaker, from providing 

the opportunities that the public is deserved, that organizations, 

Mr. Speaker, deserve and that institutions that have long served 

Saskatchewan people incredibly well. And we have a 

government who hides from it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And here they go, Mr. Speaker, that they . . . just the second 

time in two years, Mr. Speaker, that the Sask Party has put 

forward changes to the sitting times of this Assembly. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the only reason that these changes have been put 

forward — in this case asking the Assembly to sit from 8 a. m. 

to midnight — is for their own political purpose, Mr. Speaker. 

It has to do directly with the mismanagement of the Sask Party, 

Mr. Speaker, and their lack of ability to get things right. 

Specifically we see that in health care. We see that in finances. 

We see that in the quality of life, in our Crown corporations, 



5050 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, in our economy, Mr. Speaker. But we see it here 

specifically that they can‘t even manage the legislation that they 

put on the table, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the interesting thing, Mr. Speaker . . . And I hear the 

Deputy Premier shouting from his seat. The Deputy Premier 

shouts from his seat, Mr. Speaker, but what I would challenge 

the Deputy Premier of the Sask Party to do, is to be able to 

uphold democracy, not be afraid of answering to his 

constituents. Because we have many phone calls, Mr. Speaker, 

many questions that come directly out of the Deputy Premier‘s 

constituency, right out of Canora, Mr. Speaker. And these are 

questions that the people of Canora are deserved answers to, 

Mr. Speaker. And we have a Deputy Premier who would rather 

shout from his seat, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would advise the member to address 

the motion that is on the floor rather than involving other 

members of the legislature in his debate. I recognize the 

member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — And, Mr. Speaker, what I know is that 

the individuals, the constituents, and the organizations in 

Canora, Mr. Speaker, have answers, have questions and they 

need answers, Mr. Speaker, from that Deputy Premier, from 

their MLA. And that MLA, that Deputy Premier who shouts 

from his chair, Mr. Speaker, won‘t stand up, won‘t stand up to 

answer those questions in question period, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And here we see a government that is so afraid and embarrassed 

of their own mismanagement, so afraid of their own answers 

that they might provide to the people, that they thwart any 

opportunity for Saskatchewan people, organizations, 

institutions, and taxpayers to ask the questions that they deserve 

rightful answers to, Mr. Speaker. And that‘s a shame, a 

shameful state of democracy within Saskatchewan. 

 

[20:45] 

 

What I know is this, Mr. Speaker, is that when a government 

puts forward good legislation, good budgets, and good policy, 

they‘re very willing, very willing to debate, to allow scrutiny, 

and to in fact shine a spotlight on that legislation, those budgets, 

and that policy. But this government has the exact opposite 

because this government doesn‘t put forward good legislation. 

They put forward legislation that‘s ill derived, that‘s harmful to 

Saskatchewan people, institutions, and businesses, and it‘s 

created in a vacuum with no consultation with those people for 

whom it affects and for those people that know Saskatchewan‘s 

needs best, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see a government that put forward a budget that is anything 

but a good or positive budget, Mr. Speaker. We see the 

financial mismanagement of this Sask Party Premier and this 

Sask Party government being highlighted across Canada for its 

historic and unprecedented mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. We 

see a Finance minister who was directed by the Premier, the 

Sask Party Premier, to put a revenue estimate forward for 

potash that was almost $2 billion, Mr. Speaker. And the reality 

is we‘re paying back potash companies to the tune of $200 

million. That‘s a $2.2 billion miss, Mr. Speaker. That‘s 

completely unacceptable to Saskatchewan people and it‘s 

detrimental to the very opportunity that lies before the people of 

our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we don‘t see good policy, Mr. Speaker. We see a 

government that‘s willing to put forward policies and 

legislation that in fact puts us in contravention of the United 

Nations, Mr. Speaker, of the United Nations. We see a 

government, the Sask Party, that‘s willing to be in 

contravention of established conventions put forward by the 

United Nations. And the fact that this Attorney General and this 

Sask Party Premier aren‘t compelled to make the changes 

needed to bring Saskatchewan into compliance with the United 

Nations conventions and into the modern Saskatchewan that we 

should be, is a huge shame to Saskatchewan people. 

 

So we see a government that advances changes unilaterally that 

only serve their own political interest. It allows them to hide 

from the many, many, many groups and delegations that are 

coming in to ask questions of this government. And there are 

many, Mr. Speaker, in every corner of this province. 

 

And we see a Sask Party Premier who moves question period, 

Mr. Speaker, into the wee hours of 8 a.m., Mr. Speaker, so that 

people coming in from North Battleford and from — and I hear 

some heckling over there — from Martensville, many 

individuals that want to come down from Martensville, Mr. 

Speaker, to question period. And it makes it quite difficult to be 

making that trip in to ask those questions of their MLA who‘s 

shutting down . . . providing them the kind of answers that they 

deserve, Mr. Speaker, and that‘s a shame. 

 

And they do this under the auspice, Mr. Speaker, that‘s not 

correct. It‘s not correct. They say that the New Democrats are 

stalling the legislation, Mr. Speaker. Nothing could be further 

from the truth. New Democrats are providing scrutiny and 

consultation with stakeholders for whom legislation affects. 

Consultation, I should say, Mr. Speaker, that the Sask Party and 

the Sask Party Premier haven‘t done. They‘ve abandoned that 

from day one, Mr. Speaker. And what we see is 

mismanagement in file after file. 

 

And just as example, of course we‘ve had much progress as it 

relates to Bills. At this point in time 18 Bills have been passed, 

are awaiting Royal Assent, Mr. Speaker. We have other Bills 

that are in committee, some that are being discussed here. And 

this is what Saskatchewan people expect of their government, is 

to be able to debate and discuss those pieces of legislation and 

not to unilaterally change rules that are only in the Sask Party 

Premier‘s best interest to sneak through legislation at midnight, 

Mr. Speaker, or to hide from Saskatchewan people with the 

answers that are important to them. 

 

It‘s really telling, Mr. Speaker, when the Government House 

Leader comes out . . . He was forthright on this front, and the 

media asked him, well why won‘t you just follow the agreed 

upon rules that were put forward, the rules that you helped 

create and agreed where you simply extend some sitting days at 

the end of sitting if you haven‘t got your legislation through? 

And the reason that the Government House Leader put forward, 

and I‘m glad he was forthright on this, is that he doesn‘t want 

those question periods, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But just think about what that Government House Leader is 

saying. And of course we know these aren‘t really the words of 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5051 

the Government House Leader; these are the words of the 

Premier. So just think about what the Premier, the Sask Party 

Premier, is saying, that he will not take the questions of the 

public. He will not take the questions of organizations and 

institutions who make Saskatchewan rich and strong. And he‘ll 

hide from them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that‘s all we have for a Premier, Mr. Speaker — a Sask 

Party Premier who hides, ducks, and weaves from being 

accountable, from being transparent, and from standing up and 

answering the questions that Saskatchewan people and 

organizations have for that Premier, Mr. Speaker. And they‘re 

tough questions. They‘re tough questions, but they‘re the ones 

that need to be asked. 

 

And when you look at the unprecedented financial 

mismanagement of our finances, Mr. Speaker, I can understand 

why it‘s embarrassing for the Premier to stand up from his seat 

and to explain how did they get it so wrong. Where did all the 

money go, Mr. Speaker, is the question Saskatchewan people 

are asking. And the Premier certainly can‘t provide adequate 

answers to this. But this is where we need to be provided the 

time to do the proper scrutiny and to ask the questions that 

Saskatchewan people are desired. Instead the government 

chooses spin and rhetoric at every turn that they have, at every 

opportunity. And it‘s our role as opposition New Democrats at 

this point in time, opposition for a while longer anyways, Mr. 

Speaker, to provide the kind of diligence and consultation that 

the Sask Party doesn‘t engage in, Mr. Speaker. This is what 

Saskatchewan people expect as well and it‘s unfortunate, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And when we talk about the fact that there is an agreement 

actually in place, we‘re wondering, well why are we here, Mr. 

Speaker? The Sask Party says, well there‘s legislation that they 

need to advance. And of course there was rules already 

established to do that, Mr. Speaker. Simply what you do if you 

need more hours of debate, there would be some days tacked on 

to the end of session, Mr. Speaker. Those were agreed upon 

conventions and rules between the Sask Party and the New 

Democrats, Mr. Speaker. mutually agreed upon rules, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, and I hear members opposite . . . 

What we know is that we can‘t take this government at their 

word. You can‘t take the Sask Party at their word and, Mr. 

Speaker, we‘ve realized even more and more that you can‘t 

even take this government at contractual obligations. Even 

when their pen hits paper, Mr. Speaker, you can‘t trust this 

government. Because they can spend lots of time formulating 

agreements with groups such as municipalities, Mr. Speaker, 

with great fanfare and political benefit for the government of 

the day to come out with all sorts of balloons and fanfare, Mr. 

Speaker. But then they have no problem with ripping up that 

agreement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you can‘t trust them when they make a promise, you can‘t 

trust them when they give you their word, and you can‘t even 

trust them when they put pen to paper and make a contractual 

obligation. And the examples of this are many. You could look 

at the spending program that was put forward by the Sask Party 

in the last budget or in the campaign, Mr. Speaker, where it says 

this year, in this budget year, they‘d be spending basically $9 

billion. Well we know, Mr. Speaker, they‘ve broken that 

promise and they‘ve done so by almost an entire $1 billion. 

Overspending, overspending their campaign promise of 

spending, their spending program put forward to the voters, of 

spending $9 billion this year. And they‘re spending one whole 

billion dollars more, Mr. Speaker. Broken promise. 

 

And then of course we talk about $1 billion deficits, and of 

course we can see directly where the difference is. And it‘s the 

difference between what was promised and what was actually 

delivered by this irresponsible government that can‘t get its 

math right on this front, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see broken agreements with many, many groups. We see it 

in health care and I think of one specific group being the 

chiropractors, Mr. Speaker, who bargained in good faith, put 

forward a press release with this government, ratified a contract, 

only to have it ripped up, Mr. Speaker. Ripped up once again, 

Mr. Speaker, by this government. So we see a government that 

can‘t be trusted, not with their promises, not with their word, 

certainly not with contractual obligations, Mr. Speaker. And 

you certainly can‘t trust them with democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see action after action, Mr. Speaker, that is undemocratic in 

this province and we see it, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to actual, I 

guess, intervention in fixing, potential fixing of elections, Mr. 

Speaker. And these are big allegations that exist out there. 

 

But here we have the Sask Party government who is alleged to 

have taken $3 million of money that isn‘t theirs, Mr. Speaker, 

$3 million from the Progressive Conservatives of 

Saskatchewan. They take it and they‘re holding on to it. The 

reason, Mr. Speaker? It‘s alleged the reason they‘re holding that 

money is so that the PCs can‘t run a full election. So that the 

Sask Party‘s intervening and in fact fixing elections, Mr. 

Speaker, taking money that‘s not theirs, Mr. Speaker, and that‘s 

unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see a Premier who politically intervenes, Mr. Speaker, in 

our democratic process as it relates to our Chief Electoral 

Officer, Mr. Speaker, an individual who protects our very 

democratic institution. We have our Attorney General, Mr. 

Speaker, who agrees through a process — Board of Internal 

Economy — puts forward the candidate, brings him forward 

with great recommendation. We have a Premier who intervenes. 

And here at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, we have no 

direction from the Sask Party as to their willingness to reinstate 

democracy to that process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we see a government at all turns that is willing to override 

democracy. We see a government right here that, based out of 

political self-interest, based out of fear of facing the public on 

important questions, of simply out of self-preservation, we see a 

government put forward a motion that wants to prevent groups 

from coming in and asking the questions of their MLAs and of 

the Premier. And we have a Premier, the Sask Party Premier 

who‘s hiding from the very people who elected him, Mr. 

Speaker. That‘s a shameful day in Saskatchewan‘s political 

scene, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a government that on so many fronts simply can‘t 

manage. It‘s a chronology of failures on this front, Mr. Speaker, 

and we see it in finances, Mr. Speaker. We see it in health care, 



5052 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

Mr. Speaker. We see it specifically in health care as it relates to 

the rural doctor shortage that is getting so much worse, Mr. 

Speaker, under the Sask Party. We see vacancies, Mr. Speaker, 

that have actually grown by 50 per cent under this Sask Party 

government. 

 

We have individuals and families and seniors across 

Saskatchewan who expect their government to do better. They 

expect the Premier and the Sask Party to deliver on the 

promises that they‘ve provided, but they haven‘t. They‘ve done 

the opposite. Circumstances have gotten worse and 

communities across the province are looking for doctors and are 

in need of that service. And it again comes down to broken 

trust, Mr. Speaker. Broken promise after broken promise, 

ripped up agreement after ripped up agreement. And here we 

have a time where Saskatchewan people can‘t trust the 

Saskatchewan Party government, and that‘s a problem, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We see it in surgical wait times, Mr. Speaker, where I know in 

the Premier‘s own riding, Mr. Speaker, in his own riding we see 

surgical wait times that have increased by 90 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. And we know individual after individual and families 

that are strained, waiting for their family member or for 

themselves to have surgery provided to them. And under the 

Sask Party and this Premier and the member from Swift 

Current, circumstances have become much worse for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

And then we see the broken promise after broken promise as it 

relates to cost of living. Now the problem on this front, Mr. 

Speaker, is much of it is a direct result of their financial 

mismanagement. Much of it, Mr. Speaker, is a direct result of 

misplaced priorities. But where it‘s taken out of, Mr. Speaker, 

where Saskatchewan people pay for this kind of 

mismanagement is through their quality of life, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know my constituents, Mr. Speaker, are hugely 

concerned about the rising cost of living under this Sask Party 

government, particularly when that rising cost of living is a 

direct result of the irresponsible mismanagement of the Sask 

Party Premier and government, Mr. Speaker. We shouldn‘t have 

expected anything different, Mr. Speaker, from this Premier. 

But the opposition New Democrats are going to hold the Sask 

Party accountable on this front, and we‘re going to urge this 

government to take the questions that Saskatchewan people are 

asking. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member‘s time has elapsed. I 

recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This evening we are 

given a chance to talk about the ability to manage the affairs of 

the province by the present government. And it reminds me of a 

relatively standard line that I use when I talk to people going 

across the province. And this line is — and it doesn‘t matter 

whether it‘s health care or highways or education or anywhere 

else — what I tell people is, as long as the Sask Party 

government sticks with the plans that the NDP government had 

laid out for the next 10 years, things go fairly well. It‘s when 

they freelance that we get into trouble. 

 

And so where do they freelance? Well they freelance on labour 

legislation where there is no issue around construction labour 

relations. They freelance and decide, we‘re going to disrupt this 

in a fashion that‘s going to effectively eliminate years and years 

of good work being done in the labour area. 

 

[21:00] 

 

When you get into health care, they‘ve been following a lot of 

the plans that are there. They‘ve been going ahead with some 

things, but they‘re falling down on some of the resource areas 

for health care. And we‘re seeing the problems that arise on a 

daily basis. 

 

When it comes to highways, they‘ve been working fairly well 

with the 10-year plan. They‘ve enhanced it and they‘ve moved 

up some things. And that‘s good. So we don‘t necessarily hear a 

lot of issues in that area. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, one area where they could have used some 

very good advice, and they don‘t seem to have followed it, is in 

how to manage this House and how to bring forward legislation 

and how to accomplish things in this legislature. And that‘s 

what we‘re talking about tonight, is the whole fact that for 

whatever reason the Premier . . . And I assume that must be 

where all this originates because we have a very heavily 

dominated, executive-controlled government, executive control 

of this legislature. And what we have is bungling. We have 

bungling of what the agenda is. 

 

Now when you look at what kinds of things have been able to 

be accomplished in this session from the Throne Speech last 

fall, it‘s pretty sad to recognize that in the fall session there 

were two Bills that passed and received Royal Assent. One was 

the cell phone Bill and the other was the 911 amendment Bill. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that you learn, or you 

should learn or you should have learned, in managing this 

legislature is that this is a place where the opposition gets to 

challenge the agenda of the government. It‘s a place where the 

opposition has a role of asking hard questions. It‘s a place 

where the opposition has the role of challenging on a daily 

basis, whether it‘s in question period or in committee or in the 

speeches that are given in this place. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the roles of a good government is to 

set out a clear agenda of where they want to go. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that is the fundamental problem that we have in 

Saskatchewan right now. That problem is that the Saskatchewan 

government and this Saskatchewan Premier have no idea where 

they want to go. So we sit here on this side of the House and we 

ask questions. And we get a surprising answer one day in some 

area that we think, well that must, you know, we thought that 

area was okay, but oh no there‘s some big problems there. Or 

we ask a question in another area. All of a sudden we‘re 

surprised with some kind of ill-thought response that creates a 

problem somewhere else. So, Mr. Speaker, I personally think, 

and I have come to this conclusion after observing the members 

opposite, the Premier, the House Leader and others who are 

working here, is they don‘t have a clue where they‘re going. 

 

Now I‘d like to remind people about the speech that I gave 

when they presented their first budget in the spring of 2008. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the image that I presented in that particular 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5053 

speech was exactly what we see now. The image there was of a 

bus going down the hill, where there was no driver and nobody 

at the steering wheel, and the thing was going all over the place. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that‘s exactly why we‘re in this jam right 

now, is that the House Leader and the Premier have not set out 

very clearly what they want to do. They have not set out an 

agenda that allows for the opposition to respond and ask 

questions, and they have not let the people of Saskatchewan in 

on their plan. 

 

Now for a while there we thought that they had a plan, and 

therefore we were just having to scrape away the layers or dig 

through the dirt and find out what the plan was. Now 

unfortunately we‘ve gotten a little further in there, and it seems 

to be all mush. There doesn‘t seem to be a goal or a plan other 

than in 2007 we‘re going to get elected and be the Government 

of Saskatchewan. Oh, we‘re here; now what do we do? And, 

Mr. Speaker, I think that‘s the fundamental issue that we see 

across this province.  

 

What we know is that when these people came into 

government, they had in excess of $2 billion in the bank. They 

had increased revenues on an annual basis that would allow 

them to do many positive things for the people of 

Saskatchewan. After two years and a little more, we see the 

government having spent all of that money in the bank. They‘ve 

spent the surplus revenues that they‘ve had each year. And we 

ask, well where did the money go? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that‘s a common question we get in the 

coffee shops — whether it‘s in Regina or it‘s out in Porcupine 

Plain or it‘s Melfort or wherever — people are saying, well I 

thought there was a lot of money here. Where did it all go? 

And, Mr. Speaker, we are asking some pretty hard questions. 

What‘s the response of the members opposite, but especially of 

the Premier of this province? It‘s to say, we don‘t want to 

answer those questions. We want to set up a closure of debate in 

the legislature. We want to push through with an agenda which 

doesn‘t seem to have any rhyme or reason. And we want to 

ignore the wishes, not only of the opposition, but of the people 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, people have big questions about this Premier 

and his ability to manage anything. They have big questions 

about the team that he‘s got working with him and the inability 

that they have shown over the last two years in managing this 

government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it‘s quite interesting to make some 

comparisons back to the ‘80s. What I know from going back 

and looking at some of the histories of those, of the nine years 

of the Devine administration was that the types of speeches and 

the types of questions we, the types of speeches we‘re giving 

now and the types of questions we‘re asking right now in year 2 

are the same as the kind of questions that were asked in year 5 

and 6 and 7 of the Devine administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the evidence of the mismanagement of this 

government is that they have been able to get to a place of great 

difficulty in two years where it took those, the administration in 

the ‘80s, five or six years. And, Mr. Speaker, that‘s what the 

people of Saskatchewan are wondering about. That‘s what the 

people are asking. They‘re saying how did we get here? How 

did this happen? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when you end up hiring somebody who‘s 

not up to the job, part of your task is to confront yourself and 

say why did we hire that person. Why did we bring them into 

this place to run the legislature? And, Mr. Speaker, we‘re at that 

point now, where everybody across the province is asking how 

did we get this whole group of people in government in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

They said, oh yes there is a boom. This is the comments in the 

2007 election. Oh yes, there is a boom, but we are so much 

better at managing a boom than the NDP government. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, words are cheap. What the public is expecting is 

actions, concrete actions about how to do positive things which 

will improve our society here in Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 

Speaker that‘s the area where this government has fallen down. 

 

So, what‘s the response? They start out the session last fall, they 

don‘t really know how many Bills they‘re going to bring in or 

not — in fact we just got a list of a few of them last week — 

and so because they don‘t have a clue, they can‘t manage the 

time that‘s there over quite a number of months. So it‘s like 

starting to build a house and you haven‘t figured out how many 

two-by-fours you need, how many two-by-sixes, how many 

sheets of plywood, anything else. You don‘t have all that. So 

you‘re starting to build and all of a sudden you‘ve got a hole. 

You‘ve got a place where you don‘t have things that are needed 

to complete the task. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we‘ve been in the situation, since last fall for 

sure but certainly since we came back now this spring, where 

the Premier and his team don‘t seem to know where we‘re 

going. And that‘s why we‘re here tonight, where we‘re being 

asked to work from 8 a.m. to 12 p.m. on an agenda where they 

won‘t even tell us what the agenda will be because they don‘t 

understand how a legislature works. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is not the kind of job that you can learn 

on the fly. This is not the kind of job that the public expects you 

to do just by freelancing it. And, Mr. Speaker, I don‘t think the 

public‘s going to tolerate it after November of next year 

because basically people have learned more than enough 

already about how difficult it is for these people to actually lay 

out a plan and set out where we‘re going to go. 

 

Now I know that governments of all stripes in legislatures 

across Canada; in state senates, state houses across the United 

States; in other legislatures in Australia, England, other places 

that have similar legislatures to what we have here, they all 

know that when you‘re in government the legislature is a very 

important place for the opposition to register their concerns 

about what you‘re doing. But it‘s also a place where they expect 

that you as government will lay out the plans. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if there‘s any reason why we‘re in this kind 

of jam we‘re in right now, it‘s because the Premier and the 

House Leader and those people do not have a clue what that 

plan is. Or if they have a clue, they don‘t know how to 

communicate it. But I think more fundamentally the issue is 

there is no plan, and there hasn‘t been one since the election 

took place. 

 



5054 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we here in this particular place and 

what we in Saskatchewan pride ourselves on, is being practical 

and being solution-oriented. And we‘re people who like to 

solve problems and benefit all the community. To do that we all 

know that it takes hard work but it takes planning, and it takes 

clear planning. And, Mr. Speaker, what we have tonight is a 

perfect example of somebody who is in the midst of a task. 

They don‘t know what the task is. They haven‘t made a plan so 

therefore they don‘t know where they are in completing that 

task, and so we‘re now stuck with people that are trying to 

figure out what to do. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a few days ago I went down to the Globe 

Theatre and I encourage everybody to go and see Henrik 

Ibsen‘s play, A Doll’s House. One of the things that comes 

when you‘re sitting there listening, you think, you know what 

this play is about. It‘s about debt and mismanagement. And 

when you actually listen and think about what it‘s also about, 

it‘s about integrity. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the issues that I‘d like to point out: 

I‘m a lawyer; my colleague from Saskatoon is a lawyer. There‘s 

a couple of lawyers on the other side of the House and we have 

a code of professional conduct which was updated in 2006. And 

I just want to read a few of the quotes from this particular text 

because I think it applies not just to the lawyers here but to all 

of us. First chapter, no. I, is ―Integrity.‖ ―The lawyer must 

discharge with integrity all duties owed to clients, the court or 

tribunal or other members of the profession and the public.‖ 

 

Integrity is the fundamental quality of any person who 

seeks to practise as a member of the legal profession. If 

the client is in any doubt about the lawyer‘s 

trustworthiness, the essential element in the lawyer-client 

relationship will be missing. If personal integrity is 

lacking, the lawyer‘s usefulness to the client and 

reputation within the profession will be destroyed 

regardless of how competent the lawyer may be. 

 

Then there‘s rule no. X. That was rule no. I. Rule no. X is 

called, ―The lawyer in public office.‖ 

 

The lawyer who holds public office should, in the 

discharge of official duties, adhere to standards of 

conduct as high as those that these rules require of a 

lawyer engaged in the practice of law. 

Guiding Principles 

1. The Rule applies to the lawyer who is elected or 

appointed to legislative or administrative office at any 

level of government, regardless of whether the lawyer 

attained such office because of professional 

qualifications. Because such a lawyer is in the public eye, 

the legal profession can more readily be brought into 

disrepute by failure on the lawyer‘s part to observe its 

professional standards of conduct. 

 

Conflicts of Interest 

2. The lawyer who holds public office must not allow 

personal or other interests to conflict with the proper 

discharge of official duties. The lawyer holding part-time 

public office must not accept any private legal business 

where duty to the client will or may conflict with official 

duties. If some unforeseen conflict arises, the lawyer 

should terminate the professional relationship, explaining 

to the client that official duties must prevail. The lawyer 

who holds a full-time public office will not be faced with 

this sort of conflict, but must nevertheless guard against 

allowing the lawyer‘s independent judgement in the 

discharge of official duties to be influenced by the 

lawyer‘s own interest, or by the interests of persons 

closely related to or associated with the lawyer, or of 

former or prospective clients, or of former or prospective 

partners or associates. 

 

[21:15] 

 

And then you go on and there‘s a clause which relates to 

avoiding questionable conduct. And it says, ―The lawyer should 

observe the rules of professional conduct set out in the Code in 

the spirit as well as in the letter.‖ And basically then it goes on 

to say: 

 

Guiding Principles 

1. Public confidence in the administration of justice and 

the legal profession may be eroded by irresponsible 

conduct on the part of the individual lawyer. For that 

reason, event he appearance of impropriety should be 

avoided. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the reason that I read some of these clauses 

out of this particular Code of Professional Conduct is that it 

does relate to how all of us work and respond. Because in many 

ways we are hired by the public, all of us, to do the task that has 

been set out for us. And it‘s my point, Mr. Speaker, that we 

have a Premier and we have the people that he has working 

with him who have not fulfilled their responsibilities to the 

public in properly setting out a plan for what we should be 

doing in this province, nor have they properly managed this 

legislature and provided the information that‘s required to have 

this matter go forward. 

 

So what is their response? Their response is to shut down 

debate. Their response is to override the rules. Their response is 

to do things which are not appropriate in a situation where you 

respect the public and you respect the ability of the opposition 

on behalf of the public to ask the fundamental questions about 

what‘s going on in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, we will use 

all of the time and ability that we have to continue to ask those 

questions. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a simple way of dealing with the 

mismanagement of time by the government would be to extend 

the days of the legislature. What we know is that they‘re not 

very interested in that because they don‘t like the hard questions 

that come in question period each day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think if they had a plan, if they knew what they 

were doing, all those questions wouldn‘t be that hard. But what 

makes their day so difficult is they don‘t have a plan, they don‘t 

know where they‘re going, and the public doesn‘t know where 

they‘re going. Mr. Speaker, I think that it‘s a sad day when we 

have things mismanaged so badly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I enter 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5055 

into this debate on the closure motion regarding extended hours 

with a heavy heart and great enthusiasm all at the same time. A 

heavy heart because this is another bully tactic by this 

government that we‘re seeing on a continual basis, but with 

great enthusiasm because it gives me the opportunity once more 

to lay out the reasons for why this opposition is going to 

scrutinize this government in every way, shape, and form to its 

fullest degree, Mr. Speaker, even if they use these bully tactics 

against the opposition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now this closure motion is . . . This is happening now for the 

second time in two years. It‘s the second time that the Sask 

Party government has put forward changes to the sitting time of 

the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and I find that very interesting in 

that in the time period that both the Sask Party government, 

who was then the opposition, and the current opposition, which 

is the NDP, when they agreed to the hours and the sitting rules 

of the House and such, Mr. Speaker, they did so with great 

research and scrutiny at the time that those rules were agreed to. 

 

And I find it very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that in the two and a 

half years that the Sask Party has come to sit as the Government 

of Saskatchewan that they are so disorganized and are so 

mismanaged that they can‘t get it together to figure out how 

they‘re going to get their legislation passed in the time that they 

want to see it passed, Mr. Speaker. So I find it very interesting 

that this is the second time, the second time in two years that 

the Sask Party government has to resort to bully tactics which 

are just absolutely deplorable anywhere in society, and 

especially, quite frankly, in the legislature of Saskatchewan, 

because the legislature of Saskatchewan is where democracy, 

the ultimate form of democracy is supposed to take place, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This is when the loyal opposition that was elected by the people 

of this province is supposed to be able to hold the government 

accountable and make sure that they are fully scrutinized in 

what they‘re doing to ensure that what they‘re doing is in the 

best interests of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the fact that the Sask Party government doesn‘t want to be 

open and accountable and transparent is extremely problematic, 

not just for the opposition, Mr. Speaker, but for the people of 

Saskatchewan who elected them to the role of government. And 

they are extremely disappointed with what they have gotten 

from the Sask Party government in that role, Mr. Speaker. 

Now the reason they‘re doing this, as I said, is because the Sask 

Party government seems to be absolutely incompetent when it 

comes to managing their own legislative agenda. We see this as 

recently as last week. We see three Bills introduced last week. 

We see another five Bills introduced today, Mr. Speaker. Is that 

a coincidence that we see five Bills introduced today, just a few 

short weeks away from the end of the session, when they had 

since the beginning of March to do so? Or better yet, they had 

last fall to introduce these Bills, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What happened? We saw five new Bills introduced today, 

which in itself is interesting, because we received a letter from 

the government last week asking us to sign off on all pieces of 

legislation to the end of session. And that included these five 

Bills that we hadn‘t even seen yet. So they wanted us to sign off 

carte blanche away the rights of Saskatchewan people to ensure 

that whatever legislation is being brought forward is legislation 

that‘s in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan, 

legislation that‘s fully scrutinized, legislation that the 

opposition has the opportunity to consult with the stakeholders 

on. They wanted us to sign away those rights to make sure that 

they could get their legislation passed by the end of session 

without the opposition doing its due diligence and its work to 

ensure that democracy is being fully practised in the province, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what we have now is a motion, or they‘re going to call it a 

motion. I‘m going to call it a bully tactic. I‘m going to call it a 

form of — oh, I don‘t know — dictatorship, where there is a 

rule breaking, where there is simply, we want this to happen by 

the government regardless of whether the due diligence has 

been done, regardless of whether the voices of Saskatchewan 

people have been heard. They simply want to ram through the 

legislation at whatever cost, Mr. Speaker, because they don‘t 

care, Mr. Speaker. They don‘t care how that legislation affects 

people. They don‘t care how that legislation affects other 

entities like, for instance, business or the environment or the 

labour environment in the province or the students that are 

going to the universities in this province or the students that are 

attending our elementary schools in this province. They don‘t 

care. 

 

And we have good examples of that, Mr. Speaker. We have 

Regina Catholic school students in the city of Regina that are 

underfunded $275 per student in comparison to the public 

school students in Regina, Mr. Speaker — $275 per student. In 

my daughter‘s school alone, that amounts to 382 students at 

$275 a head. I don‘t think they‘d have to worry about cutting 

teaching assistant positions or other programs or worrying 

about how they‘re going to stretch their dollars if they could see 

that extra funding, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was brought to the Sask Party‘s attention, it was brought to 

the attention of the Minister of Education, and what did the 

Sask Party and the Minister of Education say? Oh well, oh well, 

we know there‘s a funding discrepancy. But is the Sask Party 

government going to change it? Are they going to do anything 

about that, Mr. Speaker? No, not at all. Why? Because 

obviously they don‘t care. It‘s that simple, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again we get back to the issue of the judgment and the trust 

of a Premier and the lack thereof, Mr. Speaker. There is poor 

judgment by the Premier in the decisions that have been made 

so far and unfortunately that leads to a lack of trust, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And we can look at a few different issues. Where is the 

judgment of the Premier and the Sask Party government when it 

comes to impeding another political party from participating in 

the democracy of this province, Mr. Speaker? Where is that 

Premier? Why isn‘t he speaking to that, Mr. Speaker? Why isn‘t 

he speaking to the fact that his name is implicated in the 

withholding of those funds, Mr. Speaker? Why is that? 

 

Why is this Premier and that Sask Party government changing 

the rules of accounting in this budget, Mr. Speaker? Why is 

that? We‘re seeing the fact that they‘re going to be suffering 

another deficit. We see the fact that they are overspending 

compared to the amount of money that‘s coming into this 

province. We‘re seeing the fact that there is underfunding in 



5056 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

critical areas such as, for instance, education and health, Mr. 

Speaker. And why is it that, when all that‘s going on, they‘re 

changing the rules of accounting? To be able to hide what‘s 

going on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The issue of open and openness and transparency and 

accountability is absolutely out the window with the Sask Party 

government, and it‘s extremely disconcerting, Mr. Speaker, 

extremely disconcerting. And why is that? Because this is the 

modus operandi of a Tory government, Mr. Speaker. That‘s 

what it is. That‘s what it is. 

 

And if we look at The Globe and Mail, Mr. Speaker, from as 

recently as April 14 . . . and I found this very interesting, Mr. 

Speaker. The Globe and Mail wrote an article about access to 

information, Mr. Speaker, and the title of it is: ―Delays, denials 

and deadlock: Ottawa‘s trouble with disclosure.‖ It says the 

―Information watchdog fears citizens‘ right to information from 

government is on the brink of being ‗totally obliterated.‘‖ Those 

are the words on the front page of The Globe and Mail about 

the Harper Tories and their lack of accountability and their lack 

of transparency. And what we‘re seeing, Mr. Speaker, is we‘ve 

got the same, if not worse, situation happening in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we look at that article, Mr. Speaker, what do we see? We 

see that a few agencies are getting a D, Mr. Speaker. Now a D 

leaves room for hope because, well, they haven‘t quite, you 

know, flunked out yet. But then we see another four agencies 

have an F, Mr. Speaker. They have an F. So if you look at 

report cards, you know a D is not good, but an F, you‘re 

flunking out. It‘s really bad. But as if that weren‘t bad enough, 

Mr. Speaker, as if that weren‘t bad enough, we have an agency 

with the federal government that is under red alert, Mr. Speaker. 

They‘re calling it red alert because it‘s off the charts. It‘s worse 

than an F. And quite frankly, if we had to grade the Sask Party 

government, it would be a red alert for the Sask Party 

government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let‘s look at why the Sask Party government 

doesn‘t want to sit the extra days that are going, that are 

potentially going to be needed to pass the legislation that they 

didn‘t take into account appropriately in terms of the timing of 

the session. They introduced eight pieces of legislation within 

the last week, Mr. Speaker. That‘s poor management, and the 

only people that are to blame for that are the Sask Party 

government. Not the opposition, not the people of 

Saskatchewan — it‘s the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

They‘re to blame about the fact that they can‘t manage the 

schedule of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, they‘re saying trust us. They‘re saying to the opposition and 

the people of Saskatchewan, just pass our legislation. Trust us. 

Well here‘s a problem with the word trust in conjunction with 

that Premier and the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. And, 

Mr. Speaker, this is talking to the characteristics and behaviours 

of the Sask Party government under the leadership and direction 

of that Premier, Mr. Speaker. It amounts to bullying tactics, and 

it amounts to a form of dictatorship, Mr. Speaker. So they say 

trust us. Well let‘s look at what people have been able to use as 

an example of trust so far. 

 

[21:30] 

 

The Premier and his Sask Party cohorts say don‘t worry; we‘re 

not going to bring forward essential services legislation, before 

the last election. What happened? Within 30 days after the last 

election, they bring forward essential services legislation. And 

that flew directly in the face of all the people they told . . . what 

they felt it was not necessary. The Minister of Health himself 

said it isn‘t necessary in this province because we‘re not seeing 

disputes and major disputes of an ongoing nature, and so 

therefore we don‘t feel it is necessary to bring forward essential 

services legislation. Within 30 days of being elected, that‘s 

exactly what they did. What they‘re saying to us now and the 

Saskatchewan people — trust us. 

 

The other thing they‘re looking at is . . . let‘s look at the last 

platform of the Sask Party — climate change. They promised 

stabilization of greenhouse gas emissions by 2010. They 

promised 32 per cent reduction by 2020, and they promised 

more than that, Mr. Speaker. But you know what they‘re giving 

Saskatchewan people? They‘re giving the Saskatchewan 

people, not just less; they‘re giving them nothing so far. Two 

and a half years in government and Saskatchewan people are 

seeing nothing on the greenhouse gas reduction front in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again they say trust us. But what have we got to base that 

trust on? Absolutely nothing. They say to the chiropractic 

providers in the province, they say you know what? Trust us. 

We‘re not going to delist your service. We‘re going to negotiate 

a contract with you, and all‘s going to be well. They tell a 

chiropractor from Prince Albert at the Premier‘s golf 

tournament, the Premier himself said, trust me, we‘re not going 

to delist you. What happens, Mr. Speaker, in the budget? The 

chiropractor services in this province were delisted. The 

Premier was disingenuous at best, Mr. Speaker, disingenuous. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we know that the Sask Party government, 

under the leadership and direction of the Premier, is 

disingenuous. We see the hypocrisy of this Premier and the 

Sask party government, and we see poor judgment and a 

complete and absolute lack of trust. 

 

Now that trust, Mr. Speaker, extends far, far, far into the area of 

trust and respect for the First Nations people and the Métis 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We‘re seeing an absolute 

disrespect, mistrust, Mr. Speaker, for the First Nations and 

Métis people. We see that in bringing forward cuts to the 

budget that were never previously discussed or consulted upon, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see, for instance, changes to tobacco purchasing rights, Mr. 

Speaker, which is an inherent right to the First Nations people 

of the country, Mr. Speaker. So we see that the Sask Party 

government decides to make changes without any previous 

consultation. But who does the Premier talk to about those 

changes just a few days prior to the budget? He talks to the 

chamber of commerce about that. He muses about that to the 

chamber of commerce. Did he make any musings about that to 

the people that it was going to affect, who have inherent treaty 

rights, Mr. Speaker? No he did not, Mr. Speaker. It was the 

ultimate lack of respect, ultimate lack of respect. 

 

What happened to, for instance, a round table partnership with 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5057 

the FSIN and the Ministry of Environment, Mr. Speaker? What 

happened to that? You know what happened? Let me read you a 

quote from a letter from Vice-chief Lyle Whitefish to Minister 

Heppner which was, by the way, cc‘d to the Premier. So the 

Premier is well aware, is well aware of what‘s contained in this 

letter. So, Mr. Speaker, here is the quote, and this is from March 

30th which was only six days after the budget was delivered: 

 

This is in response to the telephone conversation I had 

with Elizabeth Quarshie, deputy minister of Environment 

on March 24th, 2010. On this date, Ms. Quarshie advised 

me that the Ministry of Environment would be 

terminating funding to the Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations under the FSIN-Ministry of Environment 

partnership agreement. 

 

And continuing on with another quote, ―Firstly I must express 

serious concern that you did not provide due consideration and 

respect to my office by contacting me personally to discuss this 

decision prior to such a decision being made.‖ As you can see, 

Mr. Speaker, again no consultation, no discussion, the ultimate 

lack of respect, poor judgment by the Premier, poor judgment 

by the Premier, and therefore a complete lack of trust by people 

in this province that he is a man of his word, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The letter goes on to state, 

 

My previous experience in working with provincial 

ministers and ministries has been very different than what 

has occurred in this situation. I am therefore dismayed 

with your ministry‘s actions which brings into question 

whether First Nations can trust the Ministry of 

Environment to live up to its commitments. 

 

So you have here, Mr. Speaker, you have it in black and white. 

The FSIN is now saying that they have difficulty trusting the 

Minister of Environment, trusting that Premier because there 

has been no consultation. There hasn‘t been any dialogue and 

therefore the trust is broken, Mr. Speaker. The trust is broken. 

 

Further on in this letter it says, ―This is illustrated in the 

unilateral action to terminate a 16-year relationship.‖ Unilateral 

action, Mr. Speaker. And if you look up the word dictatorship 

in the dictionary, you‘ll find the description is unilateral action, 

Mr. Speaker. So when this Sask Party government and this 

Premier is referred to as a form of dictatorship, it is bang on the 

money, Mr. Speaker, bang on. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we go on to see there are so many things to 

talk about, that it‘s difficult to know where to touch on next, 

given that I have few precious minutes left. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the due diligence that the 

opposition is doing to ensure that all the Bills are properly 

scrutinized, that all the stakeholders that would be affected by 

those Bills have been reached, have been consulted with, a 

word that I understand the Sask Party has great difficulty with, 

that the Premier obviously has great difficulty with given that 

they don‘t actually put it into practice . . . But we in the 

opposition do believe in consultations, Mr. Speaker. And we 

believe in making sure that those consultations are done in 

conjunction with any of the Bills that are being forward, to 

ensure that due diligence is being practised, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when we look at that, Mr. Speaker, we look at the fact that 

when they do these types of things in terms of moving this 

motion to have the unreasonable sitting hours, Mr. Speaker, the 

working hours are not the issue, Mr. Speaker. Everyone on the 

opposition caucus works these hours or more anyways, Mr. 

Speaker. All you have to do is check the front log at the 

Sergeant-at-Arms‘ door and see when we sign out, Mr. Speaker. 

We sign out considerably later than the members of the Sask 

Party government do, Mr. Speaker. We are here well working 

into wee hours of the morning to ensure that we are doing the 

proper scrutiny that needs to be done. 

 

So we don‘t have a problem with the hours that we‘re going to 

be in the legislature. What we have a problem with, Mr. 

Speaker, is the hours that the Sask Party government and that 

Premier wants us to sit in this Chamber because it prevents us 

from doing the due diligence that we are supposed to be doing 

as the elected members of the opposition in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. That‘s what we have issue with, Mr. Speaker. So as I 

said, we get back to the whole issue of we have a government 

and a Premier that are exercising poor judgment and cannot be 

trusted because of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we ask questions in the Chamber. We submit written 

questions. We see questions that are directed to the government 

and the Premier through letters and emails to ministers. And 

what are the answers? There are no answers, Mr. Speaker. 

People receiving responses, we receive responses but we‘re not 

receiving answers. There is no accountability, no transparency 

by this government, Mr. Speaker, and that‘s why we‘re saying 

we may need to see an extension of sitting days. We‘re not 

opposed to that, Mr. Speaker, but the extension of hours is an 

absolute abdication of democracy, Mr. Speaker. That‘s what it 

is, Mr. Speaker. It is a dictatorship. 

 

The Speaker: — The member‘s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 

somewhat, I guess, ashamed that I have to stand tonight and 

speak to a motion to amend the rules or change the rules in our 

Assembly — rules which we all agree to, rules which we all 

undertook to live by, rules that members of this Assembly 

should believe in, rules that should govern how we conduct our 

business. 

Mr. Speaker we undertook in this Assembly about four years 

ago some significant rule changes, and those rules are printed in 

a book called The Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we undertook to put in 

place the legislative calendar, a calendar which we all agreed to. 

Mr. Speaker, if we can‘t live within the rules that we have 

created, Mr. Speaker, the rules that we all agreed to, then we 

should jointly change the rules to make them work. Mr. 

Speaker, to unilaterally change rules, to unilaterally change 

rules, Mr. Speaker, says that this House cannot work, that this 

House will not work, and that we have a government that will 

use its power. We have a government that will use its power to 

abuse the minority, that the majority will use its power to abuse 

the minority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote. I want to quote a few things 

from the rules, Mr. Speaker, because I think the people of the 



5058 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

province of Saskatchewan have a right to understand what the 

rules say. Mr. Speaker, ―Unless otherwise ordered by the 

Assembly or its rules, sitting days shall be in accordance with 

the parliamentary calendar of two periods as defined by this 

rule.‖ So, Mr. Speaker, according to the rules, we established a 

parliamentary calendar. We‘ve established that parliamentary 

calendar. It goes on to say, it goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that: 

 

The ordinary times for the daily meetings and 

adjournment of the sittings of the [Legislative] Assembly 

shall be as follows: 

 

Monday: 1:30 p.m. - 10:30 p.m. (with recess between 

5:00 p.m. & 7:00 p.m.) 

Tuesday: 1:30 p.m. - 10:30 p.m. (with recess between 

5:00 p.m. & 7:00 p.m.) 

Wednesday: 1:30 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.  

Thursday: 10:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have defined the rules of when we should sit. 

We have defined a calendar of days in which we shall sit. Those 

were defined by joint agreement. They were agreed to by all the 

members, all 58 members of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and 

then we should live, we should live by those rules. If we agree 

to a set of rules, Mr. Speaker, in life, we should live by those 

rules. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we see today is a government who cannot 

live by its rules. This government, in two years — each year, 

each year, Mr. Speaker — has had to extend the hours 

unilaterally in order, in order, Mr. Speaker, to believe, and I say 

to believe, they could get their work done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, we saw in 2008 the hours extended. It 

lasted about three days, if it even lasted three days. And then for 

10 days at the end of the session, we were going home early, 

two or three hours a day because the government couldn‘t 

manage its workload in 2008, Mr. Speaker. And it did the same 

thing. It passed a motion to extend the hours and then didn‘t 

need the time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have consistently, Mr. Speaker, we 

consistently then and we have consistently now told them that 

they don‘t need to extend the hours to get their work done. Been 

absolutely consistent in telling them they do not need to extend 

the hours, Mr. Speaker, that if they‘re organized, if they know 

what they‘re doing, and if they work with the opposition, the 

work will get done in the normal hours, Mr. Speaker. Been 

absolutely consistent telling them that the work will get done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in 2008 they had to extend the hours. 

In 2010 they have to extend the hours, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Canora can yell from his 

chair, the member from Canora, the Deputy Premier can yell 

from his chair but, Mr. Speaker, if he wants to get in the debate, 

he should get in the debate. He shouldn‘t be yelling from his 

chair when somebody else has the floor because, Mr. Speaker, 

he shows day after day he doesn‘t respect the rules of this 

Assembly. Now, Mr. Speaker, if he doesn‘t respect the rules of 

the Assembly, there‘s no wonder he cannot get an arrangement 

in order to get their work done, Mr. Speaker. Because he is the 

deputy leader of the Saskatchewan Party, and he cannot even sit 

in his seat, Mr. Speaker, and follow the rules. 

 

[21:45] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, why are we, why are we in the situation we 

are, Mr. Speaker? Well I‘ll tell you exactly why we‘re in this 

situation. We have a government that can‘t manage its financial 

affairs, Mr. Speaker. We have a government that cannot manage 

its legislative affairs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So what do we have, Mr. Government? We have a government 

that couldn‘t manage a two-car parade, or quite frankly a 

two-household paper route. Even if the two households were 

side by side, they‘d get lost in between, Mr. Speaker. They‘d 

get lost in between the two-house paper route, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‘s really quite unfortunate that the members 

of the government who can‘t manage their legislative agenda 

that we have told repeatedly would get done within the normal 

work time, Mr. Speaker. We have passed Bills as they‘ve come 

forward, Mr. Speaker. We‘ve moved a number of Bills through 

the various stages of hearing, Mr. Speaker — second reading 

into committee and passed. And there are a number of Bills 

waiting for Royal Assent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if we were today doing Bills rather than wasting our time 

on this debate, Mr. Speaker, a number of other Bills would have 

moved forward. But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we have a 

government who wants to, a government who wants to exert 

their authority and try to bully an opposition that won‘t be 

bullied. 

 

Mr. Speaker, me and my, our colleagues, my colleagues on this 

side of the House are not going to be bullied by a government, 

we‘re not going to be bullied by a government that thinks that 

they can push around the official opposition. So my colleagues 

and I, my colleagues and I will stand firm and tell the 

government, and in particular . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I‘d ask the members to 

allow the member from Regina Dewdney to continue his speech 

uninterrupted. The member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Canora-Pelly can yell from his seat all he wants, but my 

colleagues and I are going to continue to try to get him and 

others to learn, learn as we hoped they would learn after 2008 

when they extended the hours and a mere three days later we 

ran out of work, Mr. Speaker. And we ran out of work. He can 

continue to yell, Mr. Speaker, but he should just follow the 

rules, Mr. Speaker. And if he wants to speak, get up when it is 

his turn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if they simply lived by the rules, all the work 

would get completed by the 20th of May, the last day of the 

session, Mr. Speaker. So now they‘re going to extend the hours, 

and they‘re going to play the bully role, Mr. Speaker, and try to 

push around the official opposition. Well, Mr. Speaker, we 

can‘t allow that to happen. 

 

In a democracy it‘s the role of the opposition to safeguard the 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5059 

rights of the population, Mr. Speaker, to represent the people 

and ensure that the government is held accountable for what it‘s 

bringing forward, that due diligence is done, and legislation is 

properly scrutinized and the questions are asked, the questions 

that need to be asked. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we‘ve got, we‘ve got an Environment 

minister today who‘s bringing forward Bills, Mr. Speaker, that 

we go out and talk to the stakeholders in the environmental 

community, and they‘re astounded because she‘s never talked 

to them. They‘ve never consulted them, Mr. Speaker. And we 

have significant legislation brought forward by an Environment 

minister who hasn‘t consulted with the environmental 

community, hasn‘t consulted with stakeholders throughout the 

province, and she wants us to pass the Bills, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a minute about how much time 

has been spent on some of these Bills. Those who understand 

the rules of our Legislative Assembly know, know that 20 hours 

can be spent on a particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

But I want to point out that we have The Municipal Financing 

Corporation Amendment Act there‘s only been 32 minutes spent 

on. Mr. Speaker, on the Doukhobor trust Bill, 59 minutes; on 

The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 31 minutes. Mr. Speaker, 

there are a number of Bills that have barely been touched, that 

there‘s been barely any discussion at all about, and the 

government wants us to unilaterally sign an agreement that we 

will pass every piece of legislation before we even got to see 

their budget Bills, before we even got to see their budget Bills, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have The Financial Administration Act, 2009. 

It‘s got 18 minutes of debate. It‘s introduced by the minister 

and a single speaker. We have several other Bills, Mr. Speaker, 

very, very substantial Bills, Mr. Speaker, with just a very short 

period of time having been spent on them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have The Forest Resources Management 

Amendment Act that significantly transforms the forest industry, 

Mr. Speaker, into the future and there‘s been an hour and 27 

minutes spent on it. The enforcement of money judgments 

amendment Act, 2009 there‘s been 24 minutes spent on. Mr. 

Speaker, The Conservation Easements Amendment Act, 2009 

there‘s 25 minutes spent on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These are Bills that the government wants us to pass without 

having done proper and due diligence. And on top of that, Mr. 

Speaker, this week we have eight new Bills we haven‘t yet 

seen. Eight new Bills that we have not yet seen, Mr. Speaker, 

introduced this week. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we need to have an understanding of how 

this House should operate, Mr. Speaker. They come, four weeks 

left in the session, and they want to deal. They want an ironclad 

deal that everything‘s going to pass without even having seen 

the budget Bill. And then every day they‘ve asked for a deal. 

They want a deal. They want a deal. They want a deal, Mr. 

Speaker. Well why don‘t we just concentrate on getting the 

work done? Why don‘t we just concentrate on getting the work 

done? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there‘s been individual ministers that have 

brought forward good, good public policy, good pieces of 

legislation late, Mr. Speaker. In the last day, two or three days, 

they‘ve said to us that they have some amendments to 

legislation that they‘d like brought forward, Mr. Speaker. And 

we‘ve had some ministers bring forward the reasons why they 

want them passed, and they provided additional information, 

Mr. Speaker. And you know why, Mr. Speaker? Because it is 

good public policy, and because it is good legislation, Mr. 

Speaker, those Bills will pass. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no opposition wants to hold up important public 

policy and important legislation to the people of the province. 

We‘re not here to hold up legislation. We‘re here to make sure 

that the legislation passed is good legislation and that it‘s in the 

public interest, Mr. Speaker. And when you want to work with 

us, you‘ll get co-operation. When you want to work against us, 

you won‘t, Mr. Speaker. That‘s common sense. It‘s common 

sense. If you want to work with us, you‘ll get co-operation. You 

want to work against us, you won‘t get co-operation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But having said that, every day for the last 10 days or so the 

media have asked, what‘s happening? And, Mr. Speaker, it was 

repeatedly said that the work will get done, repeatedly said that 

the Bills will pass, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the government deputy leader can once 

again yell from his seat and show that he hasn‘t any respect for 

the rules and show that he doesn‘t know what should be done in 

a situation like this and show that co-operation isn‘t important 

to him, Mr. Speaker. But to the people of Saskatchewan, they 

understand that in order for this House to function properly, 

there needs to be co-operation. There needs to be the ability to 

work together, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But part of the problem is, Mr. Speaker, is who is in charge 

over there? When we have the absence of the Premier, Mr. 

Speaker, it seems that nothing can be done over there. There is 

nobody in charge. It‘s obviously a one-person show, Mr. 

Speaker. And not a very effective show at all because, as I 

would like to recap, they can‘t manage the province‘s finances, 

they can‘t manage the province‘s legislative agenda, Mr. 

Speaker. And they can‘t manage a two-car parade, or for that 

matter a two-house paper route, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‘s unfortunate. It‘s unfortunate that they 

haven‘t taken the time to want to work in a co-operative manner 

with the opposition. Rather than bring in a deal and say, you 

have to sign it or we‘re going to extended hours, Mr. Speaker, 

they could have just continued to work. I asked the Government 

House Leader just to continue to work and he‘ll see that things 

will get done. Just continue to work. Let the work get done. 

We‘re here to get the work done. We‘re all here to work on 

behalf of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we‘re going to have a situation again where 

we have about four weeks left and we‘re going to run out of 

work. And we‘re going to be laughing at the government again 

who can‘t manage their affairs well enough, Mr. Speaker, not to 

run out of work before the end. They did that in 2008, Mr. 

Speaker, and they‘re going to do it in 2010. 

 

And it‘s unfortunate that they cannot manage their affairs better 

and manage the work in a way that both allows members of this 



5060 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

Assembly to work within the rules of the Assembly, but also the 

negative effects it has on stakeholders and others who . . . 

Consultations may not be done, be able to be done in a 

forthright manner and as upfront as they may otherwise have 

been done, but also how it affects the stakeholders who may 

want to come and watch question period, Mr. Speaker, may 

want to be here. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it‘s unfortunate that the Premier hasn‘t 

shown leadership. When you have this type of problem not once 

but twice, twice in two years, there‘s only one person 

responsible and that‘s the Premier. The Premier needs to be 

held accountable for his lack of leadership, his lack of 

judgment, and lack of ability to move his agenda forward. This 

isn‘t about anybody but the Premier. It has to be about the 

Premier because he‘s the man in charge. He appoints the House 

Leader. He appoints his deputy leader. He appoints his cabinet. 

And, Mr. Speaker, if they can‘t get it done, then he hasn‘t done 

his job. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier, the Premier has to be held 

accountable for changing the rules twice in two years and an 

inability to manage the province‘s finances and inability to 

manage the province‘s legislative agenda, Mr. Speaker, and, I‘d 

have to say, a lack of concern for the seriousness of the issue of 

changing the rules, Mr. Speaker, because if he took the 

seriousness that this change of rules represents, Mr. Speaker, he 

would have, an hour or two ago, changed his mind, Mr. 

Speaker, And he would urge his members to agree to the 

opposition amendment that is a common sense amendment, a 

common sense amendment, one that makes sense, one that they 

should be able to agree to, an amendment that says until they 

feel comfortable, if they‘re insecure — because we can‘t deal 

with their insecurity, Mr. Speaker — but if they‘re insecure and 

if the leader can‘t show, Mr. Speaker, if the leader cannot show 

them that there is a path forward, Mr. Speaker, then we have 

made a common sense amendment that would say let‘s sit from 

10 a.m. to 10 p.m. with an hour off for lunch or an hour and a 

half off for the lunch period from 12 noon to 1:30, and two 

hours from 5 to 7 for a supper break, Mr. Speaker, and question 

period at 1:30 each and every day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is a common sense amendment. It gives them a 

couple additional hours a day. It should make them 

comfortable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don‘t know how many times we have to tell them that their 

legislation will go forward, Mr. Speaker. I don‘t mean to 

diminish what they‘re saying and what they put forward, Mr. 

Speaker, but there‘s not a whole lot in a lot of their legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. There is not a whole lot of substance in a lot of 

this legislation. They‘re too busy cutting services to the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan and not spending enough time 

moving forward with a progressive, a progressive legislative 

agenda, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that boils down to leadership. And once 

again, we call upon the Premier to live by the rules which he 

agreed to, live by the rules by which his caucus agreed to, Mr. 

Speaker. Throw out this silly motion. Throw out their silly 

motion, Mr. Speaker, or at the very least, very least, Mr. 

Speaker, to agree to the thoughtful, considerate amendment put 

forward by the official opposition that is trying to deal with 

their insecurity and trying to deal with their inability to manage 

their own affairs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We‘re trying to help them, Mr. Speaker. We‘re trying to help 

them learn, Mr. Speaker, but that takes leadership from the 

Premier. We hope he steps up to the plate, tells his members 

tonight to support the amendment put forward by the official 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, and do it . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member‘s time has elapsed. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

amendment brought forward by the member from The 

Battlefords: 

 

That all words in clauses 1 and 2 and clauses 3 and 4 be 

deleted and be replaced with the following: 

 

1. Notwithstanding Rule 6(1), the ordinary times for the 

daily meetings and adjournment of the sittings of the 

Assembly on Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays 

shall be at 10 a.m. to 10 p.m. with a recess from 12 

p.m. to 1:30 p.m. and from 5 p.m. to 7 p.m., and on 

Thursday, the Assembly shall sit from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. 

Routine proceedings under rule 14(2) be at 1:30 p.m. 

on Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays and at 10 a.m. 

on Thursdays. 

 

Is the Assembly ready to hear the question? Are you in 

agreement with the motion presented? 

 

[22:00] 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nays have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 22:00 until 22:03.] 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the amendment, please 

rise. 

 

[Yeas — 20] 

 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Harper Trew Higgins 

Junor Atkinson Nilson 

Forbes Vermette Broten 

Furber Morin Yates 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5061 

Iwanchuk Taylor Quennell 

Wotherspoon Chartier  

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the amendment please rise. 

 

[Nays — 27] 

 

Morgan Krawetz McMorris 

Cheveldayoff Duncan Huyghebaert 

Heppner D‘Autremont Harrison 

Norris Reiter Hutchinson 

Brkich Hart Schriemer 

Stewart Allchurch Weekes 

Tell Wilson Hickie 

Michelson Ottenbreit Ross 

Chisholm Kirsch McMillan 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 20; 

those opposed, 27. 

 

The Speaker: — The amendment is defeated. The motion 

before the Assembly is the motion presented by the Deputy 

Government House Leader. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? I recognize the member from Cannington, the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it‘s unfortunate that I have to rise today to speak on a motion, 

on a motion, Mr. Speaker . . .[interjections] . . . I‘m glad I have 

an audience on the opposite side, Mr. Speaker, that shares the 

enthusiasm at this late hour of the evening, Mr. Speaker, and 

it‘s unfortunate that we have to move a motion to extend the 

time that we sit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that happens because the members opposite have 

indicated to me, in conversations with the House Leader, that 

they are not prepared to move forward on any of our 

environment legislation, Mr. Speaker. The word I had from the 

Leader of the Opposition . . . not the Leader of the Opposition, 

the House Leader of the Opposition, who perhaps has not been 

in conversations with his own leader . . . that I don‘t know, Mr. 

Speaker. But that last week they were not prepared to move 

forward on any of our environmental legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

and that is indeed shameful. 

 

The fact is, last Thursday the Leader of the Opposition from his 

seat is hollering to us, bring forward your CO2 Bill and we‘ll 

vote it and pass it right now. Mr. Speaker, that‘s what he said. 

So I stood up and move, asked for leave to move to that 

particular Bill so they could pass it. No. They refused to allow 

that to go forward. We hear the member . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the member 

from Cannington, the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And we hear 

the member from Regina Walsh Acres continually talk about 

the fact that CO2 legislation hasn‘t passed in this House, Mr. 

Speaker, in two and a half years that we have been government. 

But in 16 years that they were government, they did absolutely 

nothing. 

 

We have a Bill on the order paper, Mr. Speaker, which the 

opposition is refusing to allow to move ahead. We also have a 

number of other environment Bills, Mr. Speaker, that they are 

refusing to allow ahead, Mr. Speaker. And why? Simply to be 

obstructionist, Mr. Speaker, and, according to the Opposition 

House Leader, to try and blackmail the government into 

rehiring an employee that was dismissed by Corrections and 

Public Safety by the deputy minister in charge there, Mr. 

Speaker, not . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I would 

ask members to choose their words wisely and, any words that 

would be impugning the character of other members, to refrain 

from using those words. I recognize the member from 

Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the members opposite continuously say that the government is 

attempting to bully them into voting for all of our legislation, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 2007 the public voted the 

members on this side, on the government side, to allow for them 

to bring forward legislation to be voted, Mr. Speaker. We‘re not 

asking the members of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, to pass our 

legislation. We‘re asking them to allow the legislation to come 

to a vote, Mr. Speaker, and they‘re refusing to allow that to 

happen. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‘ve listened very carefully to their vacuous 

debate, Mr. Speaker, that had very, very flawed logic in it. 

Every time I talk to the Opposition House Leader, Mr. Speaker, 

the Opposition House Leader, I get a different response. There 

is no consistency in the response I get through him. I ask him, 

what is it that will help to move our legislation forward, Mr. 

Speaker? And one time it‘s one thing that he wants, and one 

time it‘s another thing. And the third time he doesn‘t have a 

request. He just doesn‘t want our legislation to pass, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have to look at what we have to do to 

move this forward, Mr. Speaker, to give an opportunity for the 

people of Saskatchewan to have a vote on our legislation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I think back to times in the past when I was sitting on the 

opposition benches and the Leader of the Official Opposition at 

the time, Mr. Speaker, was the House leader. And at that point 

in time, he brought in closure on debate time after time after 

time, Mr. Speaker. And fact is, I even have a quote from him 

from 1993, Mr. Speaker, when the Leader of the Official 

Opposition was . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I realize a lot of members want 

end to the debate, but I would ask members to allow the 

member from Cannington to respond in the same manner that 

the opposition members had the opportunity to speak while they 

were speaking to the motion. I recognize the member from 

Cannington. 

 



5062 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

and I‘ll quote from the Leader of the Official Opposition in 

1993 when he was the House leader, and I quote: 

 

I would make the argument, a much more legitimate 

argument if you‘re worried about getting the work of the 

people done, to extend the hours in order to accomplish 

the will of the government which is duly elected by the 

people of the province. That‘s a fundamental principle 

that should be allowed in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was the Leader of the Official Opposition. 

And now he has a different tune, Mr. Speaker. Well I‘d . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — That was before the agreed upon rules of 

consent. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Oh yes. The member from Regina 

Walsh Acres says that was then; this is now. You know, we 

can‘t be held to our past performances, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the member from Walsh Acres has had her time to 

have a say, but now she wants to take up everybody else‘s time 

as well. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, in listening to the debate from the 

members opposite, it was very, very repetitive . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was very, 

very repetitive, largely unrelated to the motion. They were 

simply using up oxygen and putting out CO2, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite talk about consultation, Mr. 

Speaker. They‘re always saying there was no consultation. And 

yet, Mr. Speaker, those few times that we have managed to 

make it into committee, Mr. Speaker, they then praise the 

consultation that took place. 

 

The Minister for Municipal Affairs, during his estimates I 

believe it was, debate at the time . . . No it was the Bills on 

cities, northern municipalities, and the rural municipalities. 

They were praising the amount of consultation that was done. 

And yet in the House here, they tell a completely different 

story, Mr. Speaker, completely different story. It‘s one story in 

committee, a completely different story, Mr. Speaker, when it 

comes to debate. 

 

You know, when you look at the amount of time that we have, 

Mr. Speaker, to carry on the debates, 40 of the Bills that are and 

were before this House, Mr. Speaker, were presented last fall. 

The members opposite have had six months to study these Bills, 

to talk to the stakeholders, Mr. Speaker, to go around the 

province and talk to everybody and anybody they wanted to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are six Bills, there are six Bills that are 

budget-related Bills, Mr. Speaker, that can only be presented 

after the budget debate has been completed, and that‘s just a 

week ago, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There were two additional Bills presented by ministers, Mr. 

Speaker, that they‘re in consultation with the members of the 

opposition as to whether or not those Bills can have passage. 

Because they‘re unspecified Bills, Mr. Speaker, it‘s up to those 

ministers to negotiate whether or not they can get that through. 

 

So 40 of the Bills, Mr. Speaker, half of which the members 

opposite are holding up, Mr. Speaker, were presented six 

months ago. So, Mr. Speaker, if they haven‘t done their 

homework that‘s the fault of the official opposition, not the 

government‘s fault. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we wish to give the members opposite the 

maximum amount of time possible for them to carry on debate, 

for them to carry on consideration in estimates, to carry on the 

consideration of Bills in committee, Mr. Speaker. To that end 

we have presented this motion, Mr. Speaker, to extend the clock 

for every day. 

 

[22:15] 

 

I would like to move an amendment to that motion, Mr. 

Speaker, that makes it clearer when routine proceedings will 

take place in the House. So I would move, Mr. Speaker: 

 

That the motion be amended by deleting clauses 1 

through 6 and the following be substituted in its place: 

 

1. Notwithstanding rule 6(1), the ordinary times for the 

daily meetings and adjournment of the sittings of the 

Assembly on Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday shall be 

8 a.m. and adjourn at 12 midnight, with a recess from 12 

noon to 1:30 p.m. and 6 p.m. to 7 p.m.; 

 

2. Notwithstanding rule 6(1), the ordinary times for the 

daily meetings and adjournment of the sittings of the 

Assembly on Thursday shall be at 8 a.m. and adjourn at 

12 midnight, with a recess from 12 noon to 1:30 p.m. and 

4:30 p.m. to 6 p.m.; 

 

3. Notwithstanding rule 14, the order of business 

considered by the Assembly on Monday, Tuesdays, and 

Wednesdays shall be as follows: 

 

(a) Government orders from 8 a.m. to 12 noon; 

(b) Routine proceedings commencing at 1:30 p.m. to be 

followed by the order of business as specified by rule 

14(3) until the adjournment of the sitting; 

 

4. Notwithstanding rule 14, the order of business 

considered by the Assembly on Thursday shall be as 

follows: 

 

(a) Government orders from 8 a.m. to 12 noon; 

(b) Routine proceedings commencing at 1:30 p.m. to be 

followed by the order of business as specified by rule 

14(3) for Thursday, concluding at 4:30 p.m. 

(c) Government orders resuming at 6 p.m. until the 

adjournment of the sitting; 

 

5. Standing committees shall meet and adjourn at the 

following times when convened: 

 

(a) Monday, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays shall be at 8 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5063 

a.m. and adjourn at 12 midnight, with a recess from 12 

noon to 1:30 p.m. and from 6 p.m. to 7 p.m.; 

(b) On Thursdays shall be at 8 a.m. and adjourn at 12 

midnight, with a recess from 12 noon to 1:30 p.m. and 

4:30 p.m. to 6 p.m.; 

(c) On Friday shall be at 8 a.m. and adjourned at 12 

midnight, with a recess from 12 noon to 1 p.m. and 6 

p.m. to 7 p.m.; 

 

6. Standing committees may convene and meet at other 

times in accordance with the regular provisions of the 

Rules and Proceedings; 

 

7. By order, the Assembly and standing committees may 

adjourn earlier than the adjourned times specified by the 

sessional order; and further 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

amendment presented to the motion by the member from 

Cannington. Will the members take it as read? 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on a point of 

order. 

 

The Speaker: — I ask the member to state his point of order. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the motion before us is 

substantially different than the motion that was originally 

before the House. The amendment adds a day — in fact on 

Friday, Mr. Speaker — that was not mentioned in the previous 

motion. It has considerable change to it, Mr. Speaker, and 

therefore the motion should be ruled out of order. 

 

If the intent was, Mr. Speaker, to have this motion before the 

House, Mr. Speaker, they should have in fact, Mr. Speaker, 

moved a new motion before the House prior to the debate, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Excuse me. I‘d just like the House to give me 

a second just to ponder the point of order raised by the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Order. I‘ve listened to the point of order and in seeking 

guidance and looking at Erskine May, we note that amendments 

may be classified into three types, and one is to insert or to add 

certain words as long as the amendments . . . on page 400, 

fundamental to the rules are relevant to the question. So I find 

the point of order not well taken. 

 

The question before the Assembly is the amendment presented 

by the member from Cannington. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The motion carries. 

 

Why is the member from Regina Dewdney on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — The member may state his point of order. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we just had you rule that the 

motion was in order. Would that full motion now not be 

debatable? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

on the point of order, I clearly heard Mr. Speaker call the 

question on the amendment, Mr. Speaker. The members of the 

opposition were hollering and screaming, Mr. Speaker. I‘m 

afraid if they can‘t listen to what the Speaker has to say — 

exactly as they‘re doing now, Mr. Speaker — it‘s their failure. 

The question was called. The question was voted. It was voted 

in the affirmative, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. When the 

Speaker ruled on the point of order, the Speaker placed the 

question. The Speaker heard no opposition to the question. The 

Speaker called for the motion to be voted on and the 

government members voted . . . Just give me one second. Give 

me one second. 

 

Order. Given the point of order and the Speaker‘s response to 

the point of order . . . I ruled the point of order all out of order. I 

called the vote. And the only member, based on the motion for 

closure, that could speak . . . There‘s only one further member 

that would be allowed. There‘s one other member outside of 

any government members who could speak to the question 

under the closure motion. 

 

So the question before the Assembly is the amendment 

presented by the member from Cannington, the Government 

House Leader, regarding an amendment to the motion presented 

by the government regarding extended hours. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 22:28 to 22:58.] 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

amendment presented by the Government House Leader. All 



5064 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2010 

those in favour of the amendment, please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 27] 

 

Morgan Krawetz McMorris 

Cheveldayoff Duncan Huyghebaert 

Heppner D‘Autremont Harrison 

Norris Reiter Hutchinson 

Brkich Hart Schriemer 

Stewart Allchurch Weekes 

Tell Wilson Hickie 

Michelson Ottenbreit Ross 

Chisholm Kirsch McMillan 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the amendment, please rise. 

 

[23:00] 

 

[Nays — 20] 

 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Harper Trew Higgins 

Junor Atkinson Nilson 

Forbes Vermette Broten 

Furber Morin Yates 

Iwanchuk Taylor Quennell 

Wotherspoon Chartier  

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 27; 

those opposed, 20. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The amendment carries. The 

motion before the Assembly is the motion as amended. 

 

That the rules and procedures for the sitting times of the 

Assembly and the sitting times for standing committees 

shall be varied on an interim basis for the remainder of 

the spring session of the spring period of the third session 

of the twenty-sixth legislature as follows: 

 

1. Notwithstanding rule 6(1), the ordinary times for the 

daily meetings and adjournment of the sittings of the 

Assembly on Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays shall 

be at 8 a.m. and adjourned at 12 midnight, with a recess 

from 12 noon to 1:30 p.m. and 6 p.m. to 7 p.m.; 

 

2. Notwithstanding rule 6(1), the ordinary times for the 

daily meetings and adjournment of the sittings of the 

Assembly on Thursdays shall be at 8 a.m. and adjourn at 

12 midnight, with a recess from 12 noon to 1:30 p.m. and 

4:30 p.m. to 6 p.m.; and 

 

3. Notwithstanding rule 14, the order of business 

considered by the Assembly on Mondays, Tuesdays, and 

Wednesdays shall be as follows: 

 

(a) Government orders from 8 a.m. to 12 noon; 

(b) Routine proceedings commencing at 1:30 p.m. to be 

followed by the order of business as specified by rule 

14(3) until the adjournment of the sitting; 

 

4. Notwithstanding rule 14, the order of business 

considered by the Assembly on Thursdays shall be as 

follows: 

 

(a) Government orders from 8 a.m. to 12 noon; 

(b) Routine proceedings commencing at 1:30 p.m. to be 

followed by the order of business as specified by rule 

14(3) for Thursday, concluding at 4:30 p.m.; 

(c) Government orders resuming at 6 p.m. until the 

adjournment of the sitting; 

 

5. Standing committees shall meet and adjourn at the 

following times when convened: 

 

(a) Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays shall be at 8 

a.m. and adjourn at 12 midnight, with a recess from 12 

noon to 1:30 p.m. and 6 p.m. to 7 p.m.; and 

(b) On Thursday shall be at 8 a.m. and adjourn at 12 

midnight, with a recess from 12 noon to 1:30 p.m. and 

4:30 p.m. to 6 p.m.; and 

(c) On Friday shall be at 8 a.m. and adjourn at 12 

midnight, with a recess from 12 noon to 1 p.m. and 6 

p.m. to 7 p.m.; 

 

6. Standing committees may convene and meet at other 

times in accordance with the regular provisions of the 

Rules and Procedures; 

 

7. By order, the Assembly and standing committees may 

adjourn earlier than the adjournment times specified by 

the sessional order; and further 

 

That the provisions of this sessional order shall come into 

effect the sitting day of its adoption and shall expire upon 

the adjournment of the Assembly on the sitting day 

preceding the completion day of the third session of the 

twenty-sixth Legislature. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 23:03 until 23:32.] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The question before the Assembly is 

the motion put forward by the Deputy Government House 



April 26, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5065 

Leader as amended. Would those in favour of the motion as 

amended, would they please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 27] 

 

Morgan Krawetz McMorris 

Cheveldayoff Duncan Huyghebaert 

Heppner D‘Autremont Harrison 

Norris Reiter Hutchinson 

Brkich Hart Schriemer 

Stewart Allchurch Weekes 

Tell Wilson Hickie 

Michelson Ottenbreit Ross 

Chisholm Kirsch McMillan 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 

 

[Nays — 20] 

 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Harper Trew Higgins 

Junor Atkinson Nilson 

Forbes Vermette Broten 

Furber Morin Yates 

Iwanchuk Taylor Quennell 

Wotherspoon Chartier  

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion as 

amended, 27; those opposed, 20. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. The debate in the . . . 

Order. Debate in the Assembly will continue subject to 

provision of the motion just passed. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At this time I 

would move the House adjourn. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that motion. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. I believe 

we had a motion on the floor that the House do now adjourn. 

We have to vote on the motion. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to withdraw the . . . Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

that the House do now adjourn? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed? Those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Standing vote. Call 

in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 23:36 until 23:46.] 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Government House Leader that this 

Assembly do now adjourn. Those in favour of the motion please 

rise. 

 

[YEAS — 27] 

 

Morgan Krawetz McMorris 

Cheveldayoff Duncan Huyghebaert 

Heppner   

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

D‘Autremont Harrison Norris 

Reiter Hutchinson Brkich 

Hart Schriemer Stewart 

Allchurch Weekes Tell 

Wilson Hickie Michelson 

Ottenbreit Ross Chisholm 

Kirsch McMillan  

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please rise. 

 

[NAYS — 20] 

 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Harper Trew Higgins 

Junor Atkinson Nilson 

Forbes Vermette Broten 

Furber Morin Yates 

Iwanchuk Taylor Quennell 

Wotherspoon Chartier  

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 27; those 

opposed, 20. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. This Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow morning at 8 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 23:49.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4991 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4991 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4991 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4991 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4991 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4992 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4992 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4992 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4992 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4992 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4996 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 4996 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5027 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5027 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4992 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4992 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4993 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4993 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4993 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4993 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4994 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4994 

PERSONAL PRIVILEGE 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4994 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4994 

 Saskatchewan Children’s Hospital Gala 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4994 

 Population Growth Benefits Saskatchewan Businesses 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4995 

 Moose Jaw Business Excellence Awards 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4995 

 Saskatchewan Archaeological Society 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4995 

 Premier’s Business Record 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4995 

 Opposition Leader’s Business Record 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4996 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Police Investigation and Member’s Conduct 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4996 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4996 

 Supply of Physicians 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4998 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4998 

 Ministry of Environment Budget 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4999 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4999 

 Climate Change 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5000 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5000 

 Prevention of West Nile Disease 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5000 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5000 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 139 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5001 



 

 Bill No. 140 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2) 

 Loi corrective (rationalisation administrative) n
o 
2 de 2010 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5001 

 Bill No. 141 — The Business Statutes Administration Transfer Act 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5002 

 Bill No. 142 — The Business Statutes Administration Transfer Consequential Amendments Act, 2010 

 Loi de 2010 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Business Statutes Administration 

 Transfer Act 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5002 

 Bill No. 143 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5002 

POINT OF ORDER 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5002 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5003 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5003 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Closure Motion 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5003 

MOTIONS 

 Closure 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5004 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 5004 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 Hours of Sitting 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5004 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5007 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5010 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5013 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5016 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5018 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5021 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5024 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5028 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5031 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5034 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5036 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5039 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5042 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5045 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5048 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5051 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5054 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5056 

 Recorded Division (amendment) ............................................................................................................................................... 5060 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5060 

 Recorded Division (amendment) ............................................................................................................................................... 5063 

 Recorded Division (amended motion) ....................................................................................................................................... 5064 

 Recorded Division (adjournment) ............................................................................................................................................. 5064 

  D’Autremont (point of order) ............................................................................................................................ 5012, 5039, 5062 

  Yates (point of order) ......................................................................................................................................... 5013, 5039, 5062 

  The Speaker (point of order) ....................................................................................................................................... 5013, 5062 

  The Deputy Speaker (point of order) .................................................................................................................................... 5040 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 




