




















































Hansard: March 23, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 35A  TUESDAY, MARCH 23, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4401 

 March 23, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Seated 

in your gallery today just behind, in the second row, behind 

some very famous Saskatchewan people are two more very 

famous Saskatchewan people that I‟m pleased to introduce to 

you and through you to members of the Assembly here today. 

Sherri and Marc Beauregard are from Rockglen, Saskatchewan. 

Maybe you could just give us a little wave. There they are. 

 

The Beauregards are two of the many heroes across the 

province, and especially in southern Saskatchewan, that 

emerged during the major blizzard that hit our province on the 

23rd and 24th of January. You might recall, Mr. Speaker — I 

know members on, well I‟m sure both sides of the House recall 

— that in some areas of Saskatchewan received between 20 and 

30 centimetres of snow, and winds were gusting in excess of 80 

kilometres an hour. 

 

Sherri and Marc run the Sherri Whiskey Hotel & Bar in 

Rockglen, and they came up with a system using six car 

batteries and I think a Toyota Camry as a source of the energy. 

They MacGyvered this together so that they could keep their 

property warm. The steak pit was kept open to supply people 

with . . . We talked about French onion soup earlier on and 

some chili that was served there, some coffee and tea during the 

storm. And of course they made the hotel available to others 

who needed literally a port in the storm that day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when Toronto was hit by a blizzard, they called in 

the army. But here in Saskatchewan we had people like Marc 

and Sherri and countless other heroes who were able to help out 

the people of the province. And through them to all of the rest 

of the people in Saskatchewan who volunteered to help that day 

and do heroic Saskatchewan deeds, we want to say welcome to 

their Legislative Assembly today, and thank you very much for 

what you‟ve done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 

distinct privilege and honour to introduce to you, through you, 

and to all members of the Legislative Assembly a woman that‟s 

seated in the front row of your gallery. And perhaps she can 

stand when I call her name. Her name is Barb Dedi. 

 

Barb Dedi is a tireless volunteer and community activist in the 

city of Regina and the surrounding area. She has contributed so 

many hours of volunteerism to multicultural events, helping 

others in need. She never says no. I don‟t know of a single 

situation that someone has approached her with where she has 

said no. She‟s an inspiration to all of us who live in the 

constituency of Regina Walsh Acres and she is well known 

throughout the city of Regina. 

 

She is also the founder who came up with the wonderful idea 

and the person who is still the lead organizer for the 11th annual 

Spring Free From Racism event that just took place this 

weekend. She is someone that we are very, very proud of in our 

constituency and I would ask all my colleagues to welcome her 

to the Legislative Assembly today, please. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too would 

also like to extend a welcome to Barb. She did an absolutely 

incredible job on Sunday and I think that each and every one of 

us should show our appreciation for the hard work she does in 

the Spring Free From Racism event. It was a big success. I 

know I enjoy attending every year and I encourage all members 

to make time to attend this wonderful event. So welcome to 

your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure today 

to introduce a young man seated in the east gallery. Kent 

Peterson hails from originally Nipawin and is in Regina 

attending the University of Regina. And I invite all hon. 

members to welcome Kent to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn-Big 

Muddy, the Minister Responsible for Tourism, Parks, Culture 

and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it‟s an honour for me to rise and introduce to you and through 

you to members of this Chamber several members of the 

Saskatchewan planning team who made Saskatchewan‟s 

pavilion at the Vancouver 2010 Winter Olympics and 

Paralympics such a huge success. 

 

Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery in the front row is Trent 

Fraser who acted as our director of marketing and production. 

He‟s joined by Grant Langford who‟s also seated in the gallery, 

who did a superb job, Mr. Speaker, in their duties and their jobs 

in obtaining corporate and city sponsorships for the pavilion. 

 

Also seated in the gallery is Nancy Hubenig who acted as the 

production manager for the Saskatchewan pavilion. And, Mr. 

Speaker, one of our entertainers is also seated in your gallery, 

probably a gentleman who needs no introduction in this 

province, Mr. Brad Johner who was one of our entertainers and 

did such a great job, Mr. Speaker, at the pavilion. And of 

course, last but certainly not least is Joan McCusker, Mr. 

Speaker, who is obviously an Olympic gold medallist and was 

the coordinator for the Saskatchewan portion of the Olympic 

torch relay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members and the public will know that the 

Saskatchewan pavilion was an overwhelming success. It was 

due in large part to these individuals and the number, hundreds 

of volunteers that we had at our pavilion. And I‟d ask all 



4402 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

members to welcome them to their House today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to extend a big 

thank you for sharing Saskatchewan‟s story at the Olympics and 

at the Paralympics, and welcome you to your Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to join the minister in welcoming the planning committee 

for the Olympics, and specifically Brad Johner. Brad is 

originally from Midale, which is in my constituency, and in fact 

he attended the same school I did in Macoun, although many 

years later, and his dad was my bus driver. And I just want to 

thank him for being a wonderful ambassador for our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

introduce to you and to all members of the Assembly Sandy 

Evanovich, who‟s seated in the gallery behind me, Mr. Speaker. 

He is one of the senior elected officials at the Saskatchewan 

Government Employees‟ Union. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of First Nations University of 

Canada. And the prayer of this petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the provincial government to recognize the importance of 

the First Nations University of Canada, to restore funding 

to the institution, and call upon their federal counterparts 

also to restore funding to the First Nations University of 

Canada. 

 

This petition is signed by individuals from the good city of 

Regina. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

proud to rise today to present a petition on behalf of concerned 

citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned about the 

condition of their highways across this great province. And this 

particular petition is concerned about the highway condition of 

Highway 22, and it clearly states here that the highway has 

deteriorated to the point where now it‟s becoming a safety 

hazard for the residents who have to drive on this highway each 

and every day. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer goes as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to commit to providing the 

repairs to Highway 22 that the people of Saskatchewan 

need. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by the good folks 

from Earl Grey, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure today 

to present a petition on behalf of the Saskatchewan Student 

Coalition. This petition is in support of the implementation of a 

Saskatchewan scholarship fund. That would be the same fund 

that was promised by the Saskatchewan Party in the 2007 

election campaign. The petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement the promised Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the signators on this petition are all from 

Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of indexing minimum wage. And 

we know that increases to minimum wage helps low-income 

individuals and families improve their standard of living and 

build a better future and maintain a standard of living as the 

cost of living increases. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to indexing Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of the 

cost of living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of constituents in Moose 

Jaw. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today again to 

present the thousands of petitions presented by people who are 

concerned about the possibility of the elimination of 

government funding for chiropractic services. And the petition 

reads as follows: 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

that the Government of Saskatchewan honour the 

agreement negotiated between the Ministry of Health and 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4403 

the Chiropractors‟ Association of Saskatchewan. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, these signatures are from all across the 

province, and here they are: from Wadena, Norquay, Canora, 

Cupar, Saltcoats, Nut Mountain, Yorkton, Rose Valley, 

Preeceville, Buchanan, Meadow Lake, Goodsoil, Dorintosh, 

Loon Lake, Kamsack, Langenburg, Arran, Togo, Pelly, Calder, 

Wroxton, Kamsack, Lipton, Raymore, Regina, Pilot Butte, 

Kipling, White City, Montmartre, Strasbourg, Saskatoon, 

Dalmeny, Leask, Weyburn, Halbrite, Radville, Fillmore, Lang, 

Biggar, Lumsden, Kelvington, Big River, Makwa, Assiniboia, 

Lafleche, Milestone, Broadview, Coderre, Mortlach, Edenwold, 

Preeceville, Caron, Caronport, Balgonie, Air Ronge, Watrous, 

Fort Qu‟Appelle, Earl Grey, Lemberg, Melfort, Allan, La 

Ronge, Delisle, Beauval, Debden, Nipawin, Prince Albert, 

Kronau, Carlyle, La Loche, Warman, Spiritwood, Birch Hills, 

Swift Current, Kyle, Rapid View, Crane Valley, Martensville, 

Rush Lake, Dundurn, Hanley, Langham, Southey, Corning, 

Waldeck, Vanguard, Val Marie, Claydon, Grenfell, Francis, 

Riceton, Dysart, Asquith, Clavet, Tisdale, Kerrobert, Cut Knife, 

Unity, Wilkie, Battlefords, Denzil, Major, Coleville, Senlac, 

Kisbey, Pangman, Lake Alma, Canwood, Big River, Weirdale, 

Shellbrook, St. Louis, Wakaw, Paddockwood, Grandora, 

Wiseton, Kenaston, Davidson, Outlook, Alvena, Vanscoy, 

Porcupine Plain, Carrot River, Weekes, Hudson Bay, 

Ridgedale, Bjorkdale, Carragana, Aylsham, Quill Lake, 

Humboldt, Yellow Creek, Naicam, Foam Lake, Neudorf, 

Willowbrook, Gull Lake, Shaunavon, Estevan, Redvers, 

Carnduff, Stoughton, Alameda, Bienfait, Oxbow, Luseland, 

Wapella, Rocanville, Whitewood, Moosomin, Esterhazy, 

Spruce Home, Christopher Lake, Cabri, Cadillac, Weirdale, 

Parry, St. Brieux, Codette, Handel, Gouldtown, Wynyard, 

Pennant, Lancer, Herbert, Wymark, Abbey, Ponteix, Hazlet, 

Sylvania, Hague, Cudworth, Hodgeville, Maple Creek, 

Pambrun, Arborfield, Gronlid, White Fox, Zenon Park, Lestock, 

Sturgis, Pense, Perdue, McLean, Bethune, Fernwood, 

Willowbunch, Balcarres, Vibank, Ogema, Indian Head, and 

Creelman. 

 

I so present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to reinstate the 

domestic abuse outreach program. And the petition reads: 

 

We the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that the domestic abuse outreach program 

provided a number of valuable services to women victims 

of domestic violence and their children, including helping 

women find emergency shelter and accompanying women 

to their homes, court, the hospital, or the police station as 

needed; that the domestic abuse outreach program was a 

model for other family violence support programs 

throughout the province; that the Government of 

Saskatchewan removed funding for the domestic abuse 

outreach program on December 31, 2009 without 

consultation with the community. 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: to cause the provincial government to 

reinstate the domestic abuse outreach program as a 

provincial government service and make it available to all 

parts of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the petitioners come from the city of Saskatoon. I so 

present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for protection for renters from 

unreasonable rent increases. And we know that many renters 

have suffered rent increases of hundreds of dollars each, with 

average rent increases in even smaller communities like Estevan 

and Yorkton being more than $200 year over year — nearly a 

20 per cent increase. 

 

I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: cause the government to consider 

enacting some form of rent control with a view to protect 

Saskatchewan renters from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this come from the city of 

Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of a new long-term care facility in La Ronge. With a 

waiting list of almost one full year for our residents to wait, it is 

appalling. I‟d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Air Ronge, La Ronge — let‟s 

see — Stanley Mission and Southend. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that has been circulated by the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition, a petition on affordable undergraduate tuition 

and a call for the Sask Party government‟s actions to match its 

rhetoric. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 



4404 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of reducing the interest on 

fixed-rate student loans to prime, considering that students in 

Saskatchewan are paying the highest amount of interest on 

fixed-rate student loans in Canada at prime plus two and a half 

per cent. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately reduce the interest on 

fixed-rate student loans to the prime rate of borrowing so 

that students can accumulate less debt and focus their 

finances on building their lives here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition has been circulated by the 

Saskatchewan Student Coalition and has signatures on it from 

people from the city of Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

stand to present a petition on behalf of rural residents of 

Saskatchewan who are dealing with yet another water issue. 

The government ministry has directed that customers may no 

longer treat non-potable water using methods approved by 

Sask Health, and that Furdale residents dealing in good faith 

with SaskWater over 30 years have paid large amounts for 

their domestic systems and in-home treatment equipment. 

The alternative water supply referred to them by a 

government ministry . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the member to 

move to the prayer, please. I recognize the member from 

Regina Walsh Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — This is the same preamble that I‟ve read in 

the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I‟ve brought to 

members‟ attention and most of the members have 

recognized the long-standing tradition — that a short 

indication of what the petition represents and then to move to 

the prayer — made by Speakers in the past. I recognize the 

member from Prince Albert . . . pardon me, Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, and the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives, to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002, and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Furdale and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Fairview. I rise today to present a petition in 

support of the withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. Speaker, the members 

of the building trade unions have a proud history of craft union 

certification in Saskatchewan, and what this has resulted in is a 

stable labour relations environment which provides quality 

work and safe construction sites that benefit all the people of 

this province. And, Mr. Speaker, also these building trades 

contracts support an apprenticeship training system which 

results in a highly skilled workforce. And the petition reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by people in Regina. 

And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased today to 

rise and present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing for The Battlefords. The petitioners note the vacancy 

rate for rental accommodation in The Battlefords is very low, 

but the cost of rental accommodation is increasing at an 

alarming rate. The petitioners call upon the Legislative 

Assembly to ask the Government of Saskatchewan: 

 

To develop an affordable housing program that will result 

in a greater number of quality and affordable rental units 

to be made available to a greater number of people 

throughout The Battlefords and that will implement a 

process of rent review or rent control to better protect 

tenants in a non-competitive housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of the city of 

North Battleford. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4405 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 

present a petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan 

concerned about this government‟s disregard and disrespect for 

legal, constitutional, and human rights. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples, and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased to 

rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the shameful $1 billion deficit. They recognize that this is 

getting worse, not better, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned citizens of Regina. I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of expansion of the graduate 

retention program. This petition is basically about fairness in 

how we treat post-secondary students and about retaining the 

best and the brightest here in our province. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed by good residents of Saskatoon and 

Osler. I so present. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — According to 

order, a certain petition regarding funding for the First Nations 

University of Canada, presented on March 22nd, 2010, has been 

reviewed and pursuant to rule 16(4) is found to be irregular and 

therefore cannot be read and received. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Spring Free From Racism 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Sunday, 

March 21st was the international day for the elimination of 

racism. The citizens of Regina were able to recognize this day 

through the 11th annual Spring Free From Racism event. I had 

the privilege of attending this event along with the Leader of the 

Opposition and the members for Regina Walsh Acres, Regina 

Dewdney, Regina Rosemont, and Prince Albert Northcote as 

well as the member for Regina Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

The event has grown in attendance to 3,000 visitors and is a 

family day celebration where all cultures come together to grow 

in understanding their own multicultural diversity through 

dance, song, food, and many, many displays. Spring Free From 

Racism guests were able to enjoy approximately 40 different 

entertainment performances along with feature guest, David 

Stone, who is a well-known singer-songwriter from Halifax, 

Nova Scotia. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan can be proud that under the CCF 

[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation], we were the first 

province to pass legislation protecting human rights with the 

Saskatchewan Bill of Rights; however, there is still much work 

to be done on this issue. 

 

I would like to ask all my colleagues to congratulate the lead 

organizers, Barb Dedi and Lucian Roska, as well as all the 

committee members for the Spring Free From Racism Day for 

another successful event. And may we all rededicate ourselves 

to eliminating racism in Saskatchewan and in the world. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Population Trends 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just recently 

StatsCan released some gloomy numbers for the province of 

Saskatchewan. One headline read, “StatsCan report predicts 

tepid growth for Saskatchewan.” Surprisingly, the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] missed this report as an opportunity to yet 

again tear down our province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when you get beneath the headlines, you will 

discover that this projection was based on data from the year 

2006, during the waning years of the tired, tired, old NDP. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, StatsCan can be forgiven for their gloomy 

projections because the NDP was responsible for a trend of 



4406 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

population decline during their time in government. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, on November 7, 2007, this province 

embarked upon a new path, one of renewal, growth, and 

optimism. Over the past two years, our population has grown 

consistently. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in fact our population hit an 

all-time high of 1,034,974 at the end of 2009. The increase in 

population numbers is proof that Saskatchewan is a great place 

to live, work, and raise a family. That‟s right, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan has reversed the trend of out-migration and, Mr. 

Speaker, I am certain that the new population numbers released 

this month will show continuation of this emerging trend. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

New Spa Offers Natural Products 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new spa has 

opened up in Prince Albert Northcote. It‟s the Ozera Healing 

Spa, and it‟s owned by Jaedean Mitchell. 

 

What makes this spa unique, Mr. Speaker, is that it offers 

natural and environmentally friendly products. One product line 

carried in the spa is by a company that uses solely wind 

powered plants and post-consumer packaging and is committed 

to sustainable products and innovation. Ms. Mitchell says that 

with so many people suffering from allergies, all-natural, 

chemical-free products are growing in demand, and her 

customer base is expanding because of the natural products 

Ozera offers. Anyone who simply wants to be pampered and 

enjoy a day at the spa can do so knowing that they are in a 

green environment, that there is minimal damage to the Earth 

from any of the products that are being used. 

 

Jaedean Mitchell loves to indulge people, and she‟s making a 

career out of it. She feels that in this busy world people don‟t 

take enough time for themselves, and she hopes her spa will 

provide a sanctuary in response to everyday chaos. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 

commending Jaedean Mitchell on her use of environmentally 

sustainable products and offer her our best wishes for success in 

her business venture. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Paralympic Athletes’ Achievements 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday was 

the closing ceremonies for the 2010 Paralympic Games. The 

Paralympic Games was a grand event, embodying the concepts 

of participation and camaraderie. The athletes accomplished 

remarkable achievements and showed their positive attitude 

towards life. Every Paralympic athlete has provided a unique 

interpretation of the values and significance of life through his 

or her fortitude, perseverance, and dedication to their sport. 

 

Mr. Speaker, cross-country skier Colette Bourgonje of 

Saskatoon received the Whang Youn Dai Achievement Award 

at the closing ceremonies of the Paralympic Winter Games. 

Colette just finished competing in her ninth Paralympic Games 

and has won 10 medals. She has a silver medal in the 

10-kilometre sit-skiing and a bronze in the 5-kilometre event at 

these games. 

 

“Colette . . . continues to embody the paralympic movement in 

Canada,” says Blair McIntosh, chef de mission of the Canadian 

team. “In addition to her success in para-nordic skiing, Colette 

is a wonderful ambassador for the Canadian Paralympic 

Committee and a role model for future Paralympians.” 

 

Paralympic athletes have shared the joy of success and the 

pleasure of participation through their presence at the winter 

games. Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge all the 

Paralympic athletes, their hard work, dedication, and 

determination as a source of inspiration for us all. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Answering Questions 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Yesterday in this Chamber, the Minister of 

Justice was asked three times whether he knew of any 

investigation involving an MLA‟s [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] violation of The Elections Act. Three times he stood 

in his place refusing to or avoiding to answer a clear and direct 

question put to him by an elected representative of the people. 

 

Just minutes later, in answer to the same question put to him by 

the media outside the Chamber, the minister answered the 

question. The minister has it backwards. Ministers of the Crown 

are accountable first to elected members of the Assembly 

during question period in this Chamber. If the minister has an 

answer to a question, and yesterday he did, he should provide 

that answer in the very place where ministers and the 

government are to be most accountable. That the minister 

would respond in two distinctly different ways in these two 

different places shows both a lack of transparency and a lack of 

respect for the traditions of parliamentary democracy and a lack 

of respect for the office that he holds. 

 

What makes the minister‟s apparent disregard for the rights of 

elected members even more disturbing is that he would show 

such disregard on the question of whether his party is seeking to 

politicize the process of choosing a Chief Electoral Officer and 

thus to politicize the oversight of the very elections that send 

members to this place. One hopes that a minister of the Crown 

refusing to answer difficult questions in the House is not also 

trying to ensure that fewer of them get asked in the first place. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Additional Child Care Spaces Opened 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday of last 

week, I had the honour of attending the official opening of 32 

new child care spaces at Riverside Community School. These 

spaces came about due to the efforts of the Ministry of 

Education, Family Futures and its executive director, Donna 

Strauss, along with her board of directors, and Saskatchewan 

Rivers School Division. 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4407 

On Thursday of last week, the Premier, Minister of Education, 

and I joined the Children‟s Choice Child Development 

Co-Operative board in celebrating the opening of 54 new 

licensed child care spaces in Prince Albert‟s St. Michael 

Community School. That‟s 86 new child care spaces last week 

alone, Mr. Speaker, with over 190 new spaces created in Prince 

Albert this past fiscal year. There is renewed sense of optimism 

in the city, Mr. Speaker. Here are the words of the Children‟s 

Choice executive director, Gail Szautner: 

 

These new spaces will serve a great need in this area of 

Prince Albert . . . This exciting partnership with the 

school, the school board and the Ministry of Education has 

made the development of these new spaces possible. We 

look forward to building on this partnership in the future. 

 

Here are some other words from the Prince Albert Catholic 

School Division board Chair, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We are proud to be part of this project and pleased to have 

had this opportunity to partner with the Ministry of 

Education and Children‟s Choice . . . This is a great 

example of how people working together can assist 

families with young children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just like the Government of Saskatchewan, the 

people of Prince Albert are moving forward. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Buyer’s Remorse 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, sometimes we all suffer from 

buyer‟s remorse. I‟m sure the Premier is feeling a little buyer‟s 

remorse after his investment property in Phoenix didn‟t turn out 

quite so well. After all, he paid 105,000 for it and now it‟s only 

worth $69,000. 

 

But I‟m sure many people in Saskatchewan are also feeling a 

little buyer‟s remorse. When they voted for the Saskatchewan 

Party in November 2007, they thought they were getting a great 

deal. They thought they would be getting a children‟s hospital. 

They thought they would be getting 13 long-term care beds. 

They thought they would be getting shorter surgical waiting 

lists. They thought cities and towns would be getting a full 

percentage point of PST [provincial sales tax]. 

 

But instead, Mr. Speaker, now that the gift wrap has come off 

and the warranty has run out, what are they left with, Mr. 

Speaker? A cheap Grant Devine knock-off model and the 

consolation prize that comes with every Saskatchewan Party 

government, Mr. Speaker — unlimited deficits, incompetence, 

and broken promises. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it‟s too late for the people of Saskatchewan 

to ask for a refund, but in November of 2011, they will have a 

chance to trade in for an upgrade, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Revenue Sharing 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve 

learned that Regina residents could see the biggest tax increase 

they have seen in a decade and Regina has been shortchanged a 

whopping $8.4 million because of this government‟s 

incompetent handling of provincial finances and their growing 

list of broken promises. A concerned citizen even wrote in the 

paper today, “. . . please don‟t talk about downtown 

improvement or domed stadiums until I know if I have to sell 

my house to pay the taxes.” 

 

To the Minister of Finance: will your budget tomorrow increase 

funding to Saskatchewan cities and towns, or will you force 

Regina families to face the biggest tax increase they have seen 

in a decade? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. And I‟d like to thank the member for the opportunity 

to talk about all of the things that this government has done for 

the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. This year alone: $26 million in 

revenue sharing — $10 million increase, 65 per cent increase — 

in revenue sharing to the city of Regina in two years, Mr. 

Speaker; a $19.5 million municipal economic enhancement 

program grant to the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. Recreational 

infrastructure projects, Mr. Speaker: $750,000 for Leibel Field 

upgrades in the Leader of the Opposition‟s riding; $300,000 for 

the YMCA [Young Men‟s Christian Association] renovation, 

Mr. Speaker; $190,000 for the Broad Street pedestrian bridge, 

Mr. Speaker, which we see going in today; $283,000 for 

Wascana Rehabilitation Centre playground improvements. And 

$43.1 million in an interest-free loan to the city of Regina for 

the global transportation hub. This government has done a 

tremendous amount for the city. 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the minister needs 

to check which are federal programs and which are provincial, 

but that‟s a different debate. 

 

The city of Saskatoon will be finalizing their budget soon, and 

there‟s been a number of comments where they talk about the 

process being very painful. They‟re also looking at a $9 million 

shortfall because of the broken promise from this government. 

They have to totally rebuild their budget, and it will be a slow 

and painful process. 

 

So they‟re getting down to the city of Saskatoon having only 

two choices: either huge tax increases or program cuts. So my 

question to the minister: why are you forcing Saskatoon to 

choose between cutting programs or increasing their taxes? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we of course know 



4408 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

that the city of Saskatoon had a surplus in the last budget year 

owing to the massive, the massive investment that this 

government has made: $29.2 million in revenue sharing to the 

city of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, a 65 per cent increase over two 

years ago, the last year that those members were in government; 

$22 million to the municipal economic enhancement program; 

22 and a half million dollars to the Building Canada Fund; the 

Destination Centre, $13 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the record of those members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

clawing back $150 million from the city of Saskatoon over the 

16 years of their government. They don‟t have a leg to stand on, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I do have to say one thing that 

the NDP did for a number of years and were well known for 

was balanced budgets and not spending beyond our means. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this trend is growing across the province. And we 

see the city of Weyburn talking about a half-million dollar 

shortfall because of their broken promise. They‟re talking about 

reducing services, and of course no new programs, that‟s for 

sure. And on top of these cuts, they‟re talking about increasing 

taxes by 4 per cent. P.A.‟s [Prince Albert] the same, a million 

dollars short; taxes could increase up to 9 per cent. Moose Jaw, 

taxes could go up 7 per cent. Why is this minister picking the 

pockets of families in Weyburn, Prince Albert, and Moose Jaw 

to pay for his own incompetence? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. And I really am happy to talk about revenue sharing. 

This government has increased revenue sharing by 43 per cent 

in the first two years of our government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The record of those members opposite is to have clawed back 

$600 million from municipalities over the course of their 16 

years in government, Mr. Speaker. They frankly, Mr. Speaker, 

don‟t have a leg to stand on in talking about these matters. 

 

We‟ve invested in record amounts of infrastructure, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟ve made record investments into communities 

right across this province. And you know what, Mr. Speaker, 

the news is pretty darn good. We have the lowest 

unemployment rate in Canada — 4.3 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The 

lowest youth unemployment rate in the country, Mr. Speaker. 

Our population at an all-time high, and all we hear from the 

other side is negativity. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, how quick they forget their 

promises and all the hoopla of a year ago about increased 

revenue sharing and a permanent formula that was put in place. 

Where‟d that go? Gone. It‟s gone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And over and over again we are seeing this government 

off-loading expenses onto Saskatchewan families every chance 

they get. Just go pay your power bill; it‟s up. Go to a 

chiropractor; could be up after tomorrow. Looks like it. Go 

post-secondary education; your tuition‟s going up. Or pay your 

property tax, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s all because of this 

government‟s mismanagement. Everyone in this province is 

paying more. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is he forcing 

families from across this province to pay more and get less? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am happy to talk 

about the record of this government, the economic record of this 

government: the lowest unemployment rate in Canada, Mr. 

Speaker, 4.3 per cent; employment up 12,000 full-time jobs 

created year over year, Mr. Speaker. We‟re forecast to lead the 

country in economic growth by almost all of the private sector 

forecasters out there, Mr. Speaker. The population growth, the 

population growth at the highest level it has ever been in the 

history of this province.  

 

And all we have from the members opposite is the running 

down of the economy, the running down of the province, and 

the running down of the people. And that‟s why where they‟re 

at in the polls. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Film Industry Issues 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, my question is a simple one. To 

the minister: will this government take action in tomorrow‟s 

budget to help the film industry reverse its 70 per cent decline 

in production? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sports. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 

member opposite for her question. Certainly this has been a 

very difficult couple of years when it comes to the film 

employment, film and television sector, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in 2008 there were 1,800 films that were . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, in 2008 there were 1,800 

films produced in North America. Last year it was 900, Mr. 

Speaker, and this year has not been a very good year. The film 

industry has been . . . It‟s been a very difficult year for the 

industry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have met with representatives from the industry, from SMPIA 

[Saskatchewan Motion Picture Association], Mr. Speaker, in 

recent weeks, and we look forward to helping them succeed in 

their industry, Mr. Speaker. But it will be the industry that takes 

a lead role in ensuring that this industry succeeds going forward 

in this province. 

 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4409 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

volumes may be down around the world and across 

Saskatchewan, but talk to Manitoba and Ontario. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2007-2008 the film and television industry 

contributed nearly 68 million to the Saskatchewan economy and 

created over 1,200 full-time jobs, but over the last two years 

production has declined by 70 per cent. And last week William 

F. White, a supplier of film and video equipment here in Regina 

and a pillar of the film community, announced it was closing its 

doors. 

 

To the minister: will the government make the changes to the 

film employment tax credit in tomorrow‟s budget that the 

industry needs to stay competitive? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sports. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as I‟ve indicated in my last 

answer, I‟ve recently met with representatives of the film 

industry. We have talked about a number of areas where they 

feel that the province and the industry can work together to do 

better, Mr. Speaker. I‟m not going to reveal what may or may 

not be in the budget at this point, Mr. Speaker. The member can 

wait until tomorrow. 

 

But certainly we know that across the entire industry, not just in 

Saskatchewan, but that film and television productions are 

down, Mr. Speaker — 1,800 in 2008 and last year it was less 

than half of that, 900 productions, Mr. Speaker. So I‟m looking 

forward to working with the industry to identify where we can 

help the industry leaders succeed in this industry going forward, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again talk is cheap 

and it‟ll be great to see some action on this file. 

 

The Premier has been known to wrap himself in the Corner Gas 

flag, and he even made a so-called comedic debut by crossing a 

picket line on the show. Interestingly enough, to film his latest 

sitcom, Brent Butt crossed the line too — the Saskatchewan 

border heading west to Vancouver. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is this government driving 

film industry jobs and investment out of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly want to thank 

the member for her question. We have been working as a 

ministry, Mr. Speaker, to attract high profile series to the 

province. Mr. Speaker, obviously when one series makes up 

about 25 per cent of the entire industry, it‟s certainly a blow 

when that series comes to an end, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s why 

we‟re looking to bring more series back to the province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But what we do in this budget and what we do as a government 

and in this province, whether it‟s the film sector or any other 

industry, is going to be within a balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. 

That‟s what we‟re going to do in this province — going forward 

in a prudent, in a fiscally prudent manner, Mr. Speaker, whether 

it comes to the film industry, the television industry, or any 

other industry across the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Treatment of Government Employees 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, does the Minister Responsible for 

Public Service Commission think that it‟s appropriate to 

terminate public employees who the government believes 

provided information to elected members of this Assembly? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, every public employee we 

have in this province is critical to our province, to the growth, 

and to ensure that we can have an efficient government and 

managed well. We respect the people that are public employees 

in this province, and I assure members opposite that we respect 

the people that are working for this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, last fall the opposition made 

public the case of a convicted sex offender who was unlawfully 

at large. Instead of finding out why the individual in question 

was mistakenly released, the government chose to focus on who 

might have provided this information to the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: has an employee of Corrections 

and Public Safety been fired, or will someone be fired based on 

the government‟s belief that they provided this information to 

the public? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we 

know, the situation that happened last fall, there was 

information that was passed inappropriately to a member of the 

Legislative Assembly. We know that there is a right way and a 

wrong way of doing business in the public service. 

 

The individual could have easily passed the information, or if 

he had a problem with public safety, he could have talked to his 

supervisor. Or if his supervisor . . . he could talk to the police. 

There‟s a chain of command. Mr. Speaker, this individual had 

violated the chain of command, and there is an investigation 

that‟s ongoing. The investigation is ongoing, or it‟s being 

completed as we speak right now. 

 



4410 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, I think that we‟ll wait until . . . see that the 

investigation is completed. It is a human resources issue. I have 

not been involved in the investigation. I did not call the 

investigation; it was the deputy minister. And I‟m happy to 

answer another question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the government 

focused all their attention on an employee who provided 

information to members of the legislature rather than on the 

issue that was of concern to the public and the public safety. 

 

So once again, to the minister: has an employee of Corrections 

and Public Safety been fired, or will someone be fired, based on 

the government‟s belief that they provided this information to 

the public? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, once again, I would 

remind the members opposite that the investigation is an 

independent investigation that was called by the ministry. It‟s a 

totally . . . I was totally hands-off on the investigation and the 

result. I have not seen any report on it. I had a briefing by the 

deputy minister. It‟s a deputy minister‟s decision. It‟s a human 

resources issue. It is not a politicized issue. Mr. Speaker, we‟ll 

wait until . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The minister can 

complete his response. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, the deputy minister 

will review the report, which he is doing, and we will wait to 

see what his recommendations are. Again, it‟s a human 

resources issue, and the deputy minister will be dealing with it. 

It will not be dealt with in the political domain. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, public servants have bills to pay 

and families to support like the rest of us. Firing public servants 

who try to do their jobs sends a clear message to the other 

public servants: if you try to serve the public interest instead of 

the Sask Party political interest, you and your family will suffer 

the consequences. It‟s intimidation, pure and simple. But firing 

the wrong person is even worse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: does the Sask Party intend to fire 

public servants every time the opposition raises an issue in the 

legislature? Why are public servants paying the price for this 

government‟s mismanagement and incompetence? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I assure the members 

opposite that we respect and value the people that work for our 

government and with our government. I think the members 

opposite only have to think back a little while when they 

remember that they have . . . there was public servants that were 

fired a number of times. In fact in 1996, the NDP released 554 

people, and there was just . . . their idea of the right thing to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under this government, the people that work for us 

are important and valuable and help bring forward our policy, 

and we look forward to our working relationship with them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Selection of a Chief Electoral Officer 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister of 

Justice aware of any investigations past or present into any Sask 

Party MLA, the party itself, or any Sask Party candidate by the 

Office of the Chief Electoral Officer? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I think it‟s important for members to 

recognize that questions are to be related directly to the 

ministry, the responsibility of the ministry, and not the Board of 

Internal Economy. If the minister wishes to respond, the 

minister can respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, given the events in the 

House yesterday, I asked my officials whether they are 

considering for prosecution any allegations of violations of The 

Election Act by any member of this Assembly. They have 

advised me that they are not. If there are any further questions 

regarding compliance with The Election Act, they should be 

redirected to the Acting Chief Electoral Officer. I have no 

knowledge of any such investigation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the issue arose because we chose not to appoint 

any specific individual. Mr. Speaker, that individual was the 

fifth on a list of candidates. I do not wish to get into the 

individual‟s credentials, Mr. Speaker, but it was a reasonable 

decision taken by this caucus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have also asked the Chief Justice of the Court of 

Appeal for this province to assist us by appointing an overseer 

and facilitator for the process of selecting a new Chief Electoral 

Officer for Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this individual must 

give us some assistance to ensure that we have a fair, impartial, 

and appropriate process. 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, it seems to be the position of 

the minister that a majority of the Legislative Assembly gets to 

choose who the Chief Electoral Officer will be who oversees 

the conduct in an election. I will remind the minister that he 

spoke glowingly of the successful candidate and referred to him 

as the last man standing, not the fifth choice. 

 

To the minister: is this simply not a government appointment of 

what was once an independent officer of the legislature? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4411 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it is imperative that not 

just the MLAs but the public have confidence in this system. 

They must have confidence in the Chief Electoral Officer and, 

Mr. Speaker, they must also have confidence in the process that 

selects that individual. For that reason, Mr. Speaker, I have 

asked the Chief Justice for the province of Saskatchewan to 

appoint a facilitator and overseer to ensure that that process 

happens in a fair, appropriate, and an impartial manner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the individual that will be 

appointed will be either a retired or supernumerary judge. And, 

Mr. Speaker, it is my request of the members opposite that they 

participate actively in the process, that they give some 

meaningful and valued input so that we are able to arrive at a 

candidate that will give us fair, appropriate, and impartial 

election results that are handled in a democratic and appropriate 

manner, Mr. Speaker. The fundamentals of our democracy 

require that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice has a 

very strange way of making requests to the opposition, I have to 

say. Mr. Speaker, when asked what knowledge the 

Saskatchewan Party caucus would have to reject the 

recommended individual, the minister said, and I quote, “We all 

went through an election in 2007. We all filed returns. We all 

had communications as we filed those returns.” He said that the 

Sask Party MLAs had dealings with the current incumbent, the 

Chief Electoral Officer, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party criteria for 

the Chief Electoral Officer seems to be how thoroughly he will 

scrutinize their election returns. 

 

To the minister: is the public really served by MLAs choosing 

who will scrutinize their returns based on the level of scrutiny 

that they wish to undergo? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members 

of the House that we want this process to be brought to an end 

as quickly as possible. We want to appoint a Chief Electoral 

Officer that will have the confidence not only of the members 

of this House but, Mr. Speaker, of the citizens of the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

We hope that that individual will review and look at all of the 

returns that are filed by parties, by all of the candidates with 

appropriate vigour and caution to ensure that The Election Act 

is complied with. We also look to that individual to supply 

guidance and direction and assistance in those members when 

they file their returns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a difficult and complex process. The 

individual who will be hired will have to take us through the 

next two elections, will take us through redistribution, and in 

fact, Mr. Speaker, a major rework of the electoral Act. This is a 

difficult and complex process. We look forward to the 

co-operation of the members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, this was the difficult and 

complex process that existed before the Sask Party caucus 

decided that the majority in this legislature was going to appoint 

independent officers. The process was this: a bipartisan 

committee, including the Speaker of this House, recommended 

independent legislative officers. The members of this House, 

unless they had very good reason not to, Mr. Speaker, and 

hadn‟t had up to this day, accepted those recommendations. 

And a number of independent officers serve under that process, 

Mr. Speaker. Not a difficult process, not a complex process. 

 

They politicized it, Mr. Speaker, and now they want to try to fix 

it by rejecting this officer. And they have given no reason why 

they should do so, and this side of the House is not going to 

co-operate in that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Premier has expressed non-confidence in two individuals: 

inappropriately in the Acting Chief Electoral Officer, perhaps 

appropriately in his Attorney General who serves on the board 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask the member to place the question 

directly. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — The opposition cannot have confidence if the 

government doesn‟t have confidence in the Attorney General. 

Will the Attorney General step aside from the Board of Internal 

Economy so that it can do its work with the confidence of this 

House? 

 

The Speaker: — Just remind members again of the rules, and 

rule 19(2) says, “Questions relating to any . . .” Order. 

“Questions relating to any matter within the administrative 

competence of the government or on matters related to 

individual ministerial responsibility may be asked of a Minister 

of the Crown.” 

 

Order. “Questions on issues not officially connected with the 

government of a . . .” 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. If the members 

will listen, they‟ll hear the rules that they created. “Questions 

. . . with the government, of a private nature, related to the 

Board of Internal Economy, caucus, party or political 

responsibilities are prohibited.” 

 

The member‟s question is directly related to Board of Internal 

Economy. However, if the minister is prepared to respond, the 

minister can respond. 

 

Question period is over. 



4412 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

School Capital Projects 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday I was 

pleased to join the Premier, the Minister for Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, mayors, board of education Chairs and 

members, school division administrators, principals, educators, 

and community members in Saskatoon for a major school 

announcement. 

 

The Premier announced that we are moving ahead six new 

major school capital projects, including a new public and 

separate school for the Willowgrove community in Saskatoon, a 

new school facility to consolidate St. Patrick Elementary School 

and St. Joseph Middle School in Swift Current, a replacement 

school for École St. Thomas Elementary School in 

Lloydminster, the École St. Andrew Elementary School major 

renovation right here in Regina and, Mr. Speaker, a new middle 

school in the community of Warman. Mr. Speaker, all six 

projects are entering the approval in principle stage and 

receiving a total of $6 million in government support to 

complete the preparation of detailed plans and specifications 

which must be completed before construction can begin. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are also advancing $5 million to support 

facility maintenance projects ranging from roof and boiler 

replacements to structural repairs in seven communities. This 

includes Churchbridge, Melfort, Loon Lake, Imperial, Rosthern, 

Swift Current, and Lucky Lake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Regina and Saskatoon public school 

divisions will also receive financial support to complete facility 

audits. This . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the facility audits are a 

part of a larger initiative to get an accurate picture of the actual 

conditions of all of our schools across Saskatchewan. This will 

allow us to take the best care of our school infrastructure over 

the long haul. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the past two and a half years, the 

Government of Saskatchewan has made school infrastructure a 

priority. To date we have invested in excess of $300 million to 

support moving forward 28 major and almost 400 additional 

smaller school capital projects across the province of which, 

Mr. Speaker, 50 were early learning and child care space 

development projects. 

 

From the northwest corner of our province in Turnor Lake to 

Oxbow in the Southeast, more than one in three schools in our 

province is receiving much-needed upgrades. This is a record 

capital investment in Saskatchewan schools, but we know that 

there is still need in many communities that must be met. We 

are committed to addressing in a substantial way the sizeable 

school infrastructure deficit that has accumulated across the 

province. 

 

Our focus has been on moving forward school projects that 

were the most pressing, schools that required renovations, 

additions, or new builds to ensure the health and safety of 

students. We have also made significant headway on smaller 

capital projects to maintain our facilities and keep our schools 

safe and in good repair for our students. 

 

Now we are able to turn our attention towards projects that 

address critical space shortages. The projects announced last 

Thursday do that. Thursday‟s announcement signals that we are 

on the right track and our priorities have not changed. We 

recognize the importance of schools that are in good condition, 

accessible, and responsive to the needs of students, teachers, 

and the community. 

 

We want our students to attend school in a facility they can be 

proud of, that truly reflects the kind of great school 

communities that we have across our province. Mr. Speaker, we 

are pleased to be advancing six major and nine block capital 

projects that, once complete, will support the education of 2,900 

Saskatchewan students. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I want to thank the minister for sending me a 

copy of his ministerial statement about 10 minutes to 1. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I do note that the minister announced what he is 

calling a ministerial statement last Thursday in the city of 

Saskatoon. At some stage, Mr. Speaker, I‟d really appreciate it 

if you could apprise the House what is indeed appropriate as a 

ministerial statement, given that there are press conferences that 

took place five days ago, Mr. Speaker, and I‟m not sure what‟s 

new in terms of this ministerial statement. 

 

But I will say this. I‟ve had an opportunity to go across the 

province since being appointed Education critic, meeting with 

school trustees across Saskatchewan as well as teachers and 

parents. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve had an opportunity to place 

some questions in this House and ask the Minister of Education 

to provide the House with a listing of school capital. And what 

was so interesting is that last November 23rd I asked the 

minister if he could provide me with an updated list of school 

capital and in fact, Mr. Speaker, he did not provide me the list 

for 2009. He provided me a list for 2008. 

 

So when the minister made his announcement on Thursday, the 

newest list I had had the following order: Saskatoon Public, 

Willowgrove; Prairie Valley, the Lumsden Elementary School; 

the Greater Saskatoon Catholic Schools, Willowgrove; Greater 

Saskatoon Catholic, St. Matthew‟s; and then of course Holy 

Family, St. Michael School in Weyburn, Georges Vanier — 

Georges Vanier in Saskatoon that has been waiting for some 

time for an addition and renovation. And then of course Greater 

Saskatoon Catholic, Holy Cross, where we have people that are 

sitting at Holy Cross and they have been waiting for some time 

to have an addition and renovation at Holy Cross. And then of 

course Warman. And we had the Warman folks into the 

legislature a couple of weeks ago and they very quickly, with 

the help of my colleague from Massey Place, organized over 

2,000 signatures on petitions to deal with that whole issue of 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4413 

overcrowding in Warman, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so when the minister provides the critic with “the latest 

information,” one assumes that when he‟s making his 

announcement in Saskatoon that it resembles the information 

that he provided in this legislature to the opposition Education 

critic. 

 

Now had I just gone with the minister‟s information that he 

provided me on November 23rd,
 

I could have said, what 

happened to Lumsden? What happened to St. Michael‟s? What 

happened to Georges Vanier? What happened to Holy Cross? 

How did all of these schools jump ahead? 

 

But I did have an opportunity on my way home to contact some 

of my contacts in school divisions across the province, and they 

said, oh now the minister provided us with a list in August of 

2009 and it‟s the latest list. But that‟s not the list he put into this 

Legislative Assembly to inform the House, Mr. Speaker. There 

was quite a different list for the opposition and then the list that 

he provided school boards with last August. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the list that he provided 

school boards with — Holy Trinity; Saskatoon Public, 

Willowgrove; Greater Saskatoon Catholic, Willowgrove; 

Lloydminster, École St. Thomas — the one missing is 

Weyburn. That would be St. Michael‟s School in Weyburn. 

That wasn‟t mentioned by the minister when he made his 

announcement. École St. Andrew‟s, which is the Regina 

Catholic School Board, that was announced as well as Prairie 

Spirit, Warman. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, may I ask the minister that when people 

submit written questions from the opposition, could the minister 

please provide the latest information in the ministry, and 

accurate information, so that we can all do our job on behalf of 

the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now if those aren‟t the rules, if those aren‟t the rules that 

written questions will be answered precisely and honestly with 

the latest information, I think all members of the opposition 

should know this. I think we should know. But if the minister 

genuinely, his officials made a mistake or his office, then they 

need to say that. But, Mr. Speaker, the information the minister 

provided me, the minister provided me . . . Oh so he‟s playing 

games. Oh he‟s playing games, that‟s what he‟s doing; he‟s 

playing games. And I would ask the minister, please don‟t play 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I would ask 

members to come to order and allow the member to wind up her 

comments. Members have been allowed to respond to 

ministerial statements roughly about the same amount of time 

that the minister has made their statements. The member‟s time 

. . . I‟d ask the member to wrap up her comments. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I would ask the minister, all ministers, don‟t 

play games. We ask information. Please provide the 

information, Mr. Speaker. It‟s appropriate in the name of 

allowing us to do our jobs, Mr. Speaker. I would ask the 

minister to provide the most accurate and up-to-date 

information that the minister can because when he doesn‟t do 

that, Mr. Speaker, he creates difficulty. And I think we‟re all 

here to act and represent all constituents in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Any further ministerial statements? Why is 

the Leader of the Opposition on his feet? 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 

before orders of the day, I wish to request leave to move a 

motion under rule 59. 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask the Leader of the Opposition to 

state briefly the purpose of the motion and to read the motion 

into the record. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 

Public Access to Information Regarding Tommy Douglas 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate very much the 

opportunity to say a few words, and I‟ll be very brief. But, Mr. 

Speaker, the Government of Canada and the Canadian Security 

Intelligence Service and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police 

are refusing to release the complete intelligence file of former 

Saskatchewan premier, Tommy Douglas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, public access to information is a core tenet of 

democracy. Saskatchewan people and Canadians from coast to 

coast deserve to know the information contained in that 

intelligence file. 

 

Tommy Douglas served our province and the country with great 

distinction as our first social democratic leader in North 

America. His legacy to our province and our country is 

extensive, including medicare, old age pension, family 

allowance, social programs, the central Bank of Canada, civil 

liberties and rights of legislation, and our Crown corporations. 

 

[14:45] 

 

This Assembly owes it to the memory of Tommy Douglas and 

his family to call for a full release of the complete intelligence 

file on our former premier. And I ask leave of the Assembly to 

move the following motion: 

 

That this Assembly calls on the Government of Canada, 

the Canadian Security Intelligence Service, and the Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police to release the complete 

intelligence file on former Saskatchewan premier, Tommy 

Douglas. And further that in making this call, the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan assert the 

following: 

 

(1) the public access to the information is a core tenet of 

democracy; 

 

(2) that the Canadian Security Intelligence Services should 

be consistent in that it routinely releases intelligence files 

on individuals 20 years after their death; and 

 

(3) that 24 years after Tommy Douglas‟s death and several 

decades after the information on him was gathered, there 



4414 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

is no legitimate security reason for keeping this 

information secret; and 

 

(4) that the release of this information is important to the 

legacy of Tommy Douglas and to the people of 

Saskatchewan and Canada; and 

 

(5) Mr. Speaker, that this Assembly recognize that Tommy 

Douglas served our province and our country with 

distinction as the first social democratic leader in North 

America; and 

 

(6) that this Assembly values Tommy Douglas‟s legacy to 

Saskatchewan and Canada, including medicare, old age 

security pension, family allowances, social programs, the 

central Bank of Canada, civil liberties and the rights 

legislation, and our Crown corporations; and 

 

(7) that this Assembly recognizes the people of Canada 

voted Tommy Douglas as the greatest Canadian to mark 

his accomplishments; and 

 

(8) that this Assembly believes that Tommy Douglas‟s 

family, friends, and all Canadians deserve to know the 

information contained in the intelligence file. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has asked for 

leave to move a motion under rule 59. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would like to hear the 

responses so I can accurately put them in the Hansard. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 889 through 927. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 889 through 927 are ordered. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 928 through 970. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 928 through 970 are tabled. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

An Hon. Member: — A point of order. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would ask 

you to review the ministerial statement presented by the 

Minister of Education to in fact check if it meets the criteria of a 

ministerial statement in our Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the announcement that the minister made today 

was in fact the announcement he made several days ago in a 

very public way. It was a government announcement made in 

. . . last Thursday, pardon me, Mr. Speaker. The information 

contained was exactly the same. 

 

So what new information or program was announced today that 

was not previously announced by the government? It was very 

public, Mr. Speaker, and several sitting days have actually 

passed since that announcement. The minister had opportunity 

to rise on that particular statement immediately after, the day 

after he made that statement. He didn‟t take that opportunity, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it seems that today in rising with this particular ministerial 

statement he used it as a diversion from a very difficult day in 

this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and to get away from the very 

issues which we wish to debate in this House, Mr. Speaker. I 

ask you to review the statement and please rule on whether or 

not it is in fact a ministerial statement. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

on the point of order, ministerial statements are to be about new 

policy or new money expenditures, Mr. Speaker. This clearly 

fits into that category, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this point of order is an attempt by the opposition 

to divert time away from the business of the House, Mr. 

Speaker.  

 

Mr. Speaker, there was one sitting day between the 

announcement and the ministerial statement today. The 

announcement was made on Thursday. The House does not sit 

on Fridays. It does not sit on Saturdays and it does not sit on 

Sundays, Mr. Speaker. So yesterday would have been the only 

time for this to have been delivered. The minister didn‟t have 

time to prepare the ministerial statement, Mr. Speaker, so it was 

delivered today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is simply an attempt, an attempt as we‟ve seen on many of 

the items before the House today, of the opposition to waste the 

government and this Assembly‟s time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I‟d ask members, I‟d ask members to 

come . . .  

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I‟ve listened to the member, the 

Opposition House Leader‟s point of order. I‟ve listened to the 

Government House Leader‟s response. And I will take the 

question under advisement. I will look at it carefully and come 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4415 

back with a response. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 133 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 133 — The 

Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very pleased today 

to rise and speak to The Tobacco Control Act, Bill 133, the Act 

to amend The Tobacco Control Act. 

 

Before I actually start into my remarks on the actual 

amendments today, I‟d like to actually give a little history to 

The Tobacco Control Act. It was my motion in December of 

1999 that actually established the all-party committee on 

tobacco, the legislative Committee on Tobacco Control. And 

the work of that committee, including . . . It was an all-party 

committee. The work of that committee actually informed The 

Tobacco Control Act that we‟re now amending and have 

amended over the years to strengthen tobacco control and serve 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Unfortunately as we move along, there‟s still many people who 

do smoke in Saskatchewan and there still . . . When I read my 

remarks that I made in December of ‟99, I was talking about 

young people who are still in great numbers smoking, and I 

noticed the minister, in his response, he also said the same 

thing. So we still have young people smoking and in greater 

numbers than we would wish to see. 

 

The new Bill actually does some changes that will address some 

things that are missing in the legislation. One is to prevent 

smoking right outside of buildings in entranceways. And people 

have complained, I think, quite a bit about this when you have 

to walk through someone smoking at the entrance to a building. 

So there will, I think, be a fair amount of support for that. 

 

There‟s also a fair amount of housekeeping in the Bill, so that 

really isn‟t of concern for a debate. The definition of enclosed 

public spaces is now going to include the common areas of 

multi-unit residential buildings, which will be very useful as 

well. And the definition of flavoured little cigars and flavoured 

tobacco products will be included now to reach those people 

who are using those products, and also the new definition of 

pharmacy as defined in The Pharmacy Act. 

 

There are many provisions now that exist that this may 

strengthen. And I know, speaking to the various organizations 

who this is of keen interest to — like the Heart and Stroke 

Foundation, the Lung Association, and the Canadian cancer 

association — they are very committed to seeing the rate of 

death from cigarette smoking decrease in this province, as they 

are across the country. 

 

And every time we make a change, hopefully it is for the better. 

There are questions that need to be asked of anything of course 

that comes forward in legislation, and that is our job to do. So 

we need to know from a opposition‟s point of view, who was 

consulted and what did they say? I understand what the Lung 

Association and the Heart and Stroke Foundation and the 

Canadian cancer association says. 

 

But what do others say? People that have an interest in when 

these new changes will affect smoking on school grounds. What 

do the school boards say? And what do people say who will 

have to actually put into play the guidelines or the restrictions 

on smoking in front of the entrance to a building, of a public 

building?  

 

So some of the questions too that will need to be asked — and 

this will of course be some of the work that will happen at the 

committee — and that will be, what would be the enforcement 

strategies that we will have? And so it‟s all well and good to say 

we have certain legislation. But how will it be enforced so that 

actually people will do what we‟ve asked them to do and that 

we will then see some change in our smoking rates, in particular 

in young people. 

 

And we also are looking at advertising in this Bill, changing the 

way advertising and promoting is done, so that there is a 

clarification that signs that appear will not be advertising or 

indicating the price of tobacco outside the facility so people can 

see it. 

 

There is a mention in the explanatory notes about the 

amendments to section 6, that the Lieutenant Governor will 

have the ability to create regulations that exempt historical signs 

and items. And of course that‟s a question that I have marked 

on my paper — what does that mean and who would that 

impact? 

 

Like I said, there are several housekeeping aspects of this, and 

that is always the changes that the government is making from 

department to ministry, which really as I said doesn‟t really 

concern people for very long. 

 

Another one that‟s of particular interest and we‟ve had debate 

for a long time around is sale of tobacco in pharmacies. And 

this one, the explanation of this change, is that retail stores like 

Walmart and Superstore that sell tobacco products and have a 

pharmacy within their location will be required to ensure that 

there‟s a separate and distinct access to the pharmacy. And the 

majority of provinces in Canada have prohibited the sale of 

tobacco in pharmacies because of the ethical issues associated 

with selling a product that is known to cause significant health 

problems. 

 

So this is something too I think that is of interest to . . . and lots 

of people would support. It is of course, the question is, what do 

the retailers say and the pharmacists? And what is their 

response to this? And that‟s another question that we will have 

in committee and of course of the stakeholders who were 

consulted by the government. 

 

The biggest one I think that people are waiting for . . . Although 



4416 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

I do think there are some significant changes contemplated in 

changing whether people can smoke in the doorway to public 

buildings, and the definition of a public building to include 

multi-unit facilities, as well as signage and various definitions 

of cigarillos and fancy cigars. 

 

I think one of the things that people have talked the most about 

is the new section 10(1). And this is a new section. And it will 

prohibit the smoking of a person in a motor vehicle when 

another person under the age of 16 is present in the same 

vehicle. And Nova Scotia and Ontario have similar legislation. I 

think this is what is of interest to many parents; people who 

look at the damage that second-hand smoke does to especially 

children who have no choice in the matter, that they travel in 

cars that they are put into and strapped into seats and basically 

forced to inhale whatever air is in the car. 

 

So I think this is of great interest to many people. I know 

there‟s been some push back. People see this as an infringement 

on their rights as parents or rights as people driving, but it . . . 

The rights of children under 16 who have no voice in saying, I 

don‟t want to be in my car seat when there‟s smoke in the 

vehicle, I think that does supersede some of the naysayers and 

some of the push backs. So I‟m looking forward to having this 

discussion again in committee. 

 

There‟s also a change in the health . . . The definition of a 

public space to include a child care facility. Again children are 

involved in daycare facilities or any child care facilities. And 

the amendments are of course changing in light of this — 

prohibiting a person from smoking or holding lighted tobacco:  

 

in an enclosed public . . . [space]; 

 

within a prescribed distance from a doorway, window or 

air intake of an enclosed public . . . [space]; or 

 

on the grounds surrounding a school or an independent 

school, as defined in The Education Act, 1995”. 

 

This is where I think we will have some conversation with the 

school boards because I know when we‟ve had this discussion, 

when we were in government, there was some concern about 

children moving across the street and smoking on peoples‟ 

lawns across the street from the schools or smoking in the 

enclosed bus shelters on the street in a public space. And the 

school boards were, and the school divisions were concerned 

about who enforces this and what are the penalties. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So these are certainly questions that will need to be asked, and I 

think that all people who will be impacted by this will want to 

have some conversation about the areas of the Bill that 

particularly affect them. 

 

There‟s going to be, and I don‟t understand this so I‟m 

interested in knowing what it means in the Act, is to ensure the 

definition of an ashtray is expanded to include other receptacles 

that may be provided by providers of enclosed public spaces. So 

I‟m interested to find out why we needed that one and what 

import that has on the Bill. 

 

There is also amendments to another section that includes if 

there‟s something else in another Act that is in conflict with this 

Act, like a bylaw of a municipality or a regulation of a 

municipality, that the provision that is more restrictive prevails. 

So that strengthens up the existing legislation and makes it . . . 

especially with the motor vehicle one. I think this is speaking to 

that so that there is no conflict with enforcing this in a motor 

vehicle. 

 

There is also some changes proposed that there will be some 

changes included in the fine, and that, I think, again speaks to 

what‟s the fine for someone smoking in a motor vehicle with a 

child under 16. So that is going to make sure that, that part is 

going to make sure that there will be some . . . they‟ll be 

capturing people that are doing this and what fine they will have 

under the existing fine structure. 

 

Also there‟s going to be some changes in the amendment that 

removes, the liability one, that removes of course the reference 

to the ministry. 

 

All in all, Mr. Speaker, I think there is some really good 

proposals here. I think people are interested in hearing the 

rationale behind some of the changes. I do think there‟ll be 

some interest in, from some agencies or some proprietors. And 

for certain I can see some interest from the school boards to see 

who is going to actually enforce this tobacco legislation 

changes on the school, on the school grounds. 

 

And I understand, and I‟ve seen children smoking on the street 

and across in the bus shelters, and I know people were 

concerned about ashes and butts and things on their lawns right 

across from the school. So it will be something I think that will 

need some attention, because I think it will be difficult to put 

something in an Act and then not do anything about it and leave 

it to the school divisions to handle this on their own. 

 

And I know the minister said that this Bill will be definitely . . . 

He‟s said that they‟ve done some, quite a bit of consultation 

with non-governmental organizations, health regions, regional 

authorities, and also business associations. So I‟m interested in 

seeing what they had to say, particularly some of the changes 

that changed the definition of an enclosed space. And that will 

of course be something that the hoteliers will want to talk about, 

and some of the business associations — how will it affect their 

business? 

 

I also know that the minister agreed that there is a very high 

incidence of smoking, and particularly in our young people, and 

that there has been incremental steps. Once that the original 

tobacco control Act was brought in, there have been 

incremental steps to move the population forward. I know there 

was a great deal of interest in the all-party committee when they 

went around. Several people on the committee I think had some 

quite eye-opening experiences because they too were smokers. 

 

I have the most interesting poster in my office that I won‟t give 

to anybody because it‟s something I got from the United States 

during this debate. And it shows various animals in real . . . real 

pictures of a pig and a camel and a cow and a duck, and they all 

have a cigarette in their mouth. And the poster says, it looks just 

as ridiculous when you do it. So it‟s a poster I have that is a 

souvenir of this time, bringing in The Tobacco Control Act. 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4417 

And I also know that over the years, as changes have been made 

and proposed, there has been more acceptance of some of the 

things — the restriction of sale in confectionaries so you have 

to cover the product, asking people for their age. I think it‟s 

become the norm. And it just shows that society does accept the 

fact that second-hand smoke is harmful, that smoking is 

harmful, and people have made the connection. They‟ve made 

the commitment in stores and businesses to comply with the 

Act so that you do see all the products covered. 

 

And I think as we move forward and look at new things that are 

being added to make it stronger, I think we really do have to 

look at what is the reason that our young people still are 

smoking so much. Why is that incidence increasing or at least 

not levelling out or, we would hope, decreasing? Why is that? 

And what could we do better to make sure, other than stopping 

children from smoking on the school grounds? That doesn‟t 

stop them from starting to smoke in the first place. 

 

So we haven‟t done enough work there yet, and it‟d be 

interesting to know in discussions at committee what, if 

anything, there is proposed to come next, to better strengthen 

our tobacco control Act, and better address the population of 

our children particularly. 

 

And I know it‟s not just children. I was just recently watching a 

story on TV that was talking about women who were having 

difficulty quitting smoking because they‟re worried about 

gaining weight. Well that‟s a whole different reason for 

smoking. It‟s not something that you‟re necessarily addicted to 

or that legislation will help you with. It‟s a whole different 

aspect of why people smoke. 

 

And there‟s also some interest in what the cost of smoking 

cessation is. There‟s products on the market that lots of people 

cannot buy because they can‟t afford it. Is there some interest in 

making some of those products more accessible to people, 

especially low-income people or people on fixed incomes or 

people that need some assistance to buy these so that they could 

actually make tobacco cessation real to them, not just a New 

Year‟s resolution every year? Lots of people would really like 

to stop smoking, but I think they have a difficult time buying 

the products. So there are still some things that a government 

could do with taxation and incentives, especially on cessation 

products, that would maybe speak to the high incidence that we 

still have of smoking. 

 

And I think the interest that I have in particular is seeing what 

we could do to help children so they don‟t start smoking and to 

certainly stop them from smoking once they‟ve started if they 

have. And that I don‟t see much of in here other than the 

stopping smoking on school grounds. So I think that‟s 

something that would be of interest to ask various stakeholders 

who have . . . will come, I‟m assuming, or at least the minister 

will speak for them, giving us some of the feedback from the 

consultation process of what they said and what was asked of 

them, and if perhaps there is something that we could do that 

would address some of those things. 

 

And as I said, Mr. Speaker, I have had a very, very significant 

interest in this since I was elected. And when I did bring the 

motion forward to start the all-party committee in the legislature 

in December of ‟99, the then deputy premier, who is now the 

Leader of the Opposition, he was the one who helped me as a 

new member, a new MLA in this legislature, how to actually 

bring forward a motion and how to make that all happen. 

 

And to watch that, Mr. Speaker, and to know the community 

out at large, in the tobacco control sort of area, they recognized 

this commitment. They recognized the commitment from 

myself and from the Leader of the Opposition and from our 

caucus on this issue. And I think they look forward to seeing the 

debate here. And they also look forward to seeing the hearings 

of the Bill once it‟s sent to committee so that we can actually 

add another piece of strong legislation to our existing legislation 

that will, in fact then, speak to reducing our incidence of 

smoking in this province and decrease our deaths. We do have 

. . . I think it‟s clear that smoking causes death, causes lung 

cancer, causes many other things like emphysema and different 

breathing problems. So it does cost the health system a lot of 

money as well as the individual person their life and their 

existence and their families who breathe the second-hand 

smoke. 

 

I had a person who had smoked for so long in their life, when 

they passed away, their furniture was being given to another 

relative and the furniture had to come back because it was so 

soaked with smoke no one could use it. And you really don‟t 

understand that until you have something like that happen, 

about how pervasive smoke is and how pervasive it is if it goes 

that far into wood. Imagine what it‟s doing into our lungs. 

 

So I think people are quite concerned still and hopefully more 

so, that as we move forward with changes to The Tobacco 

Control Act that people accept them and see them for what they 

are, that they‟re a public health issue. They‟re certainly a 

benefit to society as well as to individuals, and there certainly is 

an onus on government — and that includes government and 

opposition — to do things that do protect the public safety but 

also to protect children who do not have a voice in many cases. 

 

So the change in the legislation to changing the legislation so 

that there would be no smoking in cars with children under 16, I 

think that goes a long way to speak to our commitment to look 

at the health of children and the most vulnerable in our society. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with those remarks I think I would be excited 

to see what happens in committee with this Bill and have the 

opportunity to question the minister and his officials on who 

was consulted, who also was interested in moving this forward, 

and what will be the people who speak up against it and what 

will be their objections. And then how we can see, which is 

something I think all of us agree, that we do support changes to 

The Tobacco Control Act that strengthen it and that meet the 

needs of the people and that move us forward so that we are a 

healthier society. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the Minister of Health, Bill No. 133. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 



4418 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I designate 

that Bill No. 133, The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2009 

be referred to the Standing Committee on Human Services. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

Bill No. 97 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Bjornerud that Bill No. 97 — The 

Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

pleasure to rise this afternoon and participate in the debate on 

Bill 97, The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009. It seems to be a 

relatively straightforward Bill in terms of its provisions, but we 

have some questions in terms of the broader impact of this 

legislation and how it plays out through different things like the 

revolving fund that it‟s currently part of in the Department of 

Agriculture, the extent of consultation throughout the livestock 

industry, and the impact that it has on other funds that are 

collected in the revolving fund, in the current revolving fund 

housed in the Department of Agriculture. 

 

It would appear that this Bill allows the Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen‟s Association to collect both the $1 non-refundable 

national levy collected on cattle sold at market and the $2 

refundable provincial levy collected on cattle sold at market. 

Previously of course, both the national and provincial levies 

were collected and went into a revolving fund in the 

Department of Agriculture. There was a government-appointed 

board consisting of a number of livestock producers that 

funnelled out the money from there. Primarily these funds went 

to research that benefits the industry. 

 

Obviously there‟s support for this within the industry, but again 

we have some question around the extent of the consultation 

that took place before this legislation was brought forward, and 

what is that level of support throughout the industry as a whole. 

It‟s quite, you know . . . Is it possible that people are making an 

informed opinion about this legislation, or is it simply a matter 

of some people not knowing what is happening with the 

check-off and the funds that derive therefrom? 

 

We‟re also going to be interested to see what the SCA 

[Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s Association] will be doing with the 

funds in the future, what the breakdown will be between funds 

allocated to research and to development within the industry. Of 

course the SCA is a long-established body and certainly great 

roots and experience and track record in the industry. But I 

think it‟s fair to ask those questions in terms of what the 

breakdown is and will be between the way that the funds will be 

allocated in the future. 

 

[15:15] 

 

There‟s some question as well how much of the funding will be 

going to the day-to-day operation and marketing of the 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s Association. Will other cattle 

producer associations such as the Saskatchewan Stock Growers‟ 

Association, who are not part of the SCA, will they benefit from 

the levies? Will the stock growers still receive money from 

these levies to use for operation and marketing as they did 

under the old system? 

 

Who within the Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s Association will be 

determining where and when those funds will be allocated? Of 

course this piece of oversight is vital. It‟s one thing to establish 

funds, Mr. Speaker, but it‟s always critical to establish very 

clearly what the oversight provisions are for those funds and 

who those people will be accountable to, who will be 

appointing them, and what the makeup of that board will be. 

 

Is there a significant advantage to having the SCA act as a 

self-regulating body, or is this simply about shifting fees or 

levies previously charged for licensing, registration, and 

inspection that went into the revolving fund? Again there‟s a 

presumption that the SCA is actively participating in this and 

calling for this legislation, and again any time that you can 

devolve more power to the people that are on the ground, that 

are involved daily within the industry and, you know, maintain 

that partnership with government, but promote that kind of 

capacity and self-development. That‟s important. 

 

We‟re also interested to see that Bill No. 97 separates one 

organization out of a number of organizations out from the 

current revolving fund, from organizations that paid licensing, 

registration, and inspection fees. Why is there the move for just 

this one participant in that revolving fund? And what for 

example do the Saskatchewan ag producers, the Saskatchewan 

poultry producers, what are their thoughts on the development? 

 

Certainly they pay fees and levies into the same revolving fund 

that the SCA paid into, and does this impact the way that their 

. . . the fund operates into the future. What impact does that 

have on the other stakeholders? And is there agreement on the 

benefit of this for the parties involved? 

 

Beyond that, is there interest on the part of the other producer 

groups to move into a similar situation as outlined in this piece 

of legislation, and will that be coming forward in the days to 

come? 

 

So we have some questions in terms of the changes and the 

particulars of them, how they will impact other aspects of the 

current regime with the revolving fund housed in the 

Department of Agriculture, how this will impact the operations 

and the relations of other producer groups to that revolving 

fund, and how this will go into the future. 

 

I guess I wouldn‟t mind delving a bit into the explanatory notes 

that have accompanied the Bill 97, and certainly, you know, off 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4419 

the top, the existing provision to be changed regarding 

development commissions, 4(1): 

 

(a) establish a plan to promote and develop the production, 

marketing or production in marketing of an agricultural 

product or agricultural products; 

 

(b) constitute a development commission to administer the 

plan mentioned in clause (a); 

 

(c) authorize the development commission to fund the plan 

through a levy that is refundable on the request of a 

producer of the agricultural product that is, or the 

agricultural products that are, the subject of the plan in 

accordance with prescribed terms and conditions; and 

 

(d) authorize the plan to be funded by any prescribed 

means other than a levy on the producers of the 

agricultural product that is, or the agricultural products 

that are, the subject of the plan, including authorizing the 

development commission to accept appropriations, grants 

or moneys that may be transferred or given to it. 

 

The section (2) of course: 

 

Regulations made for the purposes of clause (1)(c) must 

prescribe the terms and conditions pursuant to which a 

development commission must make a refund of levies to 

producers. 

 

That‟s, if I might add by way of commentary, Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s obviously a vital concern and consideration to be taken 

care of when you‟re amassing these funds, when you‟re levying 

these fees on producers. They should have a very clear 

understanding of where the money is going, what it is going to, 

and should the need arise, how do they go about requesting a 

refund. 

 

Looking further through the legislation, Mr. Speaker, this will 

affect The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act and will result in its 

repeal, as well as the regulations from 2004. Section (5) in the 

proposed legislation deals with the windup of the Cattle 

Marketing Deductions Fund and the transfer of those assets and 

liabilities from the fund to the Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s 

Association. 

 

There will be “An audit of the accounts and financial 

statements, as well as a report of the activities of the former 

fund and financial statements showing the business of the 

former fund for the period commencing April 1, 2009 and 

ending on the day this Act comes into force [and it] shall be 

tabled by the Minister of Agriculture.” 

 

That will be a very interesting body of information to consider, 

Mr. Speaker, and again if you‟re going to get this fund off to a 

good start, it‟s important to make sure that all the facts are on 

the table and that everybody knows where they will be starting 

from. 

 

The existing provision in The Department of Agriculture, Food 

and Rural Revitalization Act states, regarding the Livestock 

Services Revolving Fund, that: 

 

(4) The minister may use the revolving fund to: 

 

(a) provide services related to the production, 

manufacture, sale, purchase, transportation and 

inspection of animals or animal products; 

 

(b) provide services related to the registration and use of 

animal identification marks; 

 

(c) provide services related to the licensing of producers 

and dealers for the purposes of the production, purchase 

or sale of animals; 

 

(d) provide services related to the collection of 

deductions related to cattle marketing and horned cattle; 

and 

 

(e) provide for the development and administration of 

legislative and regulatory requirements related to any 

matter mentioned in clauses (a) to (d). 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, taking the functions of the current regime, 

transferring them out into the new fund envisioned by Bill 97 

and under the authority of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s 

Association. 

 

Section (10) gets into where this legislation has an immediate 

impact on other legislation and regulations concerning other 

producer groups. It states as such: 

 

The following shall be paid to the Minister of Finance and 

credited to the revolving fund: 

 

(a) all fees charged pursuant to subsection (7); 

 

(b) all payments made pursuant to subsection (9); 

 

(c) all fees charged for licensing, registration or 

inspection pursuant to The Animal Products Act or The 

Animal Identification Act or any regulations made 

pursuant to those Acts except The Fur Farming 

Regulations, The Game Farming and Game Products 

Merchandising Regulations, 1989, “The Saskatchewan 

Egg Regulations”, being Saskatchewan Regulations 

269/78, “The Saskatchewan Hatchery Regulations, 

1978”, being Saskatchewan Regulations 268/78, and 

“The Saskatchewan Poultry Regulations”, being 

Saskatchewan Regulations 257/78; 

 

(d) all administrative fees charged by the minister in 

accordance with any agreement made pursuant to 

section 8 of The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 1998 

to support the operation of a promotion-research agency, 

as defined in that Act; [and] 

 

(e) all administrative fees provided for and regulations 

made pursuant to The Cattle Marketing Deductions Act, 

1998 for services provided by the minister to administer 

that Act. 

 

The final clause in the explanatory notes attached to the 

legislation, I‟ll just go into these very briefly before I conclude 

my remarks, Mr. Speaker. “Clause 17.1(4)(d) is amended by 



4420 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

striking out „cattle marketing and‟ and clauses (10)(d) and (e) 

are repealed as a consequence of the repeal” of the marketing 

deductions Act, 1998 and regulations. 

 

So to recap, Mr. Speaker, it‟s again transferring the housing and 

the administration of funds that are currently being collected 

and that find their way into a revolving fund, which is currently 

housed and under the authority of the Department of 

Agriculture. Moving those funds into, under the administration 

of the Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s Association, again on the face 

of it, this would seem to promote better . . . a more direct 

relationship between a stakeholder group and the funds that 

they need to conduct researching and marketing for their 

product which, on its face, would seem to be a fairly positive 

development. 

 

We of course are interested to see what the level of consultation 

has been across the industry. Are there those who simply are 

unaware of these changes and reforms and as such aren‟t able to 

comment in an informed way? 

 

We‟re also interested to see if there‟s an analysis that has been 

done on the other producer groups that operate in relation to the 

current revolving fund. Will this constrain the pool of funds 

available to them? How will it impact the operating of that fund 

going into the future? And is there agreement on the part of the 

other producer groups that this is a good thing? 

 

Is there interest on the part of the other producer groups that 

they would like to proceed in a similar manner to make the 

changes to the legislation that would, in turn, move the funds 

that they provide into the fund into their . . . under their 

authority? These are a number of the questions that we have 

concerning this legislation, but for the time being, Mr. Speaker, 

I would conclude my remarks. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion moved by the Minister of Agriculture that Bill No. 97 

be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, 

to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — Bill No. 97 stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 109 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 109 — The 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

address issues raised by Bill No. 109, An Act to amend The 

Municipalities Act and to make related amendments to The 

Local Government Election Act, Mr. Speaker. And the purpose 

of the Act is . . . Well it‟s a basket of purposes, Mr. Speaker. It 

doesn‟t have one purpose. But I take it from both the Act itself, 

the way it‟s put together, its reference to numerous other Acts 

— or I should say, Mr. Speaker, from the Bill itself and its 

reference to numerous other Acts — and from the minister‟s 

second reading speech, that a number of issues have arisen in 

the view of the government. 

 

And they‟re not necessarily related issues, but they are related 

in the sense that they all fall within legislation governed 

specifically by The Municipalities Act and The Local 

Government Election Act and that the government saw fit to 

include this basket of fixes, if I might call them that, Mr. 

Speaker — and I don‟t mean anything pejorative by the use of 

that word — but fixes to two pieces of legislation within one 

Act. 

 

And that‟s maybe, perhaps, an interesting decision on the part 

of the government, Mr. Speaker. The amendment to The 

Municipalities Act, 2009, cover other issues and then a different 

set of issues, a different set of issues I think, Mr. Speaker, to 

The Local Government Election Act. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 

an alternative for the government would have been to take the 

one basket of perceived need for fixes to The Municipalities Act 

and put in a Bill somewhat like this Bill, Bill No. 109, to 

implement those fixes to The Municipalities Act, and then to 

make, I think, a significant policy change that this Bill proposes 

to make to The Local Government Election Act in its own 

legislation. 

 

[15:30] 

 

And it‟s an interesting question, Mr. Speaker — I suppose not 

determinative of very much — but an interesting question as to 

the government‟s decision to address these issues in the same 

piece of legislation. In other words, to amend The 

Municipalities Act and to amend The Local Government 

Election Act in issues that aren‟t really similar in any way. I 

mean you can‟t really see why the amendments to one piece of 

legislation fall into the basket that includes the amendments to 

the other pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one can speculate I suppose as to why the government 

decided to proceed this way. And one reason they might have 

proceeded this way is because they already have an overloaded 

legislative agenda, Mr. Speaker. And dividing this Bill into two 

Bills — which you might think this Bill should be — would 

have just overloaded that agenda even more. So this Bill now 

gets a maximum of 20 hours consideration by members of the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

If they had amended The Local Government Election Act as 

they propose to do, Mr. Speaker, in its own Bill as one might 

think one would do, then that amendment and that discussion 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4421 

about that amendment would get 20 hours potentially, Mr. 

Speaker. And the other amendments to The Municipalities Act 

would get 20 hours, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so you have a Bill that the government, I trust, thinks that 

they can get through in sort of half the time by making it an 

omnibus Bill. Now to call it an omnibus Bill may be a little bit 

unfair or surprising because it is still remarkably thin, and 

omnibus Bills are often much larger. 

 

But they do have the advantage, whether they‟re a small 

omnibus being driven by the government or a large omnibus 

being driven by the government, they do have the advantage of 

limiting debate to 20 hours on all the provisions within the Bill, 

no matter how many pieces of legislation are being amended 

and no matter how many different items are under discussion in 

the Bill. 

 

The Bill first of all starts off with the responsibility of 

municipalities to fix roads, and perceived difficulties that 

municipalities have. I shouldn‟t perhaps call them perceived 

difficulties, Mr. Speaker. They are real and actual difficulties. I 

think we hear about them on both sides of the House quite often 

and for a long time. And the Bill progresses from the fix for 

addressing the concerns in municipalities about maintaining 

roads to questions of individual conduct and disclosure of 

individual conduct in local government elections. 

 

And so you can see the breadth of the legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

from roads to the fair conduct of elections, which is quite a 

subject of debate concerning provincial elections in the 

legislature this week and usually not tied up with roads, 

although concerns about the province‟s highways increasingly 

come up in the legislature as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan municipalities have the responsibility for 

maintaining roads. Not the provincial highways, but many roads 

in the province are the responsibility of Saskatchewan 

municipalities. The greatest amount of mileage of these roads is 

through the least densely populated areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the major, almost overwhelming financial responsibility of 

rural municipalities is the maintenance of these roads. There‟s I 

don‟t think anything that falls within the responsibility of a 

rural municipality that would even come close. All the other 

responsibilities of a rural municipality together probably do not 

add up to the cost of maintaining roads that travel through the 

least populated areas of the province. And I say that not to 

suggest that the roads aren‟t necessary; they are absolutely 

necessary and essential. Rural municipalities wouldn‟t be 

maintaining them at great expense if they were not. 

 

But the point I wish to make, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

population, the rate-paying, tax-paying population to support 

the burden of maintaining those roads, which are quite 

extensive, is smaller in those municipalities that have that 

extensive road network. And it is perhaps not an irony — that 

word is overused, Mr. Speaker — but it is certainly a difficult 

paradox with which rural municipalities live, that the cost of the 

provincial highway system is borne by all the people of 

Saskatchewan but the cost of the municipal road system is 

borne by a very small group of people who nevertheless rely, as 

we all do, on municipal roads. It is true of Saskatchewan as a 

whole. 

 

I think that not only do we have more electrical wire per capita 

than any other place in North America because of our 

commitment to provide electrical power to every resident of the 

province, if that is at all humanly possible . . . And that goes 

back to the commitment and ideals of Tommy Douglas. And I 

would have rather, Mr. Speaker, been perhaps today debating 

the heritage, the legacy of Mr. Douglas in respect to the federal 

government‟s refusal to release the intelligence file over two 

decades after his death. But I can comment on that legacy in 

respect both to rural electrification and to the province‟s road 

system. Not only do we have more miles of electrical wire per 

person than any place else in North America; we would have 

more miles of paved highway per person, I think, than 

anywhere else in North America, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know that this government finds that to be a challenge. 

And I think they were a little surprised, Mr. Speaker. I think 

they thought that government was going to be easy and that the 

challenges of maintaining those roads that the former 

government faced were not problems that they were going to 

have, Mr. Speaker. I think this government is to a certain extent 

genuinely surprised by the fact that it‟s hard to meet revenues 

and expenditures and to make the choices that are necessary to 

make in government. 

 

As John F. Kennedy said, government is about choosing. And 

it‟s the inability to choose, to have the discipline to make 

decisions, that has caused so much difficulty for the 

Saskatchewan Party government in respect to a number of 

matters, including, including roads. 

 

Now I‟m going to sound like someone of a certain age with 

historic interests, Mr. Speaker, but you can‟t talk about the 

destruction of roads in rural Saskatchewan without talking 

about the history of rail line abandonment in Western Canada, 

Mr. Speaker. It is the increase in truck traffic that has resulted 

from branch line abandonment over the years that has resulted 

in municipalities absorbing costs that were . . . It‟s practically, 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s practically a matter of the Canadian and 

Saskatchewan Constitution. 

 

A deal was struck, Mr. Speaker, and I know that deals and 

conventions and rules don‟t mean very much to government 

members. I mean that has been, that has been front and centre in 

this Legislative Assembly since we returned this spring. That‟s 

very clear. But this deal was a deal that was struck. It was an 

historic deal in this country. 

 

Really I mean the country was, to a certain extent, built by the 

railway. The railway was built and the railway built the country. 

And when I refer to that as a constitutional deal, Mr. Speaker, 

it‟s actually entrenched almost in the constitution of the 

province by an Act of parliament that the Canadian Pacific 

Railway is not subject to taxes and will be free of taxes in 

perpetuity. And there‟s a reason for that, Mr. Speaker. It wasn‟t 

just a gift because people liked railways. I think even in the 

19th century — perhaps especially in the 19th century — a lot 

of people, particularly farmers in the West, weren‟t all that fond 

of railways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the deal was that the economy, the fundamental basis of the 



4422 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

economy in the province of Saskatchewan as it . . . Well the 

territories because the province didn‟t exist yet when this deal 

was made. The territories in Western Canada, the fundamental 

basis of their new economy was grain, specifically wheat. And 

that grain was to be transported to the seaports and to market at 

a rate that farmers could make a living. And the West could be 

populated in many cases by ancestors going back two, three, 

four, five generations — perhaps not five generations, but three 

or four in some cases, Mr. Speaker — of members of this 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

That was the deal. And governments have lived up to that deal, 

and Canadian Pacific Railway is still free from taxation in a 

way that other corporations are not. But the Crow rate is gone, 

the branch lines are gone, and now the people who are 

recipients of that bargain, the other side of that bargain, Mr. 

Speaker, farmers, people who live in rural Saskatchewan, no 

longer have the benefits of that deal, no longer have the benefits 

of that understanding. 

 

What they have, Mr. Speaker, is decreased access to the railway 

and increased traffic, growing traffic, and not just traffic 

carrying grain, but every other resource that travels out of rural 

Saskatchewan — potash, Mr. Speaker, in good times — and as 

a rule, all these being carried on our roads sometimes to main 

lines but sometimes just to the highway. And both the province 

and municipalities for a number of years now have had this 

increased burden of maintaining roads throughout the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the government I think, government after successive 

government . . . And I know that the members opposite will 

look back and say that the NDP government did not keep this 

bargain. But I believe government after government, including 

this government, have striven to keep faith with the people of 

Saskatchewan that no matter where you live, you‟ll have 

electricity and no matter where you live, you‟ll have access to a 

road. And that‟s not a bargain that‟s been kept well in the 

North. I see the member from Cumberland looking at me but 

we are working on this. We are working on this. Work is being 

done. 

 

And you don‟t hear the stories in Saskatchewan that you hear in 

Manitoba now about collapsing roads and the missing truckers. 

And now maybe geography helps us a little bit. Manitoba may 

have a larger North, but you don‟t hear those problems here. 

What more can be done? We‟ve kept that bargain. And when 

the Minister of Highways gets up and says, in response to a 

question or a statement from this side of the House, that a 

highway, perhaps a northern highway, is so full of potholes that 

it‟s a danger, the minister I think is inclined to say — because 

it‟s the political thing to say — well that‟s the responsibility of 

the previous government. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, one of two things is true: either the potholes 

are not two years old, in which case they‟re the responsibility of 

the current minister, or they‟re over two years old, Mr. Speaker, 

which the minister would claim that they are. And if they‟re 

over two years old, well shame on the minister, Mr. Speaker, if 

he‟s had over two years, the government‟s had over two years 

to address them. 

I don‟t know how either answer is a satisfactory answer from a 

government, Mr. Speaker. Either they‟re your potholes and you 

should have fixed them, or they‟re our potholes and you should 

have fixed them a long time ago because they‟re even older. 

There‟s no other, there‟s no other alternative there, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But although governments I think have striven . . . And this 

government that we currently have has at least increased the 

highway budget by the factor of inflation. It hasn‟t gone down 

by any amount. The Government of Saskatchewan, I think, has 

kept good faith on roads. 

 

The federal government and the railways have not kept their 

deal on rail lines, particularly branch lines, and municipalities 

are forced to absorb increased costs for which they don‟t really 

have the resources, Mr. Speaker. They don‟t really have a tax 

base. And if the government is not able to keep a deal on 

revenue sharing that was supposed to be based on provincial 

sales tax but apparently was not — it was actually based on 

potash revenues — if the government is not able to keep that 

deal, as it has not been able to, not able to keep that promise 

and is not able to keep that promise going forward, Mr. Speaker 

. . . And it would surprise me if the budget, like the last Throne 

Speech, didn‟t claim to be going forward. If they‟re not able to 

keep that promise going forward, Mr. Speaker, then 

municipalities are going to come under increased strain. 

 

And this is true for cities. It‟s true for towns. It‟s true for 

villages. It‟s true for hamlets. And it‟s true for rural 

municipalities. And the resources in rural Saskatchewan to deal 

with the issues caused by branch line abandonment . . . 

 

And I don‟t know if younger people in the House — not 

necessarily members of the Legislative Assembly — really 

appreciate the history lesson, but I remember an attempt to fight 

the election on the Crow rate, Mr. Speaker. And it didn‟t work 

out too well, as I recall, but it was an important issue. And I 

think the failure of the people of Saskatchewan to rally behind 

insisting that the deal that had been made with the railways — 

and a very good deal for the railways, Mr. Speaker — that 

insisting that it not be kept and benefiting all the people of 

Saskatchewan but particularly the residents of rural 

Saskatchewan and particularly the farming community. 

 

The legislation purports to provide municipalities with a 

mechanism for resolving disputes with private contractors 

whose activities may have a big impact on municipal roads. 

And the opposition supports this in principle, but we query 

whether the government has consulted sufficiently on the 

mechanism, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I suppose that sounds repetitive. I have been in this 

Assembly for six years and no matter who‟s in opposition — 

and that‟s varied over the six years, obviously — no matter 

who‟s in opposition, the opposition members get up and say, 

well, Mr. Speaker, we don‟t know if the government has 

consulted. And that‟s what opposition members like to say, Mr. 

Speaker. I think probably you‟ve heard it. I don‟t want to bring 

you into the debate, but you may have even said it in your time. 

I don‟t know. 

 

But I think the opposition has valid reasons for being concerned 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4423 

about this government‟s consultation, and we have seen 

example after example after example of that. And today, Mr. 

Speaker, not to digress very long from the Bill, but today I 

understand that the Minister of Justice‟s reason for not 

consulting with the opposition before making the outlandish 

proposal he made in the House during question period was he 

was playing telephone tag with the Chief Justice. 

 

So it was the government‟s view that they should put the 

all-party system into place first and then ask the party later 

whether they agree to it or not. And my response to the press 

was, well the minister was playing telephone tag with the wrong 

person. Surely if he‟s genuine in his consultations, he would 

want to consult with the other side of the House as to whether 

his proposal was acceptable before he started phoning people to 

actually implement it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But that, Mr. Speaker, I think is indicative of the attitude. I 

think the response of the opposition that, well you would talk to 

the other party first, strikes this government as very strange, Mr. 

Speaker. So when legislation arises that says to municipalities 

. . . And I appreciate that, and we hear quite a bit now about, 

well this is what the rules say. This is what the rules say, and if 

you just look at what the rules say then this is what we can do. 

And that‟s being held up as an argument that there‟s a majority 

on that side of the House and that majority can appoint the 

ombudsman. That majority can appoint the Children‟s 

Advocate. That majority can appoint the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner and that the majority can appoint the Chief 

Electoral Officer. And that‟s the argument that we‟re hearing 

from a government that thinks that majority government is a 

dictatorship, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the rules say, the constitution says that municipalities are a 

creature of the province. That‟s what the rules say, and if you 

wanted to be as legalistic as this government is on the question 

of independent legal officers, then of course the government 

wouldn‟t consult with municipalities. But no government in 

Saskatchewan would say . . . I don‟t think they would use the 

constitutional phrase out loud, we can do what we want in 

respect to municipal government because municipalities are a 

creature of the province. I think if they used the language from 

the constitution, Mr. Speaker, that would be offensive in 

municipalities, and the members opposite know that. 

 

The written rules, the written rules aren‟t the only rules, Mr. 

Speaker. There are conventions. There are conventions that 

govern the Constitution of Canada. It‟s not all written, Mr. 

Speaker. I think that‟s been clearly established by references in 

the Supreme Court, and there are conventions with how 

governments deal with each other that aren‟t in the constitution. 

 

And it is a well-established convention — even more 

established — that the government does not impose 

independent legal officers by majority, Mr. Speaker. A 

well-established convention that municipalities are treated as a 

level of government and not creatures of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So knowing that, we have two, we have, well, two broad 

questions. They lead to a number of specific questions, but two 

broad questions, Mr. Speaker. The first broad question is, what 

consultation took place with the municipalities about the 

development of this mechanism? Is it, is it the mechanism they 

want? 

 

We followed the meeting of the Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities. We noted that there‟s a lot of concern 

about rural health care. We noted that a lot of municipalities are 

wondering when the promise is going to be kept about doctors 

in their community by this government. We know that. 

 

But we suspect also that there was discussion about respecting 

the powers by convention — because there aren‟t any 

constitutional powers — the powers by convention of 

municipalities. Is this based upon a proposal from rural 

municipalities, Mr. Speaker? I don‟t think the minister, in his 

second reading speech, went so far as to say that it was. So is 

this an act of paternalism or is this an act of consultation? And I 

don‟t think the opposition knows the answer to that broad 

question yet and is, therefore, not prepared to make a decision 

about whether we support the principle in more than just 

principle at this point, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again, I guess the other broad question is, the devil being 

in the details, does the mechanism make sense? Does the 

mechanism work? 

 

Now actually, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have pretty 

well established this week that they don‟t much care about 

process and mechanisms. But I assume, Mr. Speaker, that this 

mechanism was not a creation of the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs. I assume that this mechanism was a creation of policy 

development people in the Ministry of Municipal Affairs, 

perhaps with input from the policy work in highways and 

traffic, the Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure, Mr. 

Speaker. And that would be, that would be relevant. 

 

Now this leads to a concern that we have with a broad range of 

legislation, particularly environmental legislation where, quite 

frankly, the issues and the mechanisms are complex. In the 

words of the Minister of Justice today, “the process is 

complex.” They are. 

 

And I don‟t notice — with the greatest respect, Mr. Speaker — 

on behalf of the legislators opposite, much interest in 

legislation. I don‟t expect . . . see very little evidence that many 

of the legislators opposite have read the legislation that they‟ve 

brought into this House or could explain the legislation they 

brought into the House, which is fine, Mr. Speaker, but we are 

very dependant in the implementation of legislation like this on 

the public servants who drafted it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we do know, and this government‟s confirmed, that the 

public service is going to be reduced, and it‟s not going to be 

reduced in a rational way. The government does not have the 

courage to pick programs, for the most part, which they no 

longer want to fund . . . [inaudible] . . . discontinue those 

programs. The government doesn‟t have the discipline or 

courage to make those choices and decisions. 

 

So the government is going to reduce the civil service, we are 

told, by 16 per cent over four years — four by four — by 

attrition, Mr. Speaker. So whoever happens to retire, unless 

Corey O‟Soup is ready to take their job, whoever happens to 

retire is gone. And it may be somebody who works in a 



4424 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

program that the members opposite don‟t really care about or it 

may be a very crucial person who understands how, for 

example, this mechanism is supposed to work and is charged 

with implementing it. But because the government won‟t make 

decisions about programs, which policy people go and aren‟t 

going to be replaced by anybody else who can assist these 

people, this government, in implementing its programs, it‟s 

going to be random, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don‟t know whether it‟s going to be environmental 

assessment. I don‟t know if it‟s going to be in Justice. I don‟t 

know if it‟s going to be in social services programming. I don‟t 

know if it‟s going to be in facilitating some greater co-operation 

and mediation between private contractors and municipalities. I 

don‟t know, Mr. Speaker. It‟s going to be random hits to the 

public service. It‟s going to be random hits to the public service, 

and we don‟t know where they‟re going to be. 

 

People who are preparing to retire may know, Mr. Speaker. 

They know that they‟re going. They‟re not going to be replaced 

and that‟s how the government‟s going to decide what‟s an 

important program and what‟s not an important program. And, 

Mr. Speaker, quite frankly we have no or very little ministerial 

responsibility on the part of this government, and without 

proper public servant support, matters are only going to get 

worse. 

 

Moving a little bit beyond the issue of roads, Mr. Speaker, and 

the mechanism for resolving disputes with private contractors 

on dealing with the repair and the maintenance of municipal 

roads, there are changes to the requirements for public 

disclosures of conflict of interest. These appear to bring 

municipal legislation more in line with the requirements for 

MLAs, which seem reasonable. Now again this has history, Mr. 

Speaker, in this legislature. 

 

I don‟t like to spend a lot time reliving the unhappy 

circumstances after which more than a dozen members of the 

Grant Devine cabinet were found guilty of fraud and breach of 

trust, Mr. Speaker, but those were days where there wasn‟t very 

much independent oversight in this legislature. And you can‟t 

make excuses for people who commit an offence and clearly 

had the intent to commit an offence, or at least that‟s what a 

court found. You can‟t make excuses for them. 

 

[16:00] 

 

But the general lack of oversight and accountability allowed 

people who didn‟t have the ability to monitor and police 

themselves to get into a great deal of trouble, and it‟s only 

decreased the confidence of the public and the administration of 

government in the province of Saskatchewan. There was 

embarrassment that the province had to endure within the 

country and it joined the other embarrassment, this 

double-barrelled embarrassment of the province. It had almost 

got to the point of bankruptcy and it was a province that had a 

really dark cloud cast over the administration, the members of 

the government who had brought about that near bankruptcy of 

the province. 

 

And there really wasn‟t — among other things — until the ‟90s, 

Mr. Speaker, apparently adequate disclosure of conflict of 

interests and other steps in place to prevent members of the 

government in particular, but any member of the Legislative 

Assembly from getting into that kind of trouble. And so one of 

the reforms of the Romanow NDP government was conflict of 

interest legislation and the creation of the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner, and that has worked fairly well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And how was that person appointed? Well that person is 

appointed, members opposite might say and technically they‟d 

be correct, by the members of the Legislative Assembly. So we, 

in effect, I guess a majority of us theoretically — well not 

theoretically — technically, legalistically looking at the rules, 

appoint the person who‟s going to oversee whether we‟re in a 

conflict of interest. I think that that‟s what actually happened, 

Mr. Speaker. That‟s what actually happened with conflict of 

interest. 

 

If that‟s what actually happened with chief electoral officers, I 

think the public would say, well isn‟t the natural human 

tendency to appoint somebody who‟s going to be looking over 

your shoulder, somebody who‟s not going to do a good job of 

that? I mean isn‟t it natural, human tendency to look for 

somebody that‟s going to be compliant and agreeable? Not 

somebody who‟s going to be critical and really, in the long run, 

be of assistance in avoiding the situation that we had in the 

‟80s. 

 

And so we would answer to the public, or we would up until 

this week, I think we would have said, well but really we don‟t. 

We really don‟t let every member of the Legislative Assembly 

say, well let‟s go for the lowest common denominator. We have 

a process that includes the objective, disinterested Speaker. It‟s 

bipartisan. It doesn‟t matter how many seats you have in the 

House — one opposition member, one government member. 

And we accept the results of a competition, Mr. Speaker, and 

we always have. 

 

Least we always have, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House. 

In all the years I‟ve been here, and I don‟t think any of my 

predecessors remember anything else different going back to 

the ‟90s, we‟ve always accepted that, Mr. Speaker. Because if 

we were to look behind it, I think there are a couple 

implications. First of all, that our member on the Board of 

Internal Economy, our member on the Board of Internal 

Economy . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, I‟m 

addressing the issue of conflict of interest, which I understand 

in this legislation would bring it in line with what provincial 

MLAs undergo. 

 

There would have to be a good reason, a very good reason why 

we wouldn‟t trust the recommendation of our member on the 

Board of Internal Economy and really, in effect politicize the 

process, by actually saying, well, I mean the person passed the 

most rigorous competition and checks that could be put forward 

by this committee, but we‟re going to make a decision on a 

political basis. 

 

So this process, which the Minister of Justice has declared as 

broken, in respect to independent officers of the legislature — 

said that to the press today, the process is broken — this is the 

process that this legislation would impose on municipalities, 

Mr. Speaker. The government says, on one hand, the process is 

broken. It doesn‟t work. On the other hand, by the actions of 

Bill No. 109, an Act to amend The Municipalities Act, this is the 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4425 

process that municipalities should follow, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well the government should decide, does the process work? 

Has the process worked for 12 years and therefore is a good 

process for municipalities to follow, and can we lead by 

example? Or is the process broken? In which case, does the 

government want to rethink its Bill, or at least that portion of 

the Bill that deals with the interest of conflict of interest and 

imposing on, or making available at least to municipalities a 

process similar to the provincial process and how MLAs‟ 

conduct is governed in a number of respects by independent 

officers. 

 

Now as again I said, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a basket. Bill 109, An Act 

to amend The Municipalities Act and to make related 

amendments to The Local Government Election Act is a basket 

of fixes. So we‟ve got roads, and then we‟ve got disclosures of 

conflict of interest, and then we‟ve got demographics, Mr. 

Speaker. It‟s just three unrelated matters, and no problem with 

that, Mr. Speaker. And I can understand why a government that 

can‟t handle its legislative agenda — sort of can‟t do that 

division by 20 — Mr. Speaker, and finds itself every single 

sitting in trouble with its legislative agenda, I can understand 

why they don‟t want to make each one of these fixes part of a 

different Bill. I can understand why we have a omnibus Bill 

here. 

 

But there‟s, as I said, a number of different matters being dealt 

with. And another one is how population figures are calculated 

depending on the purpose for which the information is being 

used. Again it seems sensible. Probably can‟t credit the minister 

with personally coming up with it. Again dependent on a public 

service that‟s robust enough to implement the policy in the 

legislation. And we need more information on how these 

changes will work as well. 

 

And then after these different fixes to The Municipalities Act 

this Bill goes on and deals with an entirely different piece of 

legislation entirely, The Local Government Election Act, and 

would give municipalities the authority and, I think to be clear 

as I understand both the legislation and the minister‟s second 

reading remarks, the option of requesting criminal record 

checks for candidates seeking public office. And the 

government says that voters deserve to have all the information 

they need to make an informed decision. And we support this 

principle as well. 

 

But it‟s interesting that the government didn‟t want to make this 

a requirement for people seeking provincial office, but only 

people seeking municipal office. If it‟s a useful bit of 

information to have about a candidate running for municipal 

office, then why is not useful information to have for the 

candidate running for provincial office? And if the government 

was requiring this of municipalities but not requiring it of 

candidates for provincial office, then I think that would be, 

well, I don‟t like to overuse the word outrageous, but it would 

border on that. But I appreciate the government isn‟t requiring 

municipalities to do that. But the government is saying through 

this Bill that it‟s useful information which does beg the 

question, well why not? Why not provincially? 

 

And perhaps problematically is that the government doesn‟t 

have the courage of its convictions in respect to provincial 

elections. It doesn‟t even have the courage of its convictions in 

respect to municipal elections because issues arise because of 

the option to require these criminal checks, Mr. Speaker. There 

is a weapon that the incumbents in a municipal government can 

use or not use. 

 

And I just raise this scenario, Mr. Speaker. In a municipality the 

incumbents, the people who control the municipal government, 

have the option once this legislation is passed to require 

criminal record checks. The incumbents know, the incumbents 

know that challengers to their incumbency have criminal 

records, Mr. Speaker. They have the option of doing that, Mr. 

Speaker. If they know that challengers to their incumbency 

have a criminal record that might embarrass them, then they 

have an incentive to take the option that the government has 

provided them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now let‟s take a different scenario. You have a municipality 

where an incumbent has a criminal record, Mr. Speaker, and has 

been elected to public office. Doesn‟t want the public to know 

that he has a criminal record and that his challenger in an 

upcoming election does not or probably does not. In that 

municipality, the municipality will not take the option perhaps 

to require criminal record checks. 

 

This is a weapon that has been given by the provincial 

government to municipalities to use or not use — and we 

certainly see in the provincial level the willingness of this 

government to use whatever weapons it can find — to use or 

not use depending on the circumstances. And so we will get 

certainly a patchwork because some municipalities will think 

this is an important thing to do and others will think it‟s not an 

important thing to do. We are guaranteed, Mr. Speaker, to get a 

patchwork across the province, municipalities where criminal 

record checks are required and municipalities where criminal 

record checks are not required. 

 

But part of that patchwork could very well result from the 

advantages to incumbents as to whether to use the weapon that 

the province has provided. So if the province believes that this 

is important information for voters to have in municipal 

elections, then to guarantee a fair playing field and to not 

provide an advantage to incumbent municipal leaders to pick or 

chose whether to use this weapon or not, depending on whether 

it advantages them or disadvantages them, if the government 

truly believes that these criminal record checks are a good idea, 

then the government should require them, Mr. Speaker, because 

the alternative is discretionary use of this weapon. 

 

And why does the government not require it? Not because they 

don‟t think it‟s a good idea. They do. That‟s why it‟s in the 

legislation. That‟s why the minister said so in his second 

reading speech. The government doesn‟t require it, Mr. 

Speaker, because then the government would have to do it for 

us. And this government is not about greater scrutiny of 

members of the Legislative Assembly. This government clearly 

is all about less scrutiny of members of the Legislative 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker. That has become abundantly clear. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, we have legislation that 

addresses a number of issues, each one important, each one 

unrelated to the next. 

 



4426 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

[16:15] 

 

The stress on provincial-municipal road network which is 

decades old, continuing and which rural municipalities do not 

have the resources to address, really that issue is not addressed 

by the legislation. The legislation only gives a mechanism for 

mediation, arbitration with private contractors. Mr. Speaker, it 

is a band-aid solution to a problem that governments of 

Saskatchewan are going to have to address more seriously and 

really look at whose responsibility are economic roads that 

really serve and benefit everybody in Saskatchewan, even if 

they live in the heart of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Then the legislation addressed conflict of interest for municipal 

leaders. And not sure that this Assembly now, this legislature, 

this government, is really in a position to lead by example, but 

that is also in this Bill. 

 

And then the Bill deals with demographics. I mean this is a Bill 

that touches on infrastructure, touches on vital statistics, and 

that touches on, to a certain extent, justice issues. And it‟s just a 

very wide range in that respect. And then it goes on to touch on 

electoral law. 

 

And though I had concerns about and spoke to them, about 

concerns about the mechanism for resolving disputes around the 

repair and maintenance of roads, and some concern about, well 

particularly about the example that this government is providing 

in respect to disclosure of the conflict of interest, I think my 

largest concern clearly, to those who are listening to my 

remarks, is how well-thought-out it has been to provide a 

discretionary weapon, I would say, to incumbent municipal 

governments in respect to upcoming municipal elections. 

 

And if the government should not seriously reconsider, for the 

sake of consistency and fair play, either withdrawing a 

provision, a level of scrutiny that MLAs do not seem to be 

willing to impose on themselves or, even if we don‟t have the 

courage to do that, consistently requiring this disclosure across 

the piece for municipal government, as opposed to providing a 

discretionary weapon that can be used by incumbents in their 

self interest, depending on their circumstances and the 

circumstances of their challengers. 

 

So there are a lot of questions raised by the Bill, and they cover 

a lot of different areas, Mr. Speaker. And I think we may still 

have questions to people working in rural Saskatchewan in a lot 

of different areas covered by what again I would call an 

omnibus Bill despite its slightness. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, to allow others to speak to this matter — I 

don‟t think it‟s received sufficient consideration in the House 

yet — I move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Meewasin has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 109. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 110 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 110 — The 

Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

pleasure to rise today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 110, 

An Act respecting Local Government in Northern Saskatchewan 

and making consequential amendments to other Acts. And of 

course it‟s a very thick document. It‟s a very important 

document and as I‟ve read and reviewed the pieces that go 

along with this, I see there‟s been considerable work. But it is 

our responsibility to make sure that we take some time to think 

about the consequences — the intended consequences, the 

unintended consequences — to make sure it‟s done right so we 

don‟t have to go back and correct those mistakes that perhaps 

were not thought of. 

 

And of course we‟ve seen that a few times, with this 

government in particular, that they‟ve rushed into legislation. 

They haven‟t really thought through the full consequences of 

some of the things that they were in a hurry to get out the door. 

 

And so as we go through this, we see what we can uncover. 

And some of the good things that they deserve credit for, we‟ll 

make mention of that as well. But unfortunately that seems far 

and few between because it‟s been a rare thing, particularly in 

the last little while. 

 

But I am looking forward to talking a bit about this Act. I‟ve 

had some experience in the North. Having growing up in the 

South though, I‟ve just come to appreciate how important 

consultation in the North is. 

 

My colleague from Regina East had a good discussion actually 

about the work that he‟s done, particularly around the labour 

standards that we were able to introduce in the northern areas. A 

very important piece of legislation and of course it took a lot of 

work to make sure that people understood the consequences of 

that kind of implementation, as with this piece of legislation. 

 

When you do that kind of work, when you have southerners in a 

southern world view, a southern perspective, it‟s important that 

we have an appropriate way of hearing the concerns from the 

northerners about their hopes and fears, their aspirations, their 

views about their communities, and how they strengthen their 

communities to make sure that they‟re strong and healthy and 

vibrant. Something that we all strive for, Mr. Speaker, and we 

all hope for no matter where we are in this province, this 

country, because we have so much to be proud of, you know. 

 

But the issues that the North has, you know . . . And they have 

such a strong history but they also have so much geography. 

And this is something that we hear some of the challenges . . . 

In fact, actually it‟s interesting the news that Manitoba‟s facing 

in terms of their ice roads thawing too early and how there may 

be communities stranded. And fortunately our ice roads here 

seem to be hanging on. But sometimes we take these things for 

granted that things can be just like they are in the South, and 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4427 

they‟re not. They face unique challenges. 

 

And so a Bill like this is so important that we get it right. Not 

only do we get it right in terms of the written word, but we also 

get it right in terms of the tools and resources that go along with 

it. And I‟ll keep coming back to this, Mr. Speaker, because I 

know these folks keep coming back to it. I‟ve met numerous 

times with the folks from New North and they raise this issue 

continually, and rightfully so, that if they don‟t have the 

capacity to make a difference in their communities, all this kind 

of stuff is for naught. 

 

And tomorrow we will find that out. Will they have the capacity 

to deliver on a piece of legislation such as Bill No. 110? 

Because it‟s important that they do. Tomorrow is budget day, 

and we will find out whether or not they have the resources to 

deliver on all the parts of this legislation. And it‟s a very 

thorough piece of legislation. And of course when they try to 

. . . And this is the attempt to align this with what southern 

municipalities have and this is very, very important. But it also 

recognizes, and it‟s important to recognize, the unique qualities 

of the northern communities. 

 

And as I said, my colleague from Regina talked extensively 

about his consultations and how he got to know the North, 

particularly his remarks around the highways in the North, the 

roads in the North — a major, major concern. And again speaks 

to the resources that go along with the legislation. We all dream 

that the legislation can take reality, but again the capacity is a 

big part of it. 

 

But the labour standards was an interesting eye-opener in terms 

of how can we take our world view, things that we take for 

granted in the South and make sure that the northerners are 

treated in a fair and an equitable way, but also an appropriate 

way that is culturally sensitive and deals with the reality of the 

North so they can reach their dreams. And of course this is 

something that‟s really, really important. So those are the kinds 

of things that I want to talk about. 

 

And of course my experience as Environment minister also 

gives me some insight, particularly around some important 

issues that I‟m not sure are addressed in here. And I‟m thinking 

about the waste management aspect. And of course 

municipalities, it‟s so important for them to have a good handle 

on how they deal with their waste management, both in terms of 

the water, the grey water, but also the solid waste management. 

 

And of course if we don‟t have good regulations then there can 

be really unfortunate circumstances, and we‟ve seen that in the 

North, unfortunately with a fellow passing away a few years 

ago in connection, the unfortunate incident with animals in the 

North, with Points North. And that was really unfortunate. So 

this is really important. And I know the minister in his remarks, 

and I will talk a little bit about this, talked about the 

unfortunate, extremely unfortunate, tragic circumstances that 

happens far too often in the North, particularly with dangerous 

animals and specifically with dogs, dogs at large. 

 

And if there‟s ever a circumstance that really highlights how 

important it is to have not just the letter of the law but the 

capacity to deliver the new law, the new regulations so that they 

can actually make a difference in their communities, it‟s that 

particular circumstance. We‟ve heard far, far too often of 

dangerous animals and the fact that they, whether they are not 

. . . the whole issue around spaying and neutering. The whole 

issue of ownership, the whole issue of proper dog control 

continues to be one that they struggle with because of the issue 

of resources. How can you have that kind of control? And it‟s 

often after the fact that we hear about this as opposed to before 

the fact. 

 

So these are the kind of things that I‟m hoping to hear that we 

hear tomorrow and over the next while is, how are the resources 

coming along to make this happen? 

 

So waste management is a huge issue. And I‟m not sure we 

know . . . We heard something yesterday about $2 million from 

this government around waste management recycling. I don‟t 

know if they‟re having anything special for the North; clearly 

that‟s an important aspect. 

 

And recycling in the North takes on a brand new, a whole new 

different meaning because we don‟t again have the 

infrastructure, the roads, the way to connect with potential 

markets for materials. And so we have to think about, how is 

that happening? 

 

The other issue that I learned particularly that was so important 

for people in the North was around forest fire management. And 

of course that was and continues to be a real issue in 

communities. And now fortunately, in the past few years, it has 

not been quite as significant. But when you have a fire in your 

community, it doesn‟t matter what‟s happening in the whole 

North if your fire, if the fire is in your area. It‟s still a concern. 

 

And so both in terms of how is that happening and what‟s the 

connection with the Ministry of Environment, with the forest 

fire folks and how does this speak to that, to allow stronger 

dialogue so people feel secure in their communities and 

understanding the science behind forest management? But also 

understanding the importance that communities feel about how 

forest fires are managed in that they feel secure and safe in their 

natural environments. This is hugely, hugely important. And so 

I think that this is one that we‟ve not heard. And I‟ve reviewed 

the minister‟s remarks, and we‟ve not heard him speak 

specifically about these two areas. 

 

And the third of course is, how do you deal with specifically 

specific areas that should be protected? And of course, we talk 

about the planning. It goes on in Environment, but how do they 

intersect with the local governments in northern Saskatchewan? 

So when we get into committee, those will be the kind of 

questions I‟ll be asking. 

 

So how does Environment . . . Environment has a really, the 

Ministry of Environment has a very unique role in northern 

Saskatchewan, much different than they do in the South, you 

know, particularly around the ownership of Crown land. And 

the fact that they are a significant employer in the North and 

they have the ways and means really to have a huge impact on 

the economic development of the North because so much of the 

North really is connected with what we value here in 

Saskatchewan and Canada in terms of our lands and our waters. 

I mean this is something that we take so much pride in in 

Saskatchewan, the fact that we have over 100,000 lakes and of 



4428 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

course the vast, vast majority of them are in the North. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And so I‟m curious about the interrelationship with 

Environment in terms of this Bill before us. The South 

obviously truly did, you know, the municipalities in the South 

truly do have a connection. We have The Water Regulations 

and the waste management regulations, all of that in the South 

too, so the Environment ministry has a real and unique 

relationship to those municipalities. 

 

But I have to say that when it comes to the northern 

communities, it‟s a very unique and important one and the one 

that‟s very different, very different from the South. And clearly 

as I said, specifically with the forest fires, there is a huge 

life-and-death aspect to it, a circumstance that I don‟t think very 

many others could relate to. And of course the South in many 

ways, in municipalities, have some capacity, but I won‟t, I can‟t 

say that they have full capacity because I know when we met, 

they often talked about not having the capacity to deal with 

wildfires in the South as well, particularly along the forest 

fringe. But even when you get into the prairie and the 

grasslands, when you have wildfires there it is a challenge as 

well. And I know particularly in the Southeast, in the Southwest 

— Moose Mountain Park and in Cypress Hills Park — the 

forests there are hugely important. But it‟s a different type of 

thing. 

 

And somehow we‟ve been able to develop good working 

relationships in municipalities right across the province, but it‟s 

the uniqueness that I speak to. And I think this has to be dealt 

with in committee when we have the folks come, and I do hope 

Environment does come along to visit. I think this is very 

important. This is an important piece of legislation. 

 

And of course the people in the North have a right to real 

democracy, and this is pretty much . . . I was struck by my 

colleague from Athabasca when he was talking about the voter 

turnout and how it could be as high as 85, 95 per cent in the 

North. And if only we could have that in the South, that would 

be phenomenal. When I know in my own city of Saskatoon, the 

voter turnout I think hit 27 per cent, and it‟s just not the same. 

So the folks in the North really do take this seriously in terms of 

how they see their future and how they view their mayors and 

how they view their councillors. 

 

I know that in many ways we have a lot of confidence in our 

leadership in the South. And I don‟t know whether that‟s a view 

that the low voter turnout is because of that, but I think we‟d 

still like to have people come out to vote. So when you have 

that kind of turnout of 85, 95 per cent, it‟s a real vote of 

confidence that their leadership in the North will have their 

hopes and fears at heart. 

 

So this is exciting. This is exciting stuff. So we‟re looking to 

see that they get authority similar to the folks in the South. And 

this legislation really proposes to give northern municipalities 

more autonomy and more authority in line with what the people 

have in the southern municipalities. And of course we support 

that in principle. 

 

But you know this really, as I say, has to reflect the reality of 

life in northern communities, and this is something that we have 

to pay attention to. And you know today, as I said earlier, 

whether it‟s the ice roads going out earlier as we‟ve heard in 

Manitoba — the impact that will have on the folks there and 

how we just can‟t take it for granted that the North has long, 

cold winters. They have challenges and particularly we see that 

with the impact of climate change, and is there innovation 

happening and how do we allow that kind of innovation to 

happen, you know. Or forest fires in the summer which can just 

play havoc, play havoc with their communities. 

 

And the real challenge really relies too around the capacity. 

And it is interesting when folks get together, and we‟ve met 

with them many times, and whether it‟s in La Ronge, Stony 

Lake in the North, Cumberland, it‟s just a real challenge. And 

we see that in, you know, communities where . . . You know, 

I‟ve met with folks in La Loche. The challenge is what they see 

both as a collective capacity within their own local government, 

that the people that they hire, making sure they have the 

appropriate skills and knowledge, and of course this will be . . . 

And I hope that people have been brought along so they 

understand the changes. 

 

Now I understand — and as I‟ve reviewed the minister‟s 

comments — that he‟s met with the folks, particularly with 

New North, and it was great to see that he recognized some of 

the individuals. But we have to go beyond just recognizing 

them. We have to give them the capacity to do the job 

effectively. And this is so hugely important. 

 

And we see this at a time when we want to see governments 

manage the resources as well as they can, and of course that 

depends totally on their capacity. And we just have to look 

across the way, Mr. Speaker, to see how that‟s a reality with 

this government here and how they‟ve mismanaged their 

resources. Never has a government been blessed with such good 

fortune coming into government — some $2.3 billion. And now 

tomorrow we wait to see what the reality of what their 

mismanagement will end up looking like. 

 

And this is something that I think we have some real serious 

concerns, because it‟s a bit like the kettle calling the pot black. 

It‟s kind of ironic that these folks can lay judgment on others in 

terms of mismanagement when we see the kind of 

mismanagement that‟s coming across the way. Right from the 

very top, Mr. Speaker, right from the Premier all the way down. 

 

With the kind of decisions that have been made, we have some 

real questions, some real questions. And the people of the North 

I think deserve some answers. And they deserve, they deserve 

to see some real proof of what their intentions are. This is all 

well and good. But if there‟s no resources, no capacity to come 

along with this, then there‟s some real challenges. 

 

We also know, and this seems to have really played into the 

limelight a bit, that the legislation also gives northern 

municipalities the authority to request criminal record checks 

for candidates seeking public office. So this Bill 110 provides 

for that. And the government says that the voters deserve to 

know the information before they make an informed decision. 

And of course we would support this in principle but it does 

give rise to a whole new set of questions, and particularly to all 

of us who are elected. 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4429 

If we are going to put this kind of standard on one set of 

candidates, is this something we should be looking right across 

the board? Particularly it is kind of an odd circumstance that we 

would have a situation where we we‟re saying, for those in 

municipal office they should be providing criminal record 

checks and that become public knowledge, but not so at the 

provincial level. 

 

It seems kind of contradictory that this would happen when we 

have people, particularly as we see people expecting high 

standards from anyone who is elected, anyone who is put in 

positions of authority, in positions of power. And sometimes, 

we think that those in municipal positions aren‟t quite as . . . the 

same as we are at the provincial level. 

 

And I would tell you that from an urban perspective — and I 

think it‟s right across the board we could have examples of this 

— but I know one of the biggest issues in Saskatoon of course 

is snow removal. Well it may not seem to be the end of the 

world, but for many people it was. If you happened to be on a 

street that was plugged and not cleaned out, it was a big deal. 

So that seemed to be the topic of conversation in Saskatoon for 

a long, long time. So it really didn‟t matter whether you‟re 

provincial or municipal; the issue of the day was getting rid of 

the snow. 

 

And I think that‟s the same thing up north. Whether you‟re 

talking about stray dogs, dangerous animals, about forest fires, 

or roads, it doesn‟t matter whether you‟re talking about the 

provincial level or you‟re talking the municipal level. People 

view if you‟re elected, you‟re elected. And so what‟s good for 

the goose is good for the gander, and I think this is important 

that we talk more about this. 

 

You know, it‟s a bit of an ethical issue. It‟s not just as simple as 

a fix-it issue. What are the ethics? What are we really trying to 

resolve here? Because there‟s also the limit to how the 

government has set this — the different levels of the record 

check, and also whether or not the notice of being charged, and 

being charged for a serious crime, versus one that is not as 

serious. 

 

So I‟d like to know the screen, the process for determining this. 

How did this happen? It‟s a very important issue. We have this 

kind of issue in other areas of public life, in public service. We 

have situations where, you know, as teachers you belong to a 

professional organization and, if there‟s a complaint made about 

you, it goes to the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers‟ Federation] 

and it‟s a very public circumstance. And so like with Bill 110, 

calls for that same sort of thing but not quite the same, for 

people with record checks. Where does it start and where does it 

end? 

 

We see that also even in social services, and that applies in a 

big way up north where we have social workers who are 

registered with the Saskatchewan Association of Social 

Workers. And of course this is their week, and we‟ll talk more 

about that through members‟ statements, not here right now 

because I know this isn‟t really related to the speech at hand, 

but what is related is public accountability. 

 

And you have people who are doing work for Social Services 

who are not registered and that causes a lot of concern, because 

there‟s a whole issue around public accountability and public 

transparency. And for this government, those are two issues that 

they‟re struggling with themselves — transparency and 

accountability. 

 

And so I think it is somewhat ironic and contradictory that this 

government would put forward a Bill that calls on one level of 

government to have some record checks — and we‟re not sure 

why they went with just that — but not the provincial. 

 

And the other irony of course with this is how the minister‟s 

announced he‟s wanting it to go to a four-year term for 

municipal elected officials, and part of the reasoning was that it 

would line up with the provincial elections. And so he‟s seeing 

some of that consistency, but not all of it and we don‟t know 

why that is. And I think he has a bit of responsibility. He may 

say that it‟s because that‟s what the municipal elected officials 

asked for, and that‟s fair enough. 

 

I‟m not sure whether he got a lot of feedback from individuals 

around the four-year term, whether people were mounting a 

letter writing campaign to keep municipal candidates off their 

doors every third year and move it to every fourth year. I don‟t 

know if that‟s the case. 

 

So I don‟t know how he‟s making his decisions. Is it just based 

on solely consulting the municipal elected folks, which is so 

important, but it‟s not the only people you need to consult. And 

so this is critical that there is some consistency, some 

consistency right across the board. And so, Mr. Speaker, this 

has been a challenge though for this government in terms of 

being consistent. 

 

And they tend to like to appease groups fairly quickly by 

putting in things and not really thinking through some of the 

difficult decisions that have to be made. And maybe they‟re not 

difficult, but I think it‟s really appropriate that the ministers, the 

government of the day consult not just only with stakeholders, 

but with the public. And that may be a little more complicated 

and more complex and sometimes you hear things that you 

don‟t want to hear or that you hear things that you don‟t know 

what to do with, but the fact of the matter is people need to 

know that you are making some changes and that these changes 

will be out there. 

 

And we need to have some of the discussions. For example I 

would like to know what does John Howard Society have to say 

about this? What does John Howard have to say about this 

because they deal with people, with men, or Elizabeth Fry? 

What do some of the other groups who deal with people in law 

reform have to say? 

 

[16:45] 

 

What truly are the ethics when you go into record checks? What 

is necessary? And what is just a little too much information? 

But people kind of like to know what it is, but is it really, really 

necessary? And does it stop some people from running for 

office that unfortunately would have made good leadership 

people? Or does it . . . Because you‟ve created some loopholes, 

you do get people who should have been stopped. But they get 

in because there‟s a loophole or you haven‟t really completely 

thought this through. I think that there‟s some real, real serious 



4430 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2010 

questions about that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I review what the minister had been 

talking about . . . And he actually gave a fairly long discussion. 

And as we‟ve said, you know, this is important because when 

you go back, these are the kind of things that can be interpreted 

to make sure the policy is right. And so I do have to say that the 

minister gave a fairly long speech about this. 

 

And he did give credit to New North and its partnership and the 

review committee, and I think it‟s important to give that credit 

again to these folks. I won‟t name them — they‟re in Hansard 

already — but we do appreciate the fact that . . . the good work 

that New North does and that they‟re active and they‟ve lobbied 

for this. So like we said, we agree with this in principle, but we 

do have some serious, serious concerns. And of course there are 

people from Timber Bay, Denare Beach, Beauval, Air Ronge, 

Stony Rapids, Patuanak, and La Loche, and so this is important 

to have a good cross-section of people across the way. 

 

So they did take a long time to take a look through this, about a 

year or so, and I think that was very, very important. They 

looked at The Cities Act, The Municipalities Act; it‟s important 

to get that interconnection. But as I said, I didn‟t see in this 

document or this speech that the minister gave any work or any 

connection with environment folks. Because I think that‟s an 

important connection of how do they interface with those folks 

in such an important way, when they deal with their land base, 

when they deal with their water, when they deal with their 

waste management, when they deal with the whole issue around 

. . . Now highways, of course, will be the roads people, but of 

course you have Environment holding the land most likely right 

off the bat. 

 

And of course I do appreciate that the minister did talk about 

dogs running loose, dangerous animals, but I do have some 

concerns because is there a capacity to actually do something in 

a proactive way. Are we going to see this be something like, too 

often we see that it will be after the fact. And I think for people 

in the North, and when we saw the circumstance in 

Ile-a-la-Crosse, it was just really unfortunate and you feel for 

everyone in the community, from the family, the brothers and 

sisters, the father and extended family, and the leadership in the 

community. 

 

Nobody wants to see this kind of thing happen, but it did 

happen and we have to ask, how could we have been more 

proactive, more proactive in this? Because bylaws won‟t solve 

the problem by themselves. You do have the capacity. You do 

have to have the tools. And if you‟re without those then you 

really are stranded because it doesn‟t make a lot of difference. 

And families cannot appreciate, and should not have to 

appreciate that there might‟ve been something in place — we 

could‟ve or we should‟ve — just doesn‟t work at all in this 

circumstance. Because we see this way, way too often. And so 

the whole issue around dangerous animals is just so, it‟s so 

important. This is very, very important. 

 

The minister talked about that he had heard at length from the 

northern stakeholders about the important partnerships, and this 

is very important. And he talked about not only at the municipal 

level but also the regional scale. And this is very important 

because this is something that, when we talk about the 

circumstances in the North, that are a little different and we 

actually have the great opportunity to do it right. 

 

I know in my time in Environment that we talked a lot about 

watershed planning and how do we do that. And particularly 

when we have significant economic projects in the North like 

the oil sands, we get it right. We get it right the first time, right 

off the bat. If we mess up at the beginning then it‟s really hard 

to get it back. And we see that in the South and we see the 

wildlife habitat lands that we‟re trying to protect, especially the 

grasslands, and we talked at length. 

 

I had mentioned the good work my former colleague Peter 

Prebble did around the Great Sand Hills, trying to re-establish 

something like that, when we have some of the most beautiful 

environments, both in terms of the lakes and the forests and of 

course the sand dunes in the Far North. We just want to make 

sure we get it right and not only . . . but when we say we, that 

we really are sensitive to the northerners. Because truly they 

have a right to self-determination and the right to some very . . . 

to a level of economic development that we all aspire to, that 

we all aspire to. But I know that they feel very strongly about 

how the North is protected. 

 

So I didn‟t see that and I do take a look. I do have to ask, what 

role did Environment have in this? This is hugely important 

because if they didn‟t have, then they maybe have to, we have 

to think about back to the drawing board. But if we did have, 

then why isn‟t it out there more in front? Because clearly, I 

can‟t believe that they weren‟t at the table but they didn‟t get a 

space on the minister‟s speech, because I think it‟s very 

important that we do hear, we do hear from Environment‟s 

perspective. 

 

It‟s really a unique circumstance in the North that Environment 

actually holds the Crown lands and is the guardian for the 

ground, Crown lands, the steward. But truly, the northerners 

feel that this is where their economic development lie and they 

look to their leadership for a larger role, probably a larger role 

than say they would in the South. Of course we have in the 

South REDAs, economic development agencies and that type of 

thing. And I‟m not sure what the circumstance is in the North, 

but I think this is really something that they talk about in this 

legislation and that they hope can actually have some reality 

here. 

 

Because if we don‟t do it right, like I say, the first time, it‟s 

really hard to get it back. So it‟s hard to get back the pristine 

nature of the North and it‟s hard though to hold back, especially 

when we‟ve talked about the roads, how important road . . . that 

infrastructure, that is for folks up north. And then along comes 

with it the development. 

 

And you know, one of the biggest issues we‟ve had — and I 

can remember this, and my colleagues would, and I‟m sure the 

current Minister of Environment would know this as well — the 

whole issue around squatters. How are we going to deal with 

squatters? And there is some, I believe that there‟s over 700 

squatters, people who just moved up north and decided to live 

on land that‟s not theirs. Now I‟m not sure of the current 

circumstance, and I‟d be happy to hear, how‟s this going to 

work into this? How are we going to resolve the issue of people 

who‟ve just moved up north? They‟re on land. They‟re squatted 



March 23, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4431 

on land, but what are we going to do? How do they fit into this 

governance model? They may not be of the Métis communities, 

the First Nations community. I‟m not sure about that. But how 

do they deal with that kind of circumstance? That was 

something that the South in terms of how, when they did 

homesteading, they had a different approach to it. So how are 

we going to approach this issue? 

 

And so when we talk about Bill 110, there‟s some really unique 

challenges here that we have in the North and I think that this is 

our opportunity to get it right. And I know that my colleagues 

have talked a lot about this and I‟m glad that they have, because 

it‟s one that is really in many ways a landmark piece of 

legislation, that if we get it right it‟s a wonderful thing. And I 

think the northerners will appreciate that. 

 

But if there‟s some concerns, if they see the inconsistencies like 

we‟ve said between the record checks for the provincial level 

and the municipal level — and first we‟re going to start with the 

northerners — I think there‟s some real concerns about that. I 

think that shows some hypocritical action on the level of this 

government. And I think this is the opportunity where they say, 

hey, did we think through all of this? I don‟t think that was the 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Time to consult. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Yeah, time to consult. I think that‟s an 

unintended consequence. Because people say, so if it‟s good for 

the goose, well it must be good for the gander. So why aren‟t 

we doing that? 

 

We do have another Bill. It‟s called the consequential 

amendments Act. I think we‟re going to be talking about or 

maybe we talked about it just prior to this, would have been the 

place to have that in if we‟re going to do it. But again I would 

have to say, what are the whole ethics behind it? Because as I 

say, many of us see this in different forms. And we talk about 

leadership in our communities. Whether it‟s elective leadership 

or there‟s professional leadership, we‟re looking for new 

benchmarks. But it has to be consistent, has to be consistent, 

because people are wondering . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It should be helpful. It should be helpful 

too. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — It should be very helpful. If it‟s not helpful, I 

think that‟s the key question . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Does it advance the development of this? It‟s very important. Is 

it advancing the leadership, the quality of leadership? It‟s very 

important that we advance the leadership. And I think we have 

an opportunity in Bill 110 to make sure that when we talk about 

local government in northern Saskatchewan that we have the 

best possible leadership. 

 

Clearly the folks in the North, when they have voter turnouts of 

85 or 95 per cent, clearly they‟re feeling pretty darn good about 

their leadership and they‟re engaged. As I said, if only the 

southern folks could get that kind of voter turnout it would be a 

great, great thing. But we don‟t seem to do that. And yet it‟s 

ironic that we feel the need to have criminal record checks. And 

I understand it was the northerners who had asked for this and I 

think that it‟s quite appropriate to listen to them. 

Now I think that it‟s . . . I know we‟re getting close to 5 o‟clock 

here, but I do have a few more things to say and I don‟t want to 

lose just how important the Ministry of Environment is here on 

this. And I do want to talk a little further about that because I 

think it is key, from my experience anyways, that we have some 

information about, how do they feel about? How do . . . Again 

the interface with Environment, the ministry in all its different 

places in terms of the lands branch, protected areas, this, you 

know, the economic development, whether it‟s forestry or 

whether it‟s oil sands. 

 

And of course the issue really then becomes around getting it 

right right off the bat, that whole thing, and developing 

capacity. I know particularly around the hunting issue is hugely 

important, hugely important, especially with the Métis 

communities. How are we making sure that this legislation, 

when we look at northern municipalities, that that fits, that fits? 

Because for us in the South it may be a different . . . I was going 

to say a different kettle of fish, and maybe it is. I think it is 

actually. 

 

But clearly the northerners need and expect and rightfully 

deserve the capacity to breathe life into Bill 110, An Act 

respecting Local Government in Northern Saskatchewan. I 

think it‟s critical, it‟s absolutely critical that when we see the 

budget tomorrow that we see some resources to breathe life into 

Bill 110. It‟s really about the capacity, the tools, and the 

resources to make this a reality. We‟ve seen too many times 

when we‟ve seen consultation in the North and hopes have risen 

and they‟ve been dashed because there just hasn‟t been the 

resources to make it happen. But I . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Being now 5 p.m., this Assembly is recessed 

until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4401 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4401 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4401 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4401 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4401 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4402 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4402 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4402 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4402 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4402 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4402 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4402 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4402 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4403 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4403 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4403 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4403 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4404 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4404 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4404 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4404 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4405 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4405 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4405 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

  Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel ................................................................................................................................ 4405 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Spring Free From Racism 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4405 

 Population Trends 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4405 

 New Spa Offers Natural Products 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4406 

 Paralympic Athletes’ Achievements 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4406 

 Answering Questions 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4406 

 Additional Child Care Spaces Opened 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4406 

 Buyer’s Remorse 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4407 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Revenue Sharing 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4407 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4407 

 Film Industry Issues 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4408 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4408 

 Treatment of Government Employees 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4409 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4409 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4409 

 Selection of a Chief Electoral Officer 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4410 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4410 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 School Capital Projects 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4412 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4412 

 



 

MOTION UNDER RULE 59 

 Public Access to Information Regarding Tommy Douglas  

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4413 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4414 

  Yates (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................. 4414 

  D’Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 4414 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 133 — The Tobacco Control Amendment Act, 2009 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4415 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 4418 

 Bill No. 97 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2009 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4418 

  Gantefoer (referral to committee) ......................................................................................................................................... 4420 

 Bill No. 109 — The Municipalities Amendment Act, 2009 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4420 

 Bill No. 110 — The Northern Municipalities Act, 2009 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4426 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


