




















































Hansard: November 29, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 18A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 29, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6245 

 November 29, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 

make an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has asked for leave for 

an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 

Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 

introduce to you and through you to this House a group of 

people seated in your gallery. Later today I will be introducing 

an Act to amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. The 

amendments are intended to modernize the Code, making it 

easier to use and reducing delays. 

 

Our guests are here today who all have an interest in human 

rights and in this particular piece of legislation. They are Chief 

Commissioner of the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission 

Judge David Arnot and three of his staff; Chief Guy Lonechild 

of the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations]. As 

you may recall, the well-respected Elder, Senator Hilliard 

McNab was one of the commissioners of the Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Commission. FSIN‟s long-standing commitment 

to human rights issues continues today with the support of 

Chief Lonechild. 

 

From the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan, Karen Lerat; 

representatives of the Aboriginal Coalition of Saskatchewan, 

led by President Kim Beaudin; Harry Lafond from the Treaty 

Commissioner‟s office; David Katzman, past president of B‟nai 

B‟rith; Machdum Bachtiar, president of the Islamic Association 

of Saskatchewan; Leonard Doell of the Mennonite Central 

Committee; Rhonda Rosenberg and Mary Chan of the 

Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan; Ashfaque Ahmed of 

the International Women of Saskatoon; Reggie Newkirk and 

Carol Lafayette-Boyd of the Saskatchewan African-Canadian 

history museum; Margaret Fern and Dave Nelson of the 

Canadian Mental Health Association; Amy MacNeil and Lynne 

Demeule of the Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitative 

Centres; Shelly Kemp of the Learning Disabilities Association 

of Saskatchewan; Karen Moore of the Saskatchewan Abilities 

Council; and Michael Richter and Jill Arkels from the South 

Saskatchewan Independent Living Centre; Joanne Horsley from 

the Avenue Community Centre for Gender and Sexual 

Diversity; Blair Shumlich and Eric Twa from the University of 

Saskatchewan‟s Students‟ Union Pride Centre; Perry Erhardt, 

president of the Canadian Bar Association; Brian Chalmers, 

president of the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce, and John 

Hopkins, CEO [chief executive officer] of the Regina Chamber 

of Commerce; Norm Dray and Cathy Mills from the 

Saskatchewan Educational Leadership Unit; and from Regina 

Catholic schools, Joanna Landry, Kathy Trudelle, and the grade 

7 and 8 class of St. Francis School. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members of the Assembly 

to join me in welcoming our guests to the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of Her 

Majesty‟s Loyal Opposition, I want to join with the minister in 

welcoming these defenders and proponents of human rights in 

the province of Saskatchewan. When people are not the victims 

of discrimination and prejudice outright, Mr. Speaker, they‟re 

often the victims of complacency on the part of those of us who 

find ourselves in the majority in an increasingly diverse society. 

 

The people who defend members of minorities and individuals 

against discrimination and prejudice and against our 

complacency, those of us who see the world as fair and just on a 

regular basis need to be, I think, reminded that many do not see 

the world as fair and just on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker. And the 

guests that are in the gallery today should be thanked more 

often than today for their work in this area. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways, the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to this Assembly, I‟d like to introduce a 

couple of constituents in your gallery. Brad Blackwell and Troy 

Atkinson are on the board of directors of West Central Road 

and Rail, doing great things in the west central part of the 

province. I had the opportunity to meet with them this morning 

and have lunch, and I‟d ask all members to please give them a 

warm welcome to their Assembly. Give us a wave, guys. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the east gallery I 

would like to introduce today three doctors from the residency 

program in Saskatchewan: Dr. Mathew Abraham, Dr. Daniel 

Kozan, and Dr. Mark Burbridge. They‟re here today to watch 

the proceedings, and I‟d like everyone to give them a warm 

welcome to the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, seated in the east gallery, an 

individual with the Canadian Foodgrains Bank, Dr. Addmore 

Makunura, who has a master‟s degree from Leeds university in 

England. He‟s also with Christian Care Zimbabwe. He is here 

for a special meeting conference with the United Church. I want 

to welcome you here, sir, and enjoy your stay in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 



6246 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2010 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I join with the 

Attorney General in welcoming all of the folks that have 

gathered in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, but in so doing, I 

specifically want to draw the Assembly‟s attention and request 

that they again welcome David Arnot, who is doing great work 

on behalf of the province at the Human Rights Commission. 

Mr. Speaker, of course he served Saskatchewan and the country 

well as the Treaty Commissioner here in the province. And we 

want to acknowledge his good work and the good work of his 

team and all those who have gathered today to watch an 

important development with respect to the Human Rights 

Commission. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have one 

more group of individuals I would like to introduce. These are 

ministry officials from the Labour Relations and Workplace 

Safety. I‟d like to ask them to stand up so they can be 

recognized. These individuals met with me earlier at an event to 

recognize their work on developing the young worker readiness 

certificate course. This was a program that was developed by 

my predecessor, the member for Saskatoon Greystone. The 

work is now a completed program, is operational, and I‟m 

willing to take credit for his work. 

 

The individuals are Marlene Smale, Wayne Tiefenbach, Guy 

Richards, Vicki Pappas, Carole Sedgwick, Shelley Burwood, 

Bill Stovin, Zamira Vincenzino Heth, Charles Eisbrenner, Glen 

Brooman, and Laverne Moskal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, I‟d like to 

welcome Sandra Fowler, sitting in the east gallery. 

 

Sandra pops up at many events. She is active in . . . I would 

have a hard time counting all the organizations she‟s active in 

and has been for many years. But she‟s a contributing member 

of, I know, our community in Moose Jaw and beyond that, 

being that she doesn‟t live right in Moose Jaw. But I‟m glad 

Sandra‟s taken the afternoon out of her busy schedule to join us 

here and would ask all members to welcome her. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for First 

Nations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I want to join with the Premier and the Attorney 

General and the opposition critic. I recognize many First 

Nations and Métis, the leaders, in the gallery today. And I want 

to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly and talk about 

the great relationship that we have with First Nations and Métis 

people in this province. And I know all members take the 

opportunity to work with them and to learn. There are some 

challenges but, Mr. Speaker, we‟re making great progress. So 

on behalf of all members, I‟d like to welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you I would like to introduce the president of the Greater 

Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce — I‟m having trouble 

speaking here this morning here — the president of the 

Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce. That would be President 

Brian Chalmers, who the opposition had the opportunity to 

meet this summer and continues to stay connected. And we will 

continue to work and to have a positive working relationship to 

make sure that all people in Saskatchewan have what we need 

to make sure that this province continues to grow. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. I‟d like everyone to welcome Brian to his 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — I‟d like to join the minister, to you and 

through you, Mr. Speaker, and join the minister with 

welcoming some of the First Nation leadership, also the Métis 

leaders that we have in the Speaker‟s gallery. I‟d just like to 

welcome you to your legislature. It‟s important that you‟re here. 

You have a strong voice. And with the respect that you deserve, 

it is an honour to be here with you. And I welcome you, and I 

hope that today we move forward recognizing the differences 

that we have, but we can work together. I just want to welcome 

you, the efforts of all of you, and welcome you to your 

legislature. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I‟d also like to join the 

Minister of Labour in welcoming the people working on the 

young worker readiness course. It‟s an important course, and 

it‟s important work that they do. And in recognition of that, 

safety starts very early, Mr. Speaker. And I‟d ask all members 

to welcome these people to their legislature. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of concerned citizens across Saskatchewan who 

are concerned about the steady deterioration of the safety of our 

highways. And this petition, Mr. Speaker, is from the good 

folks in Fort Qu‟Appelle. And I‟ll read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray your honourable 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing lanes 

on Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu‟Appelle and the 

junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety for 

Saskatchewan‟s motoring public. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from Fort 

Qu‟Appelle, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 



November 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6247 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan renters who are 

facing a combination of rising rents and low vacancy rates in 

many communities across the province, and that many of these 

renters have suffered rental increases in the hundreds of dollars 

each, and that we all know that a majority of provinces now 

have rent control guidelines, Mr. Speaker, and that the 

argument that private market will deliver sufficient affordable 

housing in the absence of rent control has proven to be false. 

And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to consider enacting some form of rent 

control with the view to protecting Saskatchewan renters 

from unreasonable increases in rent. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I present on behalf of concerned citizens. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to present a 

petition from the residents of the province of Saskatchewan 

who wish to bring to our attention that many Saskatchewan 

seniors live on fixed incomes and are victims of physical, 

emotional, and financial abuse and that Saskatchewan citizens 

have a right to social and economic security and a right to live 

free from poverty, that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors‟ bill of rights, which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

And the over 50 signatures, Mr. Speaker, today are from the 

communities of Lashburn, Lloydminster, Battleford, North 

Battleford, Colonsay, Jansen, and Lanigan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 

rise to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. And we 

know that Saskatchewan‟s income gap between the rich and the 

poor continues to grow, and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. I‟d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing the petition come from 

the cities of Regina and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that calls for expanded hospice and palliative 

care in the province of Saskatchewan: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: that all Saskatchewan people deserve quality 

end-of-life and bereavement care; that hospice and 

palliative care is known to help enhance the quality of life 

for those facing advancing illness, death, and 

bereavement; that a publicly funded and administered 

hospice and palliative care system including residential 

hospices would increase end-of-life care options for 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

cause the provincial government to enhance and increase 

publicly funded and administered hospice and palliative 

care including in-home hospice services and residential 

hospices in order to ensure that all Saskatchewan people 

have access to high-quality end-of-life care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present a petition from Furdale residents. A government 

ministry has directed Sask Water to cut off supplies of water for 

domestic use to the Furdale customers. This same government 

ministry has directed that customers may no longer treat 

non-potable water using methods approved by Sask Health. 

 

The Furdale residents, in dealing in good faith with Sask Water 

for over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their domestic 

systems and in-home treatment equipment as well as for 

livestock irrigation lines, and that the alternative water supply 

referred to by government ministry is a private operator offering 

treated, non-pressurized water at great cost with no guarantee of 

quality, quantity, or availability of water. And the prayer reads 

as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 



6248 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2010 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Saskatoon and Furdale. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again, 

once again here today to present petitions on behalf of 

concerned residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to 

the unprecedented mismanagement of our finances by the Sask 

Party. They reference the two consecutive deficit budgets, the 

billions of dollars of debt growth, both accruing at this point in 

time and the $4.2 billion over the next four years under the 

unsustainable plan of the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. We all know 

this comes at a cost and consequence to Saskatchewan people, 

all at a time where revenues have been at all-time highs, Mr. 

Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned citizens of 

Regina Rosemont, of Arcola, and of Carlyle. I so submit. Thank 

you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Thank You, Roughriders 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night, all of 

Saskatchewan watched on as the Saskatchewan Roughriders 

played in another exciting Grey Cup. While the outcome of this 

game was not the desired one, this great team delivered a 

riveting season of football. Yes, Mr. Speaker, this team united 

Saskatchewan under the banner of green and white. The season 

had its ups and downs, its wins and its losses. Yet through all 

that, the Rider season was bookended with two great matches 

between our Roughriders and the Montreal Alouettes. 

 

One Rider fan admitted quite candidly to the effect that the 

Riders having by saying it has been a very stressful season for 

me, I am sure almost every other Rider fan. We feel their pain 

when they lose, and we‟re right there with them when they win. 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, a 21-18 loss was hard to swallow, but 

thankfully Rider fans are a determined and dedicated bunch. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, it is expected that the legions of Rider fans 

will congregate at Mosaic Stadium this afternoon, as this will be 

a prime opportunity for fans to welcome their team home from 

Edmonton. 

 

So to the Saskatchewan Roughriders and their fans, I want to 

thank you for another great season. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Rider Pride 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the 2010 CFL [Canadian 

Football League] season has come to an end, and although the 

outcome of the Grey Cup in Edmonton yesterday didn‟t end up 

quite as we hoped, the Riders did not leave their fans 

disappointed. Once again, Mr. Speaker, the Riders allowed 

Rider Nation and its fans all across Canada to be engaged with 

the CFL football season in cheering for the Riders right through 

to the final game being the Grey Cup. 

 

Yesterday‟s game was another nail-biter which had the 13th 

man on his feet, cheering and supporting the efforts on the field. 

Mr. Speaker, there were 63,317 spectators on hand at 

Commonwealth Stadium, and it‟s estimated that 45,000 were 

fans supporting the Riders. Coach Ken Miller said that when he 

finally had the opportunity to look around, “It was mostly a 

green sea.” That speaks to how proud Rider Nation is of its 

beloved Riders. 

 

Not only did the Riders make us proud on the field, Mr. 

Speaker, but off the field as well. This team presents itself well 

in public and contributes greatly to the community, plus the 

support the players have for each other is evident as well, Mr. 

Speaker. Our Rider song says it all, “We‟ve got that Rider 

Pride”, and there are many good reasons for it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the members of the legislature, on 

behalf of Rider fans in Saskatchewan and all across the country, 

I‟d like to extend a collective thank you to the Rider coaches, 

the Rider administration and volunteers, and especially our 

Saskatchewan Roughrider football players. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

2010 Saskatchewan Book Awards  

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 

weekend the winners of the 2010 Sask Book Awards were 

announced at a wonderful gala attended by hundreds of book 

lovers. Fourteen awards were presented to authors, publishers, 

and designers. 

 

David Carpenter won the Book of the Year for his book A 

Hunter’s Confession. Alexandra Popoff won both the Saskatoon 

Book Award and the Non-Fiction Award for her book Sophia 

Tolstoy: A Biography. The Regina Book Award was Dianne 

Warren‟s Cool Water. The Fiction Award went to Sandra 

Birdsell for her novel Waiting for Joe. First Book Award, Amy 

Jo Ehman for Prairie Feast: A Writer’s Journey Home for 

Dinner. Sounds like my kind of book. 

 

Scholarly Writing Award, Margaret Kovach for her book 

Indigenous Methodologies: Characteristics, Conversations, and 

Contexts. The First Peoples‟ Writing Award went to Jo-Ann 

Episkenew for Taking Back Our Spirits: Indigenous Literature, 

Public Policy, and Healing. The Award for Poetry was won by 

Dave Margoshes for Dimensions of an Orchard. The Young 



November 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6249 

Adult Literature Award went to Arthur Slade for The Dark 

Deeps: The Hunchback Assignments II. The Prix du livre 

français was won by Martine Noël-Maw for Dans le pli des 

collines. Purish Publishing won awards for their book written 

by First Peoples and for education publishing. Hagios Press 

won for Fallout by Sandra Ridley. 

 

Our congratulations to all the award winners and to all who 

were nominated. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Provincial Debt 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s fair to say that 

Saskatchewan families and businesses know what debt is and 

they understand its consequences. Whether it‟s on a credit line 

or a credit card, debt is debt. With the release of the financial 

update, the Sask Party is spinning the numbers in all directions. 

But the fact is debt is up in a big way. 

 

The Minister of Finance said last week that he was not 

concerned about this massive increase to debt. He tried to spin 

it as Crown debt, failing to mention that they have raided 

almost $1.3 billion from the Crowns over the past two years 

alone to cover off for their unsustainable budgets. This is 

offside with Saskatchewan people, businesses, and communities 

that have worked so hard and sacrificed to save us from 

insolvency and to set us on a very positive financial path. That 

positive trend has shamefully been tossed in reverse by the Sask 

Party government. 

 

Last year, a Leader-Post columnist characterized the Sask Party 

debt increase as, I quote, “The biggest rise in public debt we‟ve 

seen since the Grant Devine days.” That was a year ago, but the 

debt loading continues with the Sask Party adding an additional 

$448 million of debt alone in this year. Further, they plan to 

increase our debt by $4.2 billion over the next four years, 

representing a size of 55 per cent in increase. And this does not 

count the hundreds of millions of dollars of debt this 

government is hiding off the balance sheet, debt that taxpayers 

are ultimately on the hook for. This record of financial 

mismanagement has consequences from power bills to health 

care. Saskatchewan people, businesses, and communities 

simply deserve better, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Santa Claus Parade in Moose Jaw 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, on Saturday 

evening the main street of Moose Jaw was lit with Christmas 

lights and festive decor, and the atmosphere was filled with 

Christmas music while people lined the streets to watch the 

Santa Claus parade. The Santa Claus parade has become a 

tradition in Moose Jaw, held in the evening to catch the 

brilliance of the lights along with the Christmas carols and of 

course Santa Claus himself. 

 

The parade marched down Main to Stadacona Street where the 

official lights-on ceremony was held in front of Fifth Avenue 

Collection. As the lights were turned on at Fifth Avenue 

jewellery location, a collective ah went through the crowd when 

the amazing display of lights lit up the sky. Thousands of lights 

and a dozen displays illuminated the scene to the applause of 

the crowd. 

 

To top off the celebration, hot chocolate and cookies were 

served by the Member of Parliament, the mayor, the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow, and I. However the real highlight 

was when Santa Claus and Mrs. Claus entered the room to chat 

with the children who sat on Santa‟s knee to tell their favourite 

Christmas wishes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a special thank you to the Moose Jaw 

Times-Herald and the Moose Jaw Kinsmen Club for organizing 

the Santa Claus parade which officially marks the start of the 

Christmas season in Moose Jaw. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

La Ronge Supports Food Bank 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the La Ronge Elks Club 

members deserve recognition for all the community support 

work that they do. Just one example of their efforts, Mr. 

Speaker, is the recent food drive conducted by the club in 

support for the La Ronge food bank. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the club members visited the communities of Air 

Ronge, La Ronge, going door to door soliciting food donations 

for the food bank as well as encouraging all the town businesses 

to donate either cash or food items. In partnership with La 

Ronge Ice Wolves hockey team, Cameco, Conexus Credit 

Union, the club also raised over $6,000. It goes without saying, 

Mr. Speaker, that all this good work would not have ever been 

possible were it not for the generosity and goodwill of 

community members of Air Ronge, La Ronge and area, and all 

of those who have contributed to this worthwhile cause. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all the members of the Elks Club 

for the excellent work that they do all year round. Mr. Speaker, 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating La Ronge Elks 

Club, all the community volunteers who helped out, and all the 

businesses that donated to these families in their time of need. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Battle of the Blades Contestant Thanked 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

earlier this session I had the opportunity to speak about a 

constituent of mine. Former NHL [National Hockey League] 

player Kelly Chase was a tough, physical player known as an 

enforcer on the ice. Kelly played for both the Saskatoon Blades 

and the Peoria Rivermen before joining St. Louis Blues in 1988. 

 

In 2008 he received the Jack Buck Award for his enthusiasm 

and his dedication to sports in St. Louis. He‟s been a St. Louis 

alumni for the last 22 years, and a three-time winner of the 

Mayors Award for his city involvement. 

 

Though he is renowned for his charity work in St. Louis and his 



6250 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2010 

hometown of Porcupine Plain, Kelly has not forgotten about his 

province. His tremendous work and dedication as a contestant 

in the Battle of the Blades introduced him to a larger audience. 

And I know that I can speak for the majority of Saskatchewan 

people when I say we were disappointed he wasn‟t the overall 

winner. 

 

But on the night of December 10th, at a special Saskatoon 

Blades game, Kelly will donate his $25,000 Battle of the Blades 

prize money to the Children‟s Hospital Foundation of 

Saskatchewan. I would like all members of this Assembly to 

recognize Kelly Chase for his incredible contributions to our 

province. Thank you, Kelly, for continuing to be a great mentor 

and a star. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Before I call for oral questions, I just want to 

remind our guests that we‟re really pleased to have you in the 

galleries, but we ask the guests not to participate in any form in 

the debate. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 

 

Contract Negotiations and Supply of Physicians 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of 

Health or the Premier, and it deals with the doctor shortage in 

the province of Saskatchewan. By the government‟s own 

website, there are 120 vacancies for doctors in the province. 

That‟s up by 40 per cent since this government was elected. 

And at that, we have the case where resident physicians are 

without contract for now going into the . . . or at least two years. 

 

Given the fact that these are the men and women who will 

ultimately hopefully fill those positions, can the minister 

indicate when and how he intends to bring about a resolve to 

this issue that‟s been outstanding now for two years? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, first of all we want to make sure that all people in 

the province know that physician recruitment and retention is 

priority number one for our government. We‟ve worked very 

hard in the first three years. Certainly more work to do. We 

absolutely know that there is more work to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what I would say is that we would not ever go back to the 

day when the College of Medicine went under probation, 

almost lost under the NDP [New Democratic Party]. We would 

never go back to the day when the College of Medicine was 

only 60 seats, Mr. Speaker. We‟re increasing that up to 100. 

We‟ll never go back to the day when, under the opposition 

when they were in government, we only had 60 residency 

positions in this province, 60 residencies. We‟ve increased that 

up to 120. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I realize that negotiations are going on right now 

between PAIRS [Professional Association of Internes and 

Residents of Saskatchewan] and the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan], Mr. Speaker. Those negotiations are working, 

Mr. Speaker. I hope that an agreement comes to fruition in the 

very near future, Mr. Speaker, not only with PAIRS but also the 

SMA [Saskatchewan Medical Association]. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, doctors in the province are 

now without a contract since April of 2009, and resident 

physicians for the last two years. Now it may be true that 

there‟s an increase in the number of men and women being 

trained, but the question is and the problem is the increase in 

doctor vacancies in the province, up by 40 per cent. The 

taxpayers are losing twice. One, they‟re paying for more people 

to be trained in medicine, but fewer and fewer are staying in the 

province. That‟s the problem. 

 

And the question to the minister and to the Premier is this: 

when will these two contracts be solved so that doctor shortages 

start going in the right direction? That‟s fewer openings in the 

province instead of more and more communities without 

doctors. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, our physician 

recruitment strategy has been put in place over the last year and 

a half. I think it‟s working very well, Mr. Speaker, as we move 

forward. First of all, priority number one is, train more of our 

own Saskatchewan residents. Job done, Mr. Speaker. Number 

two is make sure that we retain more of those physicians. And 

that is certainly happening. Contrary to what the Opposition 

Leader just said, that we‟re losing most of our physicians, that 

is not true. We are increasing the retention of our graduating 

physicians and residents in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would shone light on the fact that in 

Saskatchewan we are the only provincial government that is 

covering the student loan portion of postgraduate residents, Mr. 

Speaker, in this province — done nowhere else. In fact talking 

to a few residents that were in Swift Current through the 

distributive education model, they said that was the very reason 

why they stayed in this province. Mr. Speaker, a policy of this 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the resident physicians 

obviously don‟t agree with the minister. Here we have petitions 

signed by 225 of the individuals he refers to. And in the petition 

they say, and I quote, “We, the residents and medical students 

of Saskatchewan, are very alarmed that the employment 

contract for resident physicians has not been resolved.” 

 

The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that many of these young 

men and women who want to stay in this province, who are 

trained and paid by the taxpayers of the province, are being 

lured away because they‟re respected and appreciated in other 

parts of Canada more than they are in their home province. And 

that is because they don‟t have a contract. 

 

They work long hours, more than they have to in any other 

province, many times in unsafe conditions. When will the 



November 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6251 

minister come to his senses and get this contract signed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I need to correct some 

of the facts from the Opposition Leader, Mr. Speaker. First of 

all, in rural Saskatchewan since we have taken over 

government, the number of physicians in rural Saskatchewan 

have increased 6 per cent. In urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

they‟ve increased 8 per cent. Mr. Speaker, the number of 

physicians working today in Saskatchewan are far greater than 

ever under the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I understand that negotiations that drag on can be 

frustrating, and we want to see a conclusion to those 

negotiations. I would say, absolutely through the SMA and 

PAIRS we hope that the negotiations conclude as quickly as 

they possibly can, which is good for both parties and, more 

importantly, good for patients. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The lawyer Rod 

Donlevy, who negotiated the Amicus deal, is the brother of the 

Premier‟s chief of staff, Joe Donlevy. Another brother, Urb 

Donlevy, is now the project manager of Amicus. The $27 

million building contract was awarded without tender to Miners 

Construction, whose president has donated almost $19,000 to 

the Sask Party in recent years. And the Minister of Justice‟s 

brother was awarded an electrical contract by Miners 

Construction. 

 

To the minister: surely even he can see that all of these 

connections constitute a conflict of interest. What is his 

government prepared to do about it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we see that 

for many years under the former government all we saw was, 

really, bed closures. Fifty-two hospitals closed, Mr. Speaker, 

chasing hundreds of health care workers out of this province. 

We also saw a number of long-term care beds close in this 

province under their watch, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Under the Saskatchewan Party, we‟re seeing 100 new beds on 

top of the complement of beds we already have. Mr. Speaker, 

those are the first beds on top of the complement that have been 

built in this province for . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s the first time we‟re 

seeing new beds put into the system for many, many years. And 

we saw in an article today, as recently as today, Mr. Speaker, in 

Saskatoon Health Region the need for new long-term care beds 

to get people out of our acute care setting. Mr. Speaker, we‟re 

getting it done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, nobody disputes the need for 

long-term care beds, but the minister should focus on the 

question. It‟s about conflict of interest. The minister complains 

about the opposition making allegations, but Saskatchewan 

people have a right to ask questions when contracts are awarded 

to major donors and immediate family members of the 

Premier‟s chief of staff. That‟s particularly the case when the 

government has gone out of its way to censor virtually all of the 

information that would allow the public to judge for themselves 

whether there are any conflicts of interest. 

 

To the minister: if he has nothing to hide, will he agree today to 

a full, open, transparent, and independent investigation of the 

Amicus affair with a view to determining whether any member 

of the government is in a conflict of interest? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I think they‟re trying to 

draw a bow from a electrical contract that was awarded through 

a tendering process, Mr. Speaker, a fair tendering process, 

where the lowest bidder was $140,000 lower than any other bid, 

Mr. Speaker. It might have . . . He is a brother to the Minister of 

Justice, Mr. Speaker. But I would say that the opposition 

seemed to know where that bid was granted to before the 

Justice minister‟s brother even knew, Mr. Speaker. No conflict 

there whatsoever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a good deal for Saskatchewan seniors, 

especially those living in acute care centres that shouldn‟t be 

living in such setting. They‟ll be able to live in appropriate 

settings at the end of their lives, the last number of months or 

years of their life, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — [Inaudible] . . . nothing to hide, then lift the 

blackout; open up the document. And, Mr. Speaker, if the rules 

allow contracts to be awarded without tender to major 

Saskatchewan Party donors, Mr. Speaker, then those rules need 

to be changed. And if freedom of information legislation allows 

the provincial government to prevent virtually all of the relevant 

information from being made public, then those rules need to be 

changed as well. 

 

We need to ensure that where taxpayers‟ money is on the line, 

contracts are properly tendered, full public disclosure of the 

decision-making process is provided, and processes are in place 

to avoid even the appearance of a conflict of interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he agree to changes to the 

conflict of interest rules and FOI [freedom of information] 

legislation to prevent future conflicts of interest of this kind and 

to ensure full public disclosure of all the relevant details of the 

Amicus deal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



6252 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2010 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting that they 

would want the policies changed when under their government, 

when a sound stage was awarded, Mr. Speaker, phase no. 1 was 

not tendered, phase no. 2 was not tendered, phase no. 3 was not 

tendered, Mr. Speaker. It was a sole . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I‟d ask the 

opposition members to allow the minister to respond to the 

question. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Regina . . . 

Member. The member from Regina Walsh Acres. The minister 

. . . Order. The Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the sound stage was a 

sole source awarding through the former government, Mr. 

Speaker, and now they want to have the rules changed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a situation where the Catholic Health 

Ministry are building a long-term care facility that we will be 

leasing from, Mr. Speaker. They are building a long-term care 

facility. They awarded the contract after interviewing a number 

of contractors in the Saskatoon area. They interviewed a 

number of contractors in the Saskatoon area. There is only one 

contractor that would have a fixed-price contract, Mr. Speaker. 

That contractor was chosen, not because of any ties with the 

Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Contracts With Information Technology Office 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 2009-2010, 

Common Sense Consulting received a contract of over 

$216,000 from the Information Technology Office. William 

McMorris, an executive director with ITO, is the president of 

Common Sense Consulting. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, an executive director‟s salary is between $90,000 

and $100,000 a year, but the Sask Party‟s paying a consulting 

firm double that to do the same job. To the minister: is that the 

Sask Party government‟s definition of efficiency? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We had 

these same questions last week. I was able to share with the 

members of the Chamber that William McMorris is a 30-year 

veteran in the IT [information technology] fields. He comes 

from a background in Calgary and in Saskatchewan. He was 

brought on as a contractor in three-month terms, Mr. Speaker. 

His term is renewed at the end of three months if his skills are 

still required and he‟s still adding value to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If the member, if the member opposite wants to smear 

contractors, Mr. Speaker, people of the public service, for 

political gain, Mr. Speaker, that is their prerogative. But this 

member, this individual was hired because he‟s a talented IT 

professional, for specific tasks, Mr. Speaker, in the ITO. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Well, Mr. Speaker, not a member of the 

public service. That‟s the point. If he was a member of the 

public service, he‟d be paying $90,000 a year. Now according 

to the minister, his company is paid $216,000 for three months, 

Mr. Speaker. If this is the Sask Party‟s definition of efficiency, 

it was probably a good idea to get rid of the efficiency 

secretariat. It was just a waste of money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is cutting the public service, which 

the minister seems to want to defend, by 4 per cent each year 

for the next four years. But now they‟re giving out contracts 

that cost double what it costs to pay the same civil servants, or 

triple, if the minister is correct on his math today. 

 

How does the minister rationalize spending double or triple to 

get the same work done? How do Saskatchewan people benefit 

from this kind of Saskatchewan Party math? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the 

members opposite are worried about, Mr. Speaker, efficiency, I 

think, I think something, Mr. Speaker, that those members 

would be very interested in is the use of consultants and 

contractors in the ITO. When our government took over the 

ITO, took over government, Mr. Speaker, three short years ago, 

80 contractors were in the employ of the ITO, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we are currently, Mr. Speaker, at about, about 41 

contractors, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Contractors have their place in the IT fields, Mr. Speaker. 

There‟s a certain skill set which we bring, brings value to the 

people of Saskatchewan. This happens to be one of those, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This individual, Mr. Speaker, for the members opposite, I 

would like to again confirm, this individual is not related to 

anyone on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. His last name 

may be the same, Mr. Speaker, but there is no connection, 

relation, friend, hockey colleague, Mr. Speaker. That is the 

facts. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Facts. Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not sure about 

the facts and I‟m not sure about the math. I have here the list 

from Public Accounts for the last two years before the 

government changed in 2007. There are not 80 contracts in total 

with ITO in either one of those years, and I‟m not sure where 

the minister is getting his numbers from. 

 

The math that‟s more troubling, Mr. Speaker, is the math on 



November 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6253 

payment for services because we replaced a $90,000 executive 

director with a over 200,000, maybe over $300,000 a year 

consulting firm, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is paying double or triple the cost 

to get the same work done just to artificially reduce the size of 

the ITO office. The minister said that there are 41 consultants 

that have been given contracts to do ITO work, Mr. Speaker, 

under the Saskatchewan Party government. Saskatchewan 

people are paying more — and by the minister‟s math, more 

than twice — to get the same job done. 

 

To the minister: how much have each of these 41 contracts cost 

to the people of Saskatchewan, and will the minister provide 

that information today? 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, that member will know 

that Public Accounts reflect any contract over $50,000, Mr. 

Speaker. It also might be the case, Mr. Speaker, that multiple 

contractors are contracted from the same IT firm, either in 

Saskatchewan or outside of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are certainly aware that the 

ITO, it provides great service to the people of Saskatchewan, to 

the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. When this 

individual was brought on, Mr. Speaker, different ministries 

were looking for IT solutions outside of government, outside of 

the ITO. This individual, Mr. Speaker, his contract, he was 

brought in to focus the ITO‟s values, Mr. Speaker, to bring the 

client ministries online. 

 

He did that very successfully, Mr. Speaker. And he is currently 

engaged, his current contract, Mr. Speaker, is leading 

improvements within the ITO on application maintenance, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is the largest ITO work unit. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, it wasn‟t my argument that the 

absolute number of contracts made a difference. That was the 

minister‟s argument, that 41 contracts are better than 81 

contracts. Now, well they were small contracts so they don‟t 

matter, Mr. Minister. They don‟t matter, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fact is that now we have, the minister says, 41 contracts 

where we may be paying individuals two or three times what 

we would be paying somebody from the public service. This 

makes ITO smaller but more expensive, Mr. Speaker. Will the 

minister table the details of those 41 contracts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ve been through this 

with the members opposite. This individual is a highly skilled, 

highly trained . . . a long career, Mr. Speaker, in IT. We‟ve 

brought him in, Mr. Speaker, to do some specific tasks for the 

ITO, Mr. Speaker. He is accomplishing them. His contract is 

renewed every three months, Mr. Speaker and, as it comes up 

to, Mr. Speaker, the analysis is made whether it‟s an appropriate 

expenditure for the ITO to carry on with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would also like the members opposite . . . We mentioned that 

they, the members opposite, have utilized contractors, Mr. 

Speaker, in their caucus office recently. They‟ve utilized a 

former . . . the campaign manager for the Leader of the 

Opposition, Mr. Speaker, and his company, Points West. And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is documented recently in one of our local 

newspapers. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Support for Affordable Housing 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

government claims to be tackling the housing crisis, but a 

comparison of waiting lists for all types of Sask Housing units 

shows that the waiting lists have doubled overall since the end 

of 2007, when this government was elected. Now more than 

2,300 families and seniors are waiting for public housing. 

That‟s 2,300 families and seniors who are having to go without 

good food, school supplies, and other essentials because they‟re 

spending too much money on rent. And now this government is 

making them wait longer for a more affordable place to live. 

 

To the minister: if her government is doing such a good job, 

why have the waiting lists for housing doubled in just three 

years? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, our government has 

acknowledged that waiting lists can be a challenge when we 

have a growing economy. Right now wait-lists have remained 

stable over the last couple of years. In three out of four of 

Saskatchewan‟s largest cities, we‟ve actually reduced the 

wait-list. Regina‟s low vacancy rate has created challenges but 

we‟re working hard to alleviate the pressures by rental markets 

by building new units. 

 

We‟ve invested $64 million since November the 7th to open 

over 700 additional affordable units. We have invested $110 

million for 1,250 more units that are in various stages of 

development. To put these numbers in context, Mr. Speaker, in 

the last full year of an NDP government, only 58 complete units 

were built. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are talking about priorities. 

Well we have priorities, and we are looking at them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the stats speak for 

themselves of what this government‟s been doing for the last 

three years. And the waiting lists are growing, and they‟ve 

jacked up the rent in the so-called affordable housing units 

owned by Sask Housing. 



6254 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2010 

To the minister: why is her government raising rents for people 

living in affordable housing units owned by Sask Housing? 

Why is she making a bad situation worse? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

knows or at least he should know that in 2008 we took the 

unprecedented step of indexing the rental supplement, 

automatically adjusting it twice yearly to match any increases in 

the cost of living. We did the same for social assistance shelter 

rates. And taken together, the shelter allowance for people on 

assistance can receive up to 100 per cent of the average market 

rate, and furthermore people with disabilities can receive up to 

110 per cent. And we‟ve increased emergency shelter rates by 

80 per cent and expanded emergency shelter spaces. 

 

Really, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve had to do this to rectify some of the 

neglect . . . [inaudible] . . . people of Saskatchewan because of 

the members opposite. In fact, Mr. Speaker, former Social 

Services minister, Mr. Pringle, said of affordable housing under 

the NDP, he said this issue was not addressed by the previous 

government. 

 

We are addressing this issue, Mr. Speaker, and we‟re going to 

make a difference in it. And it will take some time, but we are 

doing it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the minister may think this is a 

laughing matter when she stands up to speak, but they‟ve been 

doing a lot to hurt the voices of people who are suffering under 

this. 

 

For example, earlier this year they made it more expensive for 

renters of private units who believe that they‟ve been treated 

unfairly to seek justice from the Office of Residential 

Tenancies. And so earlier this year the application fees went up 

from $25 to $50 — a 100 per cent increase at a time of rising 

rents. 

 

Now the minister may not think that‟s a lot of money, but for 

somebody on a fixed income who‟s already maybe using a food 

bank because the rent is too high, this is a lot of money. So why 

is this government making it harder for renters who believe 

they‟re being treated unfairly to seek justice? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 

opposite for the question. The fees are like a number of other 

government fees. They‟ve gone up. They are reflective of the 

cost of operating the office. 

 

There are as usual, with any type of an operation like this, there 

are costs incurred with regard to utility, staff rates, and 

everything else. And the goal is that this, the Residential 

Tenancies office, should come close to operating at a 

break-even basis. The fees had not been raised for a great deal 

of time before that and we felt it was appropriate. It‟s borne by 

a landlord or by a tenant. And, Mr. Speaker, what I would like, 

what I would like to point out to the member opposite is the 

Residential Tenancies office can award costs against the 

unsuccessful party. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve heard a lot of spin 

from the other side but, you know, the overall numbers don‟t 

tell the full story by the number of people in need who are being 

left behind by this government. Rents in social housing units are 

based on a percentage of income and the waiting lists for those 

units have grown even faster than the overall waiting list. 

 

Since the end of 2007, the number of families who are waiting 

for social housing units have grown more than 150 per cent. To 

the minister: what is the minister‟s plan to fix this problem 

immediately? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I have said many times that 

we know there‟s more work to be done in this area, but we have 

done a considerable amount of work. And we know that the 

members opposite, it didn‟t even hit their radar screen until we 

became government. The NDP failed to increase shelter rates 

for 13 out of 16 years they were in power despite the fact that 

there was inflation increases of 30 per cent over that time. They 

also failed to increase the seniors‟ income plan between 1992 

and 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are talking about how 

things are tough. But you know, I just have a quote from the 

Leader of the Opposition. This weekend he made this statement. 

He acknowledged that, “„Exciting times in Saskatchewan,‟ he 

told the Associated Press. „I don‟t want to make it sound like 

there‟s a huge problem there because there just isn‟t.‟” 

 

The Speaker: — I‟d ask members to come to order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 160 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

Amendment Act, 2010 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 160, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

Amendment Act, 2010 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved first 

reading of Bill 160, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 

Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 



November 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6255 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 419 through 449. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers to questions 419 through 449 are 

tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 157 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 157 — The Oil and 

Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I‟m quite pleased to join the debate and certainly talk 

about the Bill being proposed, Bill 157 which is An Act to 

amend The Oil and Gas Conservation Act. And of course this 

Bill will be henceforth known as the oil conservation 

amendment Act, 2010. 

 

I understand from the minister‟s presentation and his notes 

explaining the Bill that this Bill is primarily aimed at 

modernizing its business and regulatory systems that are 

targeted to the energy and resource industries. 

 

And certainly one of the points that he raised, the minister did, 

is the fact that they want to interact with industry, I guess. 

Industry wants to interact with the government on pretty much a 

24-7 basis for their information needs. So industry obviously 

has become flexible and adaptable in the way it receives and 

sends information. And this is one of the components that the 

minister certainly alluded to when he spoke about the value. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he also spoke about some of the manner in which 

they want to deal with some of the oil and gas companies 

primarily. And this is also part and parcel of the New West 

Partnership that he spoke that his leader and his Premier was 

advocating a couple of months ago. And basically again, Mr. 

Speaker, they talk a lot about trying to do a bit of consolidation 

to try and provide a more efficient, transparent, and consistent 

compliance assurance and enforcement process when it comes 

to the oil and gas industry. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I read this information with a lot of interest 

because obviously as a New Democratic Party we are quite 

pleased to work in partnership with the oil and gas sector. And 

certainly I think that was something that we were very proud of 

our record. As you know, Mr. Speaker, when the former NDP 

government was in power, they worked very well with CAPP, 

the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, and they had 

a lot of interaction. They certainly had a lot of meetings and had 

a lot of discussions on how we can improve oil and gas 

development opportunities to our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, by way and by virtue of what they call the 

capital strike in Alberta, when Alberta attempted to try and 

renegotiate some of the royalty structures for the oil and gas 

companies, a lot of the oil and gas companies decided to not 

deal in Alberta any more. And they moved a lot of their 

attention and invested a lot of their capital into Alberta. 

 

[14:30] 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, obviously as the New Democratic 

government at the time under our former Premier Lorne Calvert 

and with the guidance of people like Eric Cline, with people 

like Eldon Lautermilch and Maynard Sonntag and many others, 

they certainly sat down and spoke at great lengths with a 

number of your oil and gas companies to try and see how they 

could actually benefit the people of Saskatchewan at a greater 

and faster pace, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So as a result of some of the royalty structures that we looked at 

at the time — and this Bill certainly alludes to that — the NDP 

party, government at the time certainly sat down and talked at 

great lengths about how they can keep the oil and gas sector 

alive and thriving and creating all kinds of opportunity in 

Saskatchewan as a result of that capital strike that was being 

forced upon Alberta by the oil and gas sector. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously there has been a change in 

direction in Alberta. People are seeing that there‟s . . . I think 

the Alberta government withdrew their argument for a different 

royalty regime. And obviously every issue and every manner 

and every process that we can undertake as a province, it‟s 

important that we look at that and to try and keep the oil and 

gas investment here in our province. 

 

And as we see Alberta basically backing down from its royalty 

hike that they‟re proposing to the oil and gas industry, I think a 

lot of the petroleum producers are now relooking at Alberta and 

saying, well let‟s go back to Alberta because there seems to be a 

greater climate, a greater opportunity for us, and less cost and 

less in challenges and problems for us to operate. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think by virtue of some of the work done 

under the previous NDP government, we have seen oil and gas 

sector just boom in our province. And things were really going 

very well for Saskatchewan. 

 

Now what does this Bill do in relation to that whole notion of 

the oil and gas companies going back to Alberta? Well, Mr. 

Speaker, as the minister alluded to, he was speaking of trying to 

streamline information sharing, working with the oil and gas 

sector on a 24-7 basis — all those efforts and all the steps that 

are being taken. There‟s something that we ought to be fully 



6256 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2010 

aware of, obviously as an opposition, and to see how we can 

also add some possible ideas and certainly how we can support 

the minister in trying to keep as many oil and gas companies in 

the oil and gas sector working and working hard for the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

So that‟s one of the reasons why we have a lot of interest in this 

Bill. It is a complex Bill, there‟s no question about that. And 

there are implications, as we alluded to with some of our own 

speakers, in a number of levels for both industry and industry 

players. Obviously we want to take the time to review the Bill 

and to make sure that we intend to see as much benefit as 

possible in any Bill, when it comes to the oil and gas sector, to 

try and maximize benefits for the oil and gas sector to stay here. 

 

And I remember the words of our former Premier Calvert when 

he says we want to bring the oil and gas industry home to our 

working people in Saskatchewan. And some of that work was 

just amazingly successful. And as a result of that, that‟s where 

some of the boom came into effect prior to 2007. Things were 

really moving along. We‟ve seen a record number of oil wells 

being drilled. We‟ve seen a lot of interest from the oil and gas 

companies. 

 

And in a certain way, there‟s certainly a tribute to our former 

Premier Calvert in a sense that he wanted to attract industry 

here, and you complicate that with the fact that the oil and gas 

sector were also in this bitter fight with the Alberta government 

over the royalty structure. So it is a good way for us as a 

province to benefit. And certainly the oil and gas sector‟s done 

a lot of work in Saskatchewan. And they‟ve certainly put a lot 

of resources into the provincial coffers through the royalty 

scheme that was developed, designed, and implemented by the 

former NDP government. 

 

So when this government took over, I think the message that 

they got quite frankly and very bluntly from the petroleum 

industry is, listen, you know, whatever regime would put the 

royalty scheme in place, don‟t mess with it. Just leave it as it is 

because we think it‟s a good deal for the oil and gas sector. 

We‟re able to invest. We‟re able to thrive. And thus if the oil 

and gas sector can invest and thrive in Saskatchewan, then as a 

province we all win. 

 

So that‟s one of the reasons why we want to make sure that if 

the Bill is going to help industry move forward, then we need to 

take the time to study it and make sure that it does that, and to 

look at any kind of other aspects of the Bill that maybe the 

current government is trying to push through and to make sure 

we watch for that as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I talk about the oil production and the fact 

that under the former NDP government, oil production was 

great. There was a lot of wells being drilled. There was a lot of 

companies doing the exploration. There was lot of people 

working, and the oil and gas sector was in fact quite booming. 

And I remember the Bakken play around the Swift Current area. 

That was a huge find, and people were very, very excited about 

that and as there was other finds as well, Mr. Speaker.  

 

And so when we looked at the whole oil and gas sector, and 

things were moving along very, very well as I mentioned at the 

outset — between the royalty regime put in place by the former 

NDP government, and certainly the resolving capital strike 

against the Alberta government — the oil and gas sector grew 

in the province of Saskatchewan. And again it was a cause and 

effect of both of those efforts, from both of the actions. And 

what I want to point out is that we saw that if we‟re able to 

work closely with that industry, Saskatchewan will be well 

served. 

 

So now when we look at the current government, and certainly 

the current minister proposing Bills, we want to make sure it 

basically does two things. Number one is that they‟re not 

messing with the successful regime that was put in place by the 

former NDP government. And secondly, that they‟re not doing 

anything untoward in terms of trying to forsake, as an example, 

the environmental balance that we have to maintain on many of 

the economic fronts or maybe the human development aspect of 

a certain project. We want to make sure that we benefit and 

maximize the benefit of all people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So any time a Bill comes forward that talks about the oil and 

gas industry, and as much as there may be minor implications, 

we want to take a very, very close look at that and make sure 

things are not being proposed that would harm the industry and 

certainly hurt Saskatchewan overall. 

 

And one would not expect that from a right wing government, 

as people would say out there. But people ought to know that 

(a) it wasn‟t them that designed the royalty scheme. It was the 

former NDP government. And industry is telling them now, 

don‟t mess with the royalty scheme that was set up with the 

former government because it‟s working well. And that‟s one of 

the things that we want to pay attention to. 

 

And a second thing is that in your haste to try and impress 

people with your supposed economic wizardry, don‟t try and 

forsake things like job opportunities. Don‟t try and forsake 

things like the environmental standards that people of 

Saskatchewan want. And that‟s why some of these Bills, Mr. 

Speaker, we pay very, very close attention to. 

 

The challenge we see, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned at the outset, 

when the Sask Party took over there was a lot of oil and gas 

sector development happening all throughout the province. 

People were excited about the opportunity and they said, oh my 

goodness, we hope that this continues. And sadly I‟m sorry to 

say that today now in 2010, we are seeing a reduction in oil 

production, Mr. Speaker. We see a reduction in gas production. 

And, Mr. Speaker, we see a reduction in the amount of wells 

being drilled in our province from 2007. And that is certainly a 

shame to see that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We saw a general reduction or contraction of the economy last 

year in the range of 3.9 per cent after being adjusted after the 

final numbers came in. 

 

So as you look at the oil and gas sector itself, and you‟re seeing 

the reducing investment, you wonder what‟s going on here. And 

that‟s why it‟s important, when I look at some of these Bills that 

are being proposed, that we don‟t let the current government 

mess up some of the work that was done under the previous 

NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the situation where Sask Trends said that 



November 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6257 

Saskatchewan has had no real economic growth since the 

change of government; the improvements in 2008 were a result 

of the inflationary cost of items that consumers had to pay. And 

in fact since then we‟ve seen, as I mentioned at the outset, a 

contraction of the economy. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as always, we look at the certain sectors of 

the economy that would cause some concern. And the oil and 

gas sector itself again is certainly having some challenges as we 

see a reduction in the number of wells being drilled and some of 

the activity throughout Saskatchewan. 

 

So overall we look at the Bill, and we certainly want to make 

sure that this so-called New West Partnership doesn‟t 

compromise our province as well in any way, shape, or form. 

And when the minister alluded this amendment in his particular 

Bill was part and parcel with some of the New West Partnership 

concept that they‟ve been working on, there‟s a lot of concern 

with the New West Partnership. 

 

So this is where I think people out there ought to know that any 

time you have a connection to a new initiative that people are 

not certain what the initiative or the New West Partnership‟s all 

about, then it‟s only fair and it‟s only reasonable that we ask for 

that information and see how the implications and how it 

interacts with this particular Bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that there‟s, as I mentioned 

there‟s a lot of complex issue with this Bill, the breadth and 

depth of the changes. It‟s going to take us some time to do all 

the required consultation with a lot of the individuals out there, 

the associations. I understand that we‟re also kind of being 

registered under the Alberta oil and gas registry, which is in 

some cases may be fine, but we want to know what implication 

that has as well. And these are some of the questions I think we 

want to make sure that we get before we proceed with moving 

this Bill through the House from our role as opposition. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn the debate on Bill 157, 

The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010. I adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 157. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 158 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert that Bill No. 158 — The 

Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a pleasure 

this afternoon to stand in the Assembly and have the 

opportunity to enter into debate on Bill No. 158, The 

Correctional Services Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of items that are included in 

this Bill. The primary focus or concern that‟s being addressed in 

the Bill is the changes to the telephone systems in the 

correctional system that would allow for the listening of calls 

that inmates place from the correctional facility to other 

individuals. The primary focus, Mr. Speaker, of the Bill is to 

address this issue that the government sees now as a problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason stated for the need for this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, is the prevalence or the incidence of gang activity in 

the correctional system and how that can have a spillover effect 

into general society outside of the correctional system. 

 

There‟s a number of instances, Mr. Speaker, where individuals 

in a correctional facility may engage in activity that can cause a 

problem for the broader society, and it is the minister‟s position 

in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, that listening to these phone calls and 

recording them is an ability, provides an ability for the 

government to take action on this and to address improper 

activity that may be occurring by an inmate while they are in 

custody, inappropriate activity with members on the outside or 

facilitating improper actions within the correctional facility. 

 

It‟s good, Mr. Speaker, to see members on the other side 

admitting that there is a problem with gangs in our correctional 

facilities. That‟s a position that the members opposite haven‟t 

always had when it comes to addressing the issue of gangs in 

correctional facilities in Saskatchewan. So it is good to see that 

they have arrived at that position that things need to be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the changes proposed here allows for a contract 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — To ask for leave to introduce a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Meadow Lake has asked 

for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meadow Lake. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 

and thank you, members, for granting leave. 

 

It‟s my pleasure to introduce a guest joining us here in the west 

gallery, Mr. Ezra Levant, a well-known political commentator, 

soon-to-be Sun TV personality. Ezra was going to be here for 

the introduction of Bill 160, the Human Rights Code 

amendment Act, and we very much appreciate Ezra joining us 

here today. So welcome, Ezra. 

 

[14:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 



6258 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2010 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 158 — The Correctional Services 

Amendment Act, 2010 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So I‟ll resume my 

remarks to Bill No. 158, The Correctional Services Amendment 

Act. And what we see in this Act, Mr. Speaker, is the 

government taking an approach that would allow them to listen 

to phone calls of inmates in order to ensure that improper 

activity is not occurring. 

 

As the minister stated in his second reading remarks, that the 

course of action that currently exists is that individuals will 

need to receive authority from a judge that actions for 

monitoring a phone call would in fact be warranted, that it 

could not be done on the fly on the basis of suspicion. 

 

And what this legislation would allow, Mr. Speaker, is for 

members opposite . . . Not members opposite. It would allow 

individuals in the correctional facility to monitor phone calls 

when there‟s activity that is not proper going on in a facility. 

And they would be able, members in the correctional facility, to 

be able to do this, Mr. Speaker, based on suspicions that they 

may have about an individual. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I do have some questions about what would be 

the basis for suspicions. Certainly there is improper activity that 

occurs within correctional facilities. I would hope though, Mr. 

Speaker, that there would be an analysis or an evaluation that 

would occur, that it may not necessarily be a hunch but that 

there would be some sort of system in place that would ensure 

that suspicions can be well founded and that suspicions would 

be based on actions and evidence that correctional officers 

would have that would indicate to them that there could be 

some concerns going on in a place. 

 

So I would be interested, Mr. Speaker, in hearing more details 

about the criteria that is used to determine whether or not an 

individual‟s actions are suspicious. So that‟s one comment I 

have, Mr. Speaker, about this type of surveillance that can occur 

to individuals who are in a correctional facility. 

 

Another instance that I have some questions around, Mr. 

Speaker, the minister‟s remarks indicate that a contract has been 

entered into with a Texas company for this technology and for 

this service. Mr. Speaker, I think that when we‟re looking at the 

Sask Party‟s . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I‟d ask . . . Order. I‟d ask 

members to allow the member from Saskatoon Massey Place to 

speak. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the minister 

states in his remarks on Bill No. 158, that the proposed plan is 

to engage with a Texas company that would provide this 

service, provide the monitoring and the software that allows for 

the telephone calls from correctional facilities to be monitored 

and recorded. 

 

Interesting, Mr. Speaker, that they go to Texas for this 

technology. We‟ve heard a lot of talk from members opposite 

about a Sask-first policy, about supporting industry at home, 

about supporting industries that are based in Saskatchewan, 

where the proceeds and profits are remaining in the province. 

So it is curious, Mr. Speaker, that they would go with a Texas 

company for this technology. 

 

There are some other questions that I have around this piece of 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, is that there are, I would assume, there 

are individuals in correctional facilities, Mr. Speaker, who rely 

on supports outside of the facility to help with their path of 

rehabilitation. And now, Mr. Speaker, of course I would not 

suggest that everyone in a correctional facility is in the same 

place when it comes to their approach to changing their actions 

and recognizing that they have made mistakes and need to 

pursue a different path in life. Not everyone is in that case, Mr. 

Speaker. But certainly there are individuals who would be in 

that situation who would want to get out of the correctional 

facility and have a different life and pursue a different path and 

be a positive contributor to society. 

 

So I recognize that the telephone system and communication 

with supports on the outside can be, I would imagine, a very 

helpful support for individuals in that place, for individuals 

who‟d want to change the way that they‟ve been living, and act 

differently. And I know the types of people, Mr. Speaker, that 

might be able to provide that kind of support would be 

individuals like spiritual advisers, for example, or elders or 

perhaps a grandparent — someone like that who could provide 

support. 

 

So when we talk about some of the additional costs that will be 

implemented by this Texas company for those types of 

individuals who rely on outside supports to help with their path 

to living a better life, I think, Mr. Speaker, we have to be 

cognizant about how this legislation could affect individuals in 

that situation and what kind of burden that might place on, for 

example, the grandparents of someone who, of an inmate who 

was in a correctional facility and seeking to live a better life and 

using the support from a grandparent or an elder or spiritual 

adviser in that way. 

 

The minister in his remarks talked about certain individuals that 

would be exempt from surveillance, and I believe he mentioned 

legal counsel and individuals that would fall under that banner. 

I would suggest also that spiritual advisers can play a very 

important role in a confidential . . . and with intimate 

information about what an individual is thinking about their life 

and where they have been and what they have done. And I am 

curious about some of the provisions that would allow for the 

maintenance of a secure relationship between an inmate and a 

spiritual adviser as I think that is something that is important. 

 

The minister‟s remarks about this proposed change also talk 

about some of the safeguards that are in place with respect to 

recording of information and access to the information as well 

as . . . and what numbers would not be recorded based on the 

fact that they are recorded in the system and are on a safe list, 

for lack of a better term. 

 



November 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6259 

We do know, Mr. Speaker, that while technology is a good 

thing and a positive thing, and something that should, in my 

opinion, always be looked at in terms of how we can gain 

efficiencies and make our lives better and make our institutions 

more effective, technology also comes with its risks and with its 

pitfalls. 

 

We see today in the news with all of the WikiLeaks and the 

release of hundreds or thousands of documents that were 

intended to be private, were intended to be secured, but were 

put down on paper or were sent electronically, and a record was 

made of them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We know that even with safeguards in place, when we‟re 

talking about technology there is an opportunity for individuals 

who want to abuse what is designed to be a secure system or 

what is designed to be a system that can improve a situation and 

make things better for the people of Saskatchewan, we know 

with technology there also comes opportunity for individuals to 

abuse that system. 

 

So while the minister talks about safeguards, I would be 

curious, Mr. Speaker, about how exactly that does work; what 

checks can be put in place to ensure that individuals who have 

access to that system would not use information 

inappropriately. Because I know that would be a concern for 

every member of this Assembly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I will conclude my remarks. There 

are aspects of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, where I do see 

merit, but I also see a number of flags along the way with this 

legislation in a number of areas that I‟ve outlined in my 

remarks. So I thank members for the opportunity to speak to 

this Bill. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 158. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 158. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 144 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 144 — The Litter 

Control Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m happy today to rise 

and speak to Bill 144, An Act to amend The Litter Control Act. 

Several of my colleagues have spoken to this Bill, this 

amendment already, and I just want to add a few comments. 

 

Reading through the previous comments, the Bill itself, and the 

explanatory notes, I understand the reason for the Bill is to 

change the definition so that it‟s clearer in the Bill who actually 

is the purchaser, and it‟s also clear in the Bill how the money is 

collected on containers, recyclable containers. 

But the questions I have . . . I don‟t see anywhere in the 

minister‟s second reading speech about any consultation that 

was done with folks like Sarcan or any recycling operations or 

the retailers and the hoteliers, about how this may or may not 

affect them. And given that we as opposition have been quite, 

we‟ve found many indications or many times when the 

government has not had any consultation with people that they 

propose to, that they say they have had consultation or they just 

simply haven‟t in Bills that do affect them in their lives and 

their work, so I do have those questions. I wonder if those 

people have been contacted. 

 

I also have a question about if this Bill itself is mainly to make 

sure we aren‟t sued or there is not a successful suit that is now 

in progress, that that suit does not succeed. It is a serious matter 

to change the law retroactively, and this suit has been going on 

for quite a while. And I know that there might be a legitimate 

goal here because the province will be liable for a certain 

amount of money. There is something . . . I mean I don‟t know 

this, but I would like to know from someone, what recourse do 

the claimants have that are currently involved in that case? If 

we do this and make it retroactive, what recourse do they have 

against the Government of Saskatchewan for doing this? So 

that‟s a question I think would be, we‟d really like to see 

answered. 

 

And like I said, there‟s many things in the Bill that I think 

people understand. Defining, always having definitions made 

clearer in an Act is a good thing, so that we certainly make sure 

that the Bill is clear, and people that it affects understand the 

implications of the Bill into their lives or their livelihoods. And 

I think the Supreme Court of Canada has made it quite clear 

that service fees collected for specific purposes not to exceed 

the cost to the government, which is the basis of the lawsuit, as 

I understand it. So that is going to be cleared up or cleaned up. 

 

I think it‟s the retroactivity that‟s worrisome. I‟m not sure . . . 

When you make an Act that is retroactive, it does send a bit of a 

chill through people‟s lives when they have what they think is a 

justifiable issue and have brought that issue to court and have 

incurred the expense of doing that. Then what happens to them 

when you put the retroactivity into an Act and basically cut off 

their avenue of what they perceive to be justice, getting justice? 

 

So there are certain, there are certain things. Like I said, the 

definitions will be good, will . . . I think people will be quite 

happy about that. Making sure that the fees are collected in the 

proper way and are defined in the proper way will be good, so 

that we avoid any future problems with Revenue Canada or any 

other thing that falls out of the Supreme Court‟s ruling. 

 

But I think people do have questions about how — at least we 

have questions — about how this Act pertains to recycling, 

Sarcan and any other recycling operations, and have they been 

consulted and do they have any concerns. I don‟t see that in any 

of the minister‟s comments The minister was quite clear that a 

lot of his remarks actually were made around the lawsuit, which 

leads me to believe that this shouldn‟t be the only reason that 

we bring in legislation is to stop a lawsuit. 

 

So I have some concerns on that and I‟m wondering . . . Those 

questions will be best answered at committee. But we do have 

some work as opposition to make sure that people that this may 



6260 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2010 

affect have been consulted and have been at least aware that the 

Act is coming. 

 

And I know that many of my colleagues have spoken to this, 

and there‟s still others who wish to do that. So there is the 

opportunity to look at the speeches that we‟ve had up to this 

point and see the points being made and the validity of those 

points. 

 

But I think there are still some fairly valid questions to be 

asked, and certainly around the consultation process and 

definitely around what recourse does a claimant have to actions 

like this, by the government that actually put in retroactive 

legislation, that makes their lawsuit null and void or actually 

just, can just . . . actually stops it. 

 

So with those questions and those comments, Mr. Speaker, I 

will be adjourning debate on this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Eastview has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 144. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Bill No. 147 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Draude that Bill No. 147 — The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure to 

rise to speak about the Bill 147, An Act respecting the 

Protection of Public Servants who make Disclosures. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it appears that this Bill has been introduced 

in response to a private member‟s Bill which was introduced — 

Bill No. 607, I think it was introduced last year — that basically 

tried to set out a way whereby public servants could be 

protected when they made disclosures about wrongdoing within 

government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this Bill has quite a few pages, has quite a 

few procedures about how public servants should be protected. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think it has some fundamental problems that 

will not address the issue. And basically it appears to be kind of 

like a bell jar or a closed-in container where a person might 

make this complaint, but it‟s with . . . inside the structure of 

government in a way that will make it very difficult for that 

person who makes the complaint to actually know if their 

complaint has been dealt with or if . . . and it also may have 

further consequences for their career. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, when you start looking at the Bill — and 

let‟s go through the sections — it‟s got quite a number of parts 

to it and it has a number of definitions. Now when we go to part 

I, it‟s where the short title is and the interpretation of various 

positions that are here. 

 

The first one is commissioner and it talks about creating a 

Public Interest Disclosure Commissioner. Now our 

understanding is that this would probably be located in the 

Ombudsman‟s office which is an existing part of the legislature. 

We‟re not certain if that‟s the plan or not. But clearly this is 

something that will require some dollars, some budget to 

actually provide the information. 

 

Now then when you go through some of these other definitions, 

it seems to be quite broad. It covers Crown corporations, 

boards, commissions, all the Executive Council areas, and you 

know that‟s probably the right breadth. Does it go broader to 

include regional health authorities which were almost fully 

funded by the Department of Health? Does it include all of the 

education departments or divisions across the province which 

are now basically funded from the Department of Education? 

How broad does this go? And I mean clearly the broader the 

better. 

 

Now one of the areas that was interesting to me was what kinds 

of wrongdoings are going to be covered. And so if you look at 

part II, it then sets out the kinds of wrongdoings that are to be 

covered. And it basically says, a contravention of an Act, a 

regulation to an Act, an Act of the Parliament of Canada or a 

regulation made pursuant to an Act of the Parliament of 

Canada. 

 

That definition doesn‟t include government policies. And as we 

know, many of the activities within government are pursuant to 

Acts and regulations, but there are also quite a number of . . . or 

most of the work that probably is done under policy manuals or 

policies within a particular department and it doesn‟t appear 

that this legislation is set up in a way to deal with concerns 

around breaches of policies. 

 

Now it does go, in part (b) of section 3, into acts or omissions 

which create danger to life, health, or safety, or a substantial 

and specific danger to the environment; (c), includes the gross 

mismanagement of public funds or a public asset; and then (d) 

basically says, if you direct or counsel a person to commit a 

wrongdoing, then you‟re caught by this particular legislation. 

 

Now I‟m not sure if that part (d) is set up there to cover 

ministerial directions or not, but maybe. It‟ll be an interesting 

one for a court to take a look at if there was a complaint about a 

ministerial direction around policy which wasn‟t in an Act or 

which wasn‟t in regulation, and whether or not that would end 

up being covered in this particular legislation. 

 

Now when a problem arises, what happens? You‟ve got a 

complaint about somebody who‟s in your department or in your 

Crown corporation and often the complaints would be about 

somebody who was a little higher up in the chain of command 

than you are. And where does the complaint go? Well when you 

read the part III, it looks like the complaints all go either to the 

deputy minister or somebody designated by the deputy minister. 

Or if it‟s a corporation, I guess it would be the CEO or 

somebody designated by the CEO. And so you effectively have 

eliminated probably a whole area of complaints about 

wrongdoings about the senior management in a department or 



November 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6261 

in a Crown corporation from having any sort of effect of this 

legislation. 

 

Now there is the commissioner operation that I guess is 

designed to try to get around some of that. But practically, I 

think there‟s going to be some problems in sorting out what the 

exact procedures are in this, and it goes back to my original 

point that it‟s a closed system. It‟s a system which is intended to 

protect people only if they make these complaints in a 

non-public way. And that may be in the interests of certain 

ministers or CEOs of Crown corporations, but it‟s certainly not 

in the interest of the public which is the whole description of 

the legislation. 

 

So the question is, how do you create legislation which 

accomplishes the purpose of protecting people who make 

disclosures of information which are in the public interest — 

and that‟s everybody — but also end up having a process which 

allows for the functioning of departments or of Crown 

corporations? And I think that‟s what the attempt that has been 

made here is to somehow deal with that particular concern. 

 

But practically at some point in the drafting of the legislation, 

there‟s been a direction or a position put forward to say, well 

make sure that all of these complaints are within the system and 

that we don‟t end up with very public disclosure of what‟s 

going to happen. We want to deal with them internally, and we 

want to deal with them on a discipline basis or some other basis. 

So it ends up I think . . . It‟s going to end up probably being a 

very frustrating process and probably of not very much use. 

 

Now my understanding is that the number of these kinds of 

cases in any given year within the province of Saskatchewan are 

actually quite low. And it‟s obviously setting up a fairly 

expansive administrative system to deal with complaints that 

would come forward. And it may be that it‟s, in that context, a 

bit of an overkill. And I maybe ask the minister who‟s brought 

this forward to take another look at that, because the last thing 

you need in the time when you‟re pressing civil servants with 

way more work than they can actually accomplish is to add 

another layer of effort and work that may not be all that 

productive in the long run. 

 

Now when you go forward into this legislation, this division 3 

of part III starts talking about, well, what information may be 

disclosed? And it says, well, disclosure may be made 

notwithstanding what any other Act has to say, but subject to 

section 13 and to the regulations. 

 

Now when you go to section 13 here, its limits on disclosure, it 

says: 

 

Nothing in this Act authorizes a public servant to 

disclose: 

 

information described in subsection 16(1) of The 

Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act, 

except in circumstances mentioned in subsection 16(2) of 

that Act; or 

 

information that is protected by solicitor-client privilege. 

 

Well we‟ve had some examples recently where the Minister of 

Health has provided information that is almost useless to 

anybody because it‟s been so heavily censored. It appears that 

this is maybe going to be providing another option for that 

which says that if there is an area like this that‟s protected, you 

can‟t release it or you‟re then subject to other disciplinary 

action. 

 

And so the question becomes, is, what‟s the interplay of this 

legislation with The Freedom of Information and Protection of 

Privacy Act? How does it apply to some actual cases that we‟re 

dealing with right now where it‟s in the public interest to know 

what kinds of contracts are being let out without tendering in 

the province of Saskatchewan? Because it‟s public money, and 

it‟s in the interests of everybody to have those who might know 

about these things disclose that to the public, to the journalists, 

to everybody, so that we can find out what‟s actually happening 

behind these closed books, these closed stories. 

 

And so if in fact this section of this particular legislation will 

allow for further activity like we‟ve seen over the last number 

of months, well then this is not legislation that‟s of any great 

value to the public. And so it strikes me, when you read this, 

that there‟s a very clear attempt to try to once again close 

everything within a system and not let information out. And 

that‟s quite contrary to the interest. 

 

Now it‟s also interesting here to say that information protected 

by a solicitor-client privilege would also be protected. Now I‟m 

obviously a lawyer, so I know quite a bit about solicitor-client 

privilege. 

 

But a number of years ago, I worked with a lawyer who was a 

lawyer for the state of Florida. So he was the deputy attorney 

general of the state of Florida. Well in the state of Florida, they 

have rules of full disclosure in public interest of all litigation 

paid for by taxpayers. And what that meant is that this lawyer 

— who was a litigator and he was actually working on the 

tobacco tax file; that‟s how I got to know him — he knew that 

every piece of information that he prepared for trial, all the 

correspondence that he had working on his case, because he 

was paid as a lawyer for the state of Florida, all of that 

information was available to the public, which included the 

tobacco companies on the other side. 

 

And he said, you know, he didn‟t quite understand other states 

or other provinces, like from Canada, where we didn‟t have 

rules like that whereby the information that was prepared for 

taxpayers wasn‟t available for everybody. And you know, 

there‟s a lot of things that you end up wondering about, but 

especially when you get 900 pages that are blacked out on 

something which is of great, great interest to the public, to the 

press, to everybody else. 

 

[15:15] 

 

And so if in fact this legislation is going to add a further gloss 

on that kind of nondisclosure, then I don‟t think this is the kind 

of legislation that we need. What we need is to be able to 

protect people in their work when they point out things that are 

wrong, things that smell — if we can use that term — things 

that don‟t sound right. They‟re off tune. We need to be able to 

protect people when they raise those things so that the matters 

can be corrected. 



6262 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2010 

Now in the Department of Health, Saskatchewan Health, a 

number of years ago when I was the minister, one of the issues 

that arose was how one should report incidents, errors, those 

kinds of things within the health system. And there was quite a 

big debate on that because you would end up having very 

closed systems that would review what happened, and that‟s 

important because you learn from your mistakes. But there was 

also a strong interest in making sure that that information was 

available to help other places and do other things. And so a 

process was put into place in Saskatchewan, which is still in 

effect, where there‟s a reporting mechanism so all that 

information is available to assist all people right across the 

board. It was based on some of the things that they were starting 

to do in Minnesota. And we were pleased to be able to do it 

right across the province. 

 

Now I know that kind of thing is continuing. It is based on the 

full disclosure of problems that we see in the airline industry. 

And we know that one of the strengths of the airline industry is 

the fact that when there is a problem, it becomes public exactly 

what went wrong. And therefore the issue is corrected not just 

in the particular incident but right across the board. 

 

This kind of legislation that we have here today appears to go in 

the other direction where it kind of closes in and further restricts 

and doesn‟t provide the kind of protection that individuals need 

to be able to set forward things that they think are wrong. And 

so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the people involved 

looking at this, the minister and others, should go back and 

examine how this particular legislation works related to specific 

cases. 

 

And a good case to start with might be this Amicus case in 

Saskatoon as to what would happen if there‟s public disclosure 

of the information that the minister seems to think is to be 

blacked out and eliminated from public view, what would 

happen to a person who brought that information forward. 

Because it is an issue, as set out in this legislation, an issue that 

is gross mismanagement of public funds or a public asset. 

 

And so we know that non-tendering of government contracts is 

the exception. The rule is that there‟s public tendering. So when 

you don‟t tender public contracts, then it probably fits under 

this Act as gross mismanagement. 

 

Now does this particular Bill apply to a minister? Does it apply 

to a deputy minister? You know, what is it? Has anybody 

looked at this kind of legislation in light of some actual cases 

here in Saskatchewan right now? Because one of the concerns 

that we have with new legislation is that the government 

appears to be once again trying to retreat into this bell jar, into 

this little world of their own, and they don‟t want to tell 

anybody what‟s going on as it relates to what they‟re doing. 

 

Now in this particular information here, it sets out how 

investigations are to take place. It sets out who‟s supposed to do 

that. And it sets out referral to the Provincial Auditor when 

there‟s financial mismanagement or concern. Now these are 

references from the commissioner who may be located in the 

Ombudsman‟s office, and the question then becomes is there a 

way, is there a way to work with this particular legislation and 

get at some real problems as opposed to some problems that . . . 

We don‟t know quite what this is intended to cover. 

Now one of the things that is set out in this particular legislation 

does relate to what happens if it‟s a deputy minister or I guess a 

CEO of the corporation. And it says that then the report is to go 

to the deputy minister, to the Premier . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. There‟s a couple of 

conversations going on. I‟m starting to have trouble to hear the 

member on his feet. I would ask the members to take the 

conversations behind the bar. I recognize the member from 

Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well I think 

that there are some concerns registered both on the government 

side and on the opposition side around the effect of this 

legislation. 

 

Now if we could be assured by the minister and others on that 

side that this legislation was actually intended to deal with 

issues like Amicus and get the information for the public, well 

then we might be in a better position to support what‟s here. But 

the way it‟s worded, the way I see it‟s being laid out, it‟s got all 

kinds of ways to cut off the information and isolate the person 

who‟s made the disclosure and possibly discipline them. And so 

when you have legislation like that, that ends up being not of 

assistance to the public, not fair, and it clearly is one more way 

that you can basically cause fear in the civil service around how 

one deals with things that just don‟t feel right, don‟t smell right, 

don‟t look right. And those are all issues that arise when a 

government starts losing control of the amount of resources 

they‟ve got to actually do things. 

 

And frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I‟ve looked at the 

legislation introduced into the House this spring, a lot of it has 

to do with changing how things are done so they can be done on 

the cheap, whether it‟s outsourcing justice from the Provincial 

Court or whether it‟s moving things out of the environment into 

private agencies through the Fish and Wildlife Development 

Fund. And I‟m not certain whether this one doesn‟t have some 

aspect of that as well. So we‟d want to be examining that kind 

of an issue as well. 

 

Now it says in here that there‟ll be a report that‟ll come from 

the commissioner each year which will set out for the previous 

year: 

 

the number of disclosures received and the number acted 

on or not acted on; 

 

the number of investigations . . . 

 

in the case of an investigation that results in a finding of 

wrongdoing, a description of the wrongdoing and 

recommendations or corrective actions taken in relation to 

the wrongdoing or the reasons why no corrective action 

was taken; 

 

And then the recommendations taken from the commissioner. 

 

So this is basically following some of the legislation that‟s set 

out for the Ombudsman dealing with complaints that the 

Ombudsman deals with. 



November 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6263 

But I think what the public would be interested in is knowing 

how that information that‟s being identified gets to the public as 

quickly as possible. And this kind of a process effectively 

closes it into a system, sort of wraps it up in a parcel, and then 

sets it aside and allows it to show up a year or two later. Now I 

don‟t know if there‟s some issues that the government‟s worried 

about this year before an election, but this would be a nice way 

to just sort of package it up and send it into the year 2012. 

 

We know that we would sure like to get the information that 

they seem to be hiding about these Amicus contracts, but 

there‟s probably other things that we would like to see. And if 

this in any way assists the government, the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council, and the ministers to basically defer release of 

information that is maybe going to cause the government 

trouble, then I think they should be really careful and this 

legislature should be really careful about how we proceed with 

this particular legislation. 

 

Now when the legislation is brought forward, it‟s pretty clear 

that this part 5, which is the Public Interest Disclosure 

Commissioner part has a substantial budgetary requirement. 

And I‟m not certain whether this would be implemented very 

quickly or not. I think the legislation states quite clearly in 

section 46 that it comes into force on proclamation. And my 

assumption would be that all of that part 5 would not be 

proclaimed right away because as I said before the government 

appears to have run out of money. 

 

So it may be that somebody else who‟s got a job that‟s similar 

to this, whether it‟s the Ombudsman or the auditor or somebody 

else, will sort of have this added to their load to be dealt with. 

And so I‟m not, I don‟t know . . . As you can tell, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I have a lot of questions about this one. And I have a 

lot of concerns that it‟s a system designed to sort of smother 

issues when they arise, send them over to be packaged and then 

delivered quite a few months or years down the road. And that‟s 

not what we need when we have things that are causing 

difficulty for the public and that should be, in the interests of 

the public, disclosed. 

 

So like many pieces of legislation that seem to come from this 

government, it has a fancy name, but it actually obfuscates the 

real intention, and it doesn‟t do what the name says. And so and 

I mean, you just see it right in the documents. It says it‟s An Act 

respecting the Protection of Public Servants who make 

Disclosures. But every page, the top of the page says, “Public 

Interest Disclosure.” 

 

Now I don‟t know where those words come from out of the true 

title of the Act. It‟s not accurate. Now are the titles created by 

staff in the legislature? I don‟t think so. I think they come from 

the minister and the people within her department working with 

the Ministry of Justice. And so at a minimum, before this Bill 

passes, we might want to actually have an accurate description 

of what it is and not allow the government to use this term 

“public interest disclosure” when that‟s not what it is at all. And 

so they even decide they‟re going to call their commissioner 

that when it‟s about protecting public servants who make 

disclosures. 

 

And that may be too fine a point for some, but I don‟t think so. I 

think this is an attempt, this legislation, to do something with a 

grand name, but only do it in a very, very small way. And one 

way they might get some more support on this side about this 

kind of a Bill would be to be more open with the kind of 

information that we ask about, whether it‟s about Amicus or 

about some of these other things, because the public is 

interested in knowing how their money is being spent. And so I 

guess I would say that I still have a lot of questions about this, 

but at this point I would adjourn debate. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 147, The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 149 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 149 — The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It‟s a pleasure to rise and offer comments on Bill 149, The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010. Mr. Speaker, I‟ve been 

going through the legislation, having a look at it, along with the 

explanatory notes that accompanied the Bill when it was tabled 

in the legislature, and I think in most areas it‟s pretty 

straightforward. 

 

There‟s an addition of a new section to the legislation, section 

64.1, that puts in place a mineral processing tax refund. And 

basically that‟s what the section does, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

speaks to an eligible asset, what requirements are there. Eligible 

corporation “means a qualifying corporation that provides 

evidence satisfactory to the minister to establish” certain criteria 

that must be met. 

 

Eligible mineral processing, what exactly that means, and it 

“means processing at a mineral processing facility located in 

Saskatchewan of any of the following.” And it lays out exactly 

what qualifies, what doesn‟t. Well not exactly, but it narrows it 

down a fair bit. For example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that: 

 

(i) ore, other than iron ore, from an eligible mineral 

resource to any stage that is not beyond the prime metal 

state or its equivalent;  

 

(ii) iron ore from an eligible mineral resource to any stage 

that is not beyond the pellet stage or its equivalent. 

 

So it is fairly specific, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Also speaks to, 

under the same section, eligible mineral resource, and that: 

 

means a mineral resource as defined in paragraph (a) or 



6264 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2010 

(d) of the definition of “mineral resource” in subsection 

248(1) of the federal Act, if the deposit is located in 

Canada but not located in Saskatchewan. 

 

It goes on. The changes . . . Or section 64.1 also goes on to 

explain qualifying corporation, that a corporation has to provide 

the evidence satisfactory to the minister to establish: 

 

. . . principal business activity is engaging in eligible 

mineral processing of ore from an eligible mineral 

resource that it has acquired at fair market value;  

 

that the corporation acquired eligible assets for use in 

Saskatchewan having an initial capital cost equal to at 

least $125 million; and 

 

any additional conditions that may be prescribed by 

regulation. 

 

It goes on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to speak to the refund “means a 

mineral processing refund granted by the minister pursuant to 

this section.” 

 

And we go into a fair bit more detail, Mr. Speaker. A 

corporation that intends to apply for the refund must submit 

satisfactory evidence and information to the minister, and all 

tax has to be . . . all tax payable by the corporation has been 

paid. There has to be evidence that is put forward to the 

minister along with “other information and records that the 

minister may require in order to determine the corporation‟s 

eligibility.” 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at the information that 

is required by the minister, the guidelines and the requirements 

that are put in place that the corporations have to meet, the 

types of minerals that are eligible for the refund, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we can see or we would assume . . . And it may not be 

always the best to make assumptions. But we would assume 

that there is a corporation that is looking at establishing in the 

province of Saskatchewan and that these adjustments are being 

made specifically for a certain corporation because of the detail 

that‟s required, because of the narrow kind of qualifying . . . 

Gosh, I‟m at a loss for words. But to qualify within the scope of 

the criteria and the requirements that are being put forward by 

the minister is fairly narrow. So there must be a specific 

corporation in industry that the minister is targeting in this 

instance and in the changes that are being made. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it goes on to talk about applying for a 

refund. You must do your normal process of taxes that are 

applicable to any operation. And then once that is all paid, said, 

and done within three years after the first taxation year the 

eligible corporation intends to claim a refund, your application 

must be filed with the minister within that three years. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we know that this legislation comes into effect 

on January 1st of 2011 and that there is a number of other 

requirements when it comes to the taxable assessments and how 

that‟s all dealt with. But starting this year, we see that five-year 

tax holiday for mining corporations. And there is some good 

requirements, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Those corporations have to 

make investments of at least 125 million and maintain at least 

75 full-time employees within the province in their operation. 

And on the face of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the 

opposition is supportive of this measure and of any measure 

that would bring new corporate head offices into Saskatchewan. 

But I mean, as we‟ve learned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the 

whole debate about the future of potash in the province of 

Saskatchewan and the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, the 

devil always is in the details. 

 

So when we look at pledges of full-time jobs or requirements of 

full-time jobs and new investments, we do know that that can 

mean different things to different people, can be interpreted 

differently by some. And people really do have different 

definitions of the word “commitment”, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And I think we all know that and understand the differences and 

the different interpretations that can happen. So when we look 

at some of this legislation and wonder why the detail and what 

certain passages may mean, we always need to be clear that the 

legislation needs to be quite prescriptive at times to make sure 

that everyone understands what it means and what the 

requirements and commitments are. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it will be interesting to see what 

commitments mining companies make in exchange for this tax 

holiday — and it is a five-year tax holiday, Mr. Deputy Speaker 

— and how successful this government is at making sure that 

those commitments are met by anyone that has made this type 

of a pledge to the province of Saskatchewan. So Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it‟s hard to be real optimistic because we know that in 

this global marketplace and when many of these international 

corporations are being dealt with, it‟s easier said than done. So 

we‟ll see what the detail of the legislation is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also, I guess we also have to wonder where the 

legislation and the request for this really originated. Because 

when we look at the initial changes that are made for the 

five-year tax holiday and the criteria that has to be met and the 

process that‟s followed to apply for that five-year tax holiday, 

64.1 I believe is the new section that‟s added.  

 

But also we have changes that are being made to other sections. 

Section 68 is amended, and my understanding of this is that it 

permits the province to enter into a tax collection agreement 

with the federal government whereby the entire Act will be 

administered by the federal government. But then there‟s also 

other changes, 68(3), which is an amendment to subsection 

68(3), is required to allow the province to self-administer the 

new section 64.1. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to know, why? I‟m not sure why we 

are looking at an Act that will be administered by the federal 

government, but we need changes to allow the province to 

self-administer the new section 64.1. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

need to understand that better and will endeavour to ask 

questions and look at why it‟s worded the way it is and why it 

needs to be done. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other changes are 124(1) about making 

regulations. And also in 124: 

 

Section 124 [that] establishes the regulation-making 

powers under the Act. The amendments will permit new 

regulations to be made to prescribe additional eligibility 

criteria . . . 



November 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6265 

So there may be more detail, or whether it‟s something 

drastically different, I would doubt, but we‟ll just have to wait 

and see, I guess, when regulations are drafted. But it will: 

 

. . . prescribe additional eligibility criteria for the new tax 

holiday provided for in section 64.1 [which is the five 

years] and allow these regulations to be made retroactive 

to January 1, 2011. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟ve seen a number of pieces of 

legislation that have been brought in this session that are 

retroactive to January 1st, 2011. One piece, I believe, is public 

safety and the phone system that has been put into the 

provincial corrections facilities and the ability to listen to the 

calls of inmates or listen to suspicious calls of inmates. So 

that‟s retroactive also. 

 

But I believe this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, was a 

commitment that was made by this government in 2009. So I‟m 

wondering why it was so slow to be brought into the House if it 

was a commitment and there was a requirement to have it in 

place by January of 2011 and the initial commitment was made 

over a year ago. Now we are finally seeing the legislation 

brought forward, and it will be retroactive to January 1st, 2011, 

whether it‟s passed or not. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess the tradition with our new system 

of committees has been that legislation will be tabled in a fall 

session to be looked at, reviewed, further consultations done 

over the holidays and into the spring so that in March when we 

come back to sit in the spring session of the legislature, then we 

will be able to have further debate, further discussion in 

committee, look at if everything that‟s being proposed is 

appropriate or if there‟s changes that need to be made. 

 

And we all know that everything that comes forward into this 

House isn‟t always perfect. There may be disagreements with 

constituents. There may be sectors in our province that aren‟t 

pleased with the changes. And sometimes it‟s some fairly large 

disagreements; other times it can be just some things that need 

to be tweaked and realigned to make sure they better fit with 

actual practice. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that the government, or I haven‟t heard 

anything else, that this is being pushed forward more quickly, 

that we are looking at it passage in the spring with, I would 

assume, regulations to come next fall — almost a year from 

now. So, Mr. Speaker, it was made as a commitment and 

announced in a news release by the Minister Responsible for 

Enterprise in December of 2009. So I don‟t know why it‟s been 

so slow to come to the legislature. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, obviously there is an industry that the 

minister is looking at bringing to the province of Saskatchewan, 

or I guess enhancing the opportunities to come to the province 

of Saskatchewan, by providing a tax holiday but with the 

definite criteria. Obviously he has something in mind, or I 

would think not only in mind but has been in discussions. 

 

[15:45] 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, who is this for? Who does it affect? And I 

think one question that we also need to address is, how does it 

affect the provincial treasury and the ability of this government 

to provide services to the people of this province, public 

services that people demand, expect, and require of this 

government? So many questions that have to be asked but, Mr. 

Speaker, at this point in time I know there are colleagues that 

are looking forward to making some comments on this 

legislation. So at this time I would adjourn debate on Bill 149. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 149, The 

Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 150 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 150 — The 

Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 

2010 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

It‟s interesting to join the debate on Bill No. 150, the Act to 

amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act at 

this stage of the proceedings. 

 

I say that of course because it fits into a pattern of behaviour on 

the part of this government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of on 

the one hand, measures that come forward that look to be like 

housekeeping, and on the other hand, measures that come 

forward that are fairly dubious on the face and in the practice of 

them. 

 

And by that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am referring to the two 

main sort of measures contained in this legislation, or in this 

proposed legislation. First of all, there is changes to an existing 

provision under the new spouse, 28.3(6) where: 

 

An annuity pursuant to this section:  

 

. . . must be equivalent in value to the allowance otherwise 

payable to the superannuate, if the superannuate had no 

spouse.  

 

And again this put forward in efforts of clarifying the payment 

of survivor benefits, survivor spousal benefits, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And again, you know, it‟s a fairly straightforward 

provision. Later in the amendments it goes into measures that 

would bring it in line with the Income Tax Act of Canada, 

making that compliant. And so on the face of that, the one item 

in the proposed legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would seem to 

be fairly straightforward and largely of a housekeeping nature. 

 

The measure in this piece of legislation that we find to be . . . 

So the first measure, on the face of it . . . We want to hear more 

as this debate proceeds on this legislation, how this will aid the 

clarification of the current regime. But on the face of it, it 



6266 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2010 

would seem to be fairly straightforward and fairly worthy of 

support. 

 

Where we part ways with the government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

where we come to a path in the woods — to use, you know, 

imagery that has been fairly popular of late, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — where we diverge company with the provincial 

government concerns the matter of removing the reporting 

requirements for those who are receiving pensions as 

superannuates. And again, Mr. Speaker, there was a Bill 

brought to this House not too long ago, Bill No. 9, which would 

have allowed for double-dipping. 

 

And for those that aren‟t familiar with the concept as it relates 

to pensions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we‟re not talking about 

anything related to the snack tray or what you might be serving 

up at your Grey Cup party or your Grey Cup wake, as the case 

may be, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We‟re referring to the practice of 

retiring, collecting a pension, and then coming back as a 

contract employee and being paid by the taxpayer, in effect, 

twice — double dipping into the pool of taxpayer dollars to get 

paid. 

 

So as it stands right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a means 

by which, if there are amounts being paid of $50,000 and over 

to any individuals or organizations, we have the ability through 

the public accounts to keep track of those amounts and to whom 

those sums are being forwarded. 

 

And it‟s interesting that, you know, in a number of pursuits, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker . . . I think of the extension of the franchise. 

When you extend the franchise, that is a march that moves ever 

forward. The franchise grows larger and the history of 

something like that is moved from, you know, a very limited 

class of people being able to vote and participate in our 

democratic process to an ever larger group of people. The move 

to include women, the move to include treaty status Indians, the 

move to lower the voting age to 18 — these are all means by 

which the franchise has been extended over the years. And it‟s 

very rare that you‟ll see a government move to curtail or step 

back from that expansion of the franchise. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, they haven‟t done it outright, but in 

this session we‟ve seen this government opposite bring forward 

legislation that will attempt to erect barriers to people‟s 

participation in the democratic process by bringing in photo 

identification requirements for the voting process. And again, 

Mr. Speaker, there is a fairly long and well-established process 

which has been very much based on fair play and very much a 

bipartisan approach in terms of the different parties coming 

together after the election, discussing with the electoral officer 

what are the changes that need to be made in the election 

process, and then providing a report of those activities and 

making subsequent changes to the necessary electoral 

legislation. 

 

We‟ve seen this government come forward with a piece of 

legislation or a proposed amendment flowing from their Throne 

Speech — and we‟ll see how the legislation flows from that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker — around photo identification where again 

they‟re trying to curtail people‟s involvement in the electoral 

process. 

 

And this didn‟t come out of the report, this all-party report that 

comes after the elections. This didn‟t come out of any major 

incidents being reported by the Elections Saskatchewan people. 

This is something that was cooked up in the backrooms of the 

Saskatchewan Party in, I would think, conjunction and 

consultation with their brothers and sisters in the federal 

Conservative Party who have taken a similar tack to try to limit 

the participation of people that don‟t have photo identification. 

 

And oddly enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those groups tend to 

be heavily skewed towards seniors. They tend to be skewed 

heavily towards First Nations. And oddly enough, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, those are two groups in particular, another group being 

poor people, groups that generally don‟t have the same kind of 

photo identification that perhaps you or I have sitting in our 

wallets . . . But those are three groups that in past have not had 

a real strong affinity in voting patterns for the government 

opposite. 

 

So you see them bringing forward a measure designed to 

complicate and to confuse and to make it more difficult for 

those people to get to the polling station to register their voting 

intention and to cast their vote. And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

it‟s small wonder that that‟s a group that is historically not 

aligned with the voting, the electoral fortunes of the members 

opposite. 

 

It‟s more than just a little strange . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Oh, pardon me. Well I hear the member from Cannington who 

in past was party to different efforts around, plus or minus 

efforts, in terms of redistribution. And we hear different things 

about the opinion of the member from Cannington as it relates, 

as it relates to the franchise and what constitutes a reasonable 

constituency. And of course we saw efforts from the 

conservative forebears of people like the member from 

Cannington that was so excited about the way that they tried to 

gerrymander the system in the late ‟80s, Mr. Deputy Speaker 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member to 

direct his remarks to the Chair, and also to return to the Bill 

that‟s on the order paper, Bill 150, The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Where this 

relates to the Bill, of course, is that this is a government that‟s 

trying to curtail accountability, that is trying to rein in 

accountability. And it‟s analogous to the behaviour you see in 

terms of the way that they‟re approaching the electoral practice 

in this province. And it‟s analogous to what those members 

opposite and their forebears tried to get up to in the late ‟80s in 

this province. It‟s analogous to what they did in the late ‟60s, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the . . . Why is the 

member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Government 

House Leader. 



November 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6267 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I believe Bill No. 150, 

The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment 

Act, 2010 is the Bill to be debated. The member opposite has 

been in the House for some time. He chose to rise on Bill 150, 

so I wish he would and I think all members of the House would 

hope that he would speak to Bill 150. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: —Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

respond to the point of order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We‟re in a 

debate on a piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and there‟s been a 

long-standing tradition in this legislature, as legislatures across 

the province, to have a significant degree of latitude to talk 

about legislation and about issues, Mr. Speaker. So when 

individuals talking about issues that have impact on the 

government‟s credibility or the government‟s ability to 

implement something because of their behaviours or patterns of 

behaviour, Mr. Speaker, that can be brought around and often is 

a part of every debate of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite were talking among 

themselves and not paying attention, Mr. Speaker, to the 

member on his feet. If they paid more attention, Mr. Speaker, 

they‟d be able to hear the, in fact, the relativity and the 

relationship to this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — In second reading debate we‟ve 

allowed a bit of a circle to be drawn around the Bill, and some 

latitude. But I would remind the member I have been listening 

to his speech, and I know he has been straying quite a ways 

from it. So I would ask the member to discuss the Bill that is on 

the order paper, Bill 150, the superannuation . . . 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I‟m 

interested in your ruling and I‟m interested in the way that 

you‟ve sided with the members . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member not to talk 

about the Speaker‟s ruling, just to carry on with the debate 

that‟s on the floor. I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the way 

that this government is trying to curtail or to undercut or to 

erode accountability with this legislation in terms of trying to 

. . . There is information that has been provided to the public 

previously. There is an analogy. There‟s a parallel behaviour 

here in the way that they‟re approaching the democratic process 

in this province. And if they can‟t, if they can‟t see that the path 

is ever moving forwards to more accountability, moving ever 

forward to more transparency, and with this kind of legislation 

trying to carve it up, to bring it back in, to hide information 

from the public, well I can see how they wouldn‟t want that, the 

parallel with the approach that they‟re taking to the elections 

Act in Saskatchewan and the measures that they‟re bringing 

forward in terms of voter identification and the sham that that 

is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of trying to erect barriers for 

people getting to the ballot box. 

I can see how they wouldn‟t like that. And I can see how the 

member from Meadow Lake wouldn‟t like that because of 

course I‟d bet dollars to doughnuts that he‟s the conduit for that 

bright idea from the federal Conservatives right into that 

caucus, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It didn‟t come out of the all-party 

commission. I‟ll bet you it came right out of the conservative 

playbook. And I can see how the member from Cannington 

wouldn‟t like that because of course those members had to go to 

court in the late ‟80s to fight for a fair and open democratic 

process, and they got stopped in the court of law, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So again, for people that want to have less democracy, it makes 

all kinds of sense that they‟d want to have less accountability to 

go alongside that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So again we‟ve had a 

practice where somebody has paid $50,000, or an organization 

has paid $50,000, that information has been public previously. 

 

They tried to curtail that in Bill No. 9 in terms of regularizing 

the practice of double-dipping. And in terms of . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well perhaps the member from Cannington can 

clarify these things for us in terms of what the precise measure 

is. But you‟ll forgive me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but they 

certainly did bring forward something that tried to 

institutionalize double-dipping and had to withdraw with their 

tail between their legs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Now again with this, our hope is that the people of 

Saskatchewan want more accountability. And you would hope 

that a government that came in for claiming that hope trumps 

fear and all these nice little things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you‟d 

think they‟d figure it out in terms of trying to cut back the 

accountability that‟s there for people trying to keep track of 

their taxpayers‟ dollars and who gets it. 

 

But of course in terms of the behaviours of this government, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, you‟d see how they‟d want to hide some 

of these things. You‟d see how they‟d want to do some of these 

things on the sly. Because that has been the practice to date in 

terms of the innovative, so-called approaches that they‟re taking 

to the awarding of contracts. 

 

We‟ve seen it in terms of the way that they‟ve cut out 

featherbeds for their special friends, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But 

we see it in particular in this Bill where there has been a 

measure of accountability granted to the expenditure of 

taxpayer dollars, and those members are trying to roll it back, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. They‟re trying to lessen the accountability 

for the expenditure of public money in this legislation. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? That‟s not what the 

people want. That‟s not even what those members opposite 

campaigned on in the last election. They campaigned on trying 

to be the most open and accountable government in the history 

of the province. Well again, Mr. Speaker, in a broad way we‟ve 

seen how that has not been the case at all with those members 

opposite. But in a very particular way here, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we see in spades how those members are moving for 

less accountability, less accountability. 

 

So why would they do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Is it so that 



6268 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2010 

they can reward their special friends? Is it so that they can put 

money into different organizations and not have to report to the 

people? You know, why is it that they‟re bringing forward this 

measure, especially when the double-dipping provision in 

particular was shot down in an earlier legislative initiative on 

the part of that government? 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the pattern of behaviour on 

behalf of the members opposite, in terms of putting forward 

measures that would result in less democracy in a curtailing of 

democratic practice in this province, that is very much in 

keeping with the kind of initiatives that we see in this Bill in 

terms of providing less accountability to the people of 

Saskatchewan who very much want to know how that 

government is spending their taxpayer dollars. And you‟d think 

that wouldn‟t be such a hard concept for the members opposite 

to wrap their heads around, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But again when it comes to the, you know, the member from 

Meadow Lake over there, not exactly the champion of 

democracy in this Chamber, Mr. Deputy Speaker, very much 

the conduit from the federal Conservatives in terms of bright 

ideas on how to approach the electorate in ways that massages 

your advantage, very much in ways that are opposite to their 

whole rhetoric around hope beats fear, Mr. Speaker. I‟m afraid 

this is very much a fear-based sort of initiative. 

 

Then we‟ve got the member from Cannington who of course, 

you know, goes back to the 1991 election when those members 

opposite got dragged to account by the people of Saskatchewan, 

but not before they tried to curtail democracy in terms of 

gerrymandering the boundaries of the electoral divisions in this 

province. So that is very much parallel to a government that 

seems to be bringing forward initiatives that would result in less 

accountability in Bill 150. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there‟s one item in this Bill that we 

think bears some interest and some support in terms of 

regularizing or clarifying the situation around survivor benefits. 

But there‟s something that we cannot abide and that we find to 

be completely at odds with the rhetorical flights of fancy that 

the members opposite like to get on in terms of striving to be 

the most open and accountable government in the history of this 

province. I mean on the one hand it‟s almost hilarious, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. It would be hilarious if it wasn‟t so directly at 

odds with the measures that these people are trying to foist upon 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So in that regard, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we definitely do not 

support the lessening of accountability, the erosion of 

accountability, the ability to hide the expenditure of taxpayer 

dollars. And for that, on this side we cannot stand, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So on that regard, I‟d just move to adjourn debate on 

Bill No. 150. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 150, 

The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment 

Act, 2010. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 153 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 153 — The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is a pleasure to rise today to make a few comments on The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act. It‟s an important Act that 

we‟ve had some comments already from the minister, and I 

appreciated his words, and the member from Regina Lakeview, 

former minister of Justice. And clearly I value the kind of 

things he was saying, and a couple of other members from our 

side who clearly think that this is an important Bill, that we take 

some time and consider it wisely. 

 

I appreciated my colleagues‟ earlier comments about 

accountability and how important that is because as we think 

about . . . When we bring Bills forward, we have to be vigilant 

and look at it from every angle. And I appreciate the comments 

made about how, when we are talking about Bills, that we make 

the circle, and we tighten it around that piece of legislation to 

make our points. 

 

But sometimes you have to think about our own personal 

experience and some of our experiences when it comes to court 

and the law because what we do in here affects people every 

day, 24-7. And it‟s so important that we get it right and there 

are no unintended consequences. It‟s critical that that happens. 

Because if it doesn‟t, then we have failed the people who‟ve 

elected us. So we take our time, and we think about what does 

this mean. 

 

And so when we have a Bill that comes before us, provincial 

court amendment Act, it doesn‟t sound very . . . doesn‟t have a 

huge fancy name, but you know really means some new 

directions in how we do things here in Saskatchewan. And of 

course we always want to make sure that‟s the right direction 

and it makes sense for people. And many of these amendments 

do. But some I do have some questions about, and I‟ll talk a 

little bit about them as we go forward. 

 

I know other people want to get on about their comments as 

well, but I want to review. Essentially from what I understand 

reading this, it sounds like there are eight key points, eight key 

core parts to this Bill that the government wants to establish. 

The first is it wants to repeal the civil division of the Provincial 

Court. And it seems that it wants to appear to transfer 

significant responsibilities handled by current Provincial Court 

judges to justices of the peace. 

 

I find that one interesting because we know that judges have 

some training in law. Many I think, they are required to be 

lawyers. Now I‟m not sure the same can be said about justices 

of the peace. I know when you‟re a JP [Justice of the Peace], 

you have an awful lot of skills and sense of fairness and respect 

within the community and standing that people say, well we can 



November 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6269 

live with what that person says. He‟s a or she is a fair-minded 

person and has something to say that we think we all should 

consider. But I‟m not sure if that brings you up to the standard 

of being a judge. And so we have to really think about that. 

 

So I want to talk more about that in terms of the quality of 

service that people will come . . . but when they come and 

finally appear in a court and they go, they wanted to have 

someone of a little bit more stature. And their right to a fair 

hearing may be compromised. And while we in here may not 

think that‟s a big deal, but when people are very — and we 

know this — emotionally tied into what‟s happening to them, 

they want to make sure they get the very best service because it 

may be their only kick at the can, and they want to make sure 

they get a fair hearing. 

 

And the other issues really talk about what functions are being 

transferred out of the Provincial Court and what types of cases 

are going to be handled by the justices of peace. And what‟s the 

impact on the services that the people receive when they go to 

court; will their rights be impacted? 

 

We know that‟s becoming more and more a bigger issue as our 

society evolves and becomes more mature. We all have become 

much more aware of our own personal rights versus the 

common good or the public right. And people are not accepting 

that the public good should outweigh their own individual 

rights. And we‟ve come to appreciate that, and more and more 

we‟ve come to understand that there is something that we have 

to listen to there. And the question is, who stands to benefit 

from these changes? And how did these changes come? Who 

was asking for them? 

 

Also it talks a bit about greater public disclosure of the results 

of the investigations into conduct of judges by the Judicial 

Council. And of course on the face it sounds like a very good 

thing. We always want more public accountability and 

transparency. And I know this government here has struggled, 

struggled long and hard over this issue because in many ways 

they have not lived up to their own public commitments, 

especially after the last election when they made this one of the 

cornerstones of their campaign. And often — daily — we see 

examples of when they are not accountable or transparent. And 

we have big questions about that. We only have to look at the 

Amicus and all the pages have been redacted from those pages 

where we have some real, real questions about that. 

 

And this is a government that goes out of its way to be less 

accountable to the public. And we know, for example, in other 

pieces of legislation that have been brought before us, the 

public . . . this interest disclosure Act, and I‟ve talked a little bit 

about that. And we have some serious concerns. And that same 

sort of Bill, that same sort of way of approaching legislation we 

see in this legislation, and we‟re concerned about that. We are 

very concerned about that, you know. 

 

And my colleague just before me was talking about the 

superannuation Act where you can spend up to $350,000 

without public disclosure. And yet in this Bill, and in this Bill 

they‟re talking about another group that they‟re demanding 

more accountability, more transparency. But for them they raise 

the bar to $350,000. And then we see what‟s happened in the 

Amicus case where they . . . hundreds of pages redacted. So 

why is this government holding itself to a lesser standard than it 

would judges? After all, we are the ones who are making the 

laws, but somehow we seem to get a free pass. And this 

government is very intent on getting that free pass. 

 

Another key point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, talks about allowing 

this government to appoint temporary judges currently serving 

on the bench in other provinces. And this the minister has 

talked about, the Minister of Justice has talked about it, 

particularly around instances where there may be a conflict of 

interest with one or more of the parties involved in a particular 

legal matter. And this would seem sensible enough. But we 

want to make sure we take a look at it. 

 

Another one that seems to make some common sense is around 

the eligibility provisions for disability benefits to the same 

standards — some three months — as provided to other 

provincial government employees. We think that seems fair 

enough, and we would support that. 

 

And we also support the changes to the nature of the Law 

Society representation on the Judicial Council. This seems to 

make some sense, particularly when the president of the law 

council is named as the person who will be the representative. 

And because there‟s a frequent turnover in that position, here 

we have in the council a frequent turnover. And that doesn‟t 

seem to make much sense because we are looking for people 

who are on the Judicial Council who do have some experience. 

And you do get that, but one of the best ways of getting that of 

course is serving a longer period of time. And if the Judicial 

Council or if the Law Society is fine with that, then I think that 

we need to hear them out on this. But we have to make sure that 

they are. And this is an important piece. 

 

I want to, Mr. Speaker, just reflect a moment on what the 

minister has said because it‟s very important. When we look 

back at the Bills that come before us, we take a look and we 

think about, what did the government have . . . What is the 

intent of the Bill? Now we can try to read between the lines of 

the legislation, try to get a sense of what the government is 

going, but unless we hear what the minister says, we may be 

missing some key elements. 

 

So I want to take a moment and just review what the Minister of 

Justice said on November 15th in the House here. Of course he 

talks about, he goes through those same key points, same key 

areas that I talked about. The idea of appointing temporary 

judges in Saskatchewan; again that‟s a pretty key thing. And 

about the disability benefits, and we‟re supportive of that. And 

about how to replace the Law Society representative on the 

Provincial Court Judicial Council if the president is unable to 

attend; that makes some sense. 

 

But he only goes into not a very long part about what happens 

with small claims court. And I think many people will be 

interested in this. And this is not to say this is bad or good, but 

have some concerns about it. I know I‟ve had some experience 

with small claims where I‟ve had to actually take a contractor to 

small claims court many years ago. We had some issues about a 

roof project in our home, and we used the small claims court. 

And I have to say that I was very impressed by the court. It was 

effective, efficient, and I had a lot of respect for the judge who 

made the decision. I had a sense that I was being heard, that it 



6270 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2010 

was allowing individuals who may not have a lawyer the access 

to a venue, an avenue of raising their concerns when all else has 

failed. 

 

[16:15] 

 

And so having said that, having said that, Mr. Speaker, I have 

some concerns about this, and I would need to know more 

about this. Because when you bring in justices of peace, the JPs 

as they‟re often referred to, will they be using the same 

facilities? Will they have the same access to the support staff? 

Will they give the same air of knowledge of the law, of 

knowledge of fairness — all of those things that the judges do? 

 

As I said earlier, justices of peace are quite often people of good 

standing in our communities that we‟ve come to respect. And 

because of their work, because of their community 

involvement, people have got to know them and say they‟re 

pretty reasonable people and they probably could come down, 

make a fair decision and a level-headed decision. 

 

But when people are quite emotionally involved in some of 

these decisions that they‟re bringing forward . . . I know for me 

in my own case was because of a leaky roof. And I have to tell 

you that it was pretty stressful that summer in Saskatoon. We 

had a wet summer this summer, but I think that summer may 

have been second or third. And I have to tell you that my roof 

did not leak before the roofers fixed it and now it leaked. And 

what was I going to do? What was I going to do? Here is a 

family that‟s repairing an older home. And who do we turn to? 

Who do we turn to? And we felt that we could not get redress 

from the contractor, that there were issues there that we weren‟t 

seeing eye to eye on. 

 

Now I don‟t know if they‟re thinking that everything should be 

done through mediation and I think mediation is a fine, a fine 

source. But sometimes, Mr. Speaker, we have to have some 

finality of a decision. We‟re all used to that here. Every four 

years, we have votes and we have an election. We come up with 

a finality of a decision. And sometimes in courts that‟s the same 

way. You have to have a finality of a decision. And so that‟s 

why when you have that, especially in courts, you have to make 

sure that everybody respects the people, the persons who are 

giving those decisions. 

 

And so if we‟re replacing a judge with a Justice of the Peace, 

then we have to make sure that we do have that respect, that 

people are feeling like they‟re getting their day in court, that 

they are being heard. And sometimes decisions don‟t go the 

way people want them to go, but if they feel like they‟ve had 

their chance to make their case, and a judge can make a 

decision that everybody can agree makes sense because, based 

on the facts that are presented, this is the way it appears. 

 

Now I would have to ask, for a Justice of the Peace, will they 

have the same training? Will they be brought up to the same 

speed as a judge who works in that area? I would have some 

concerns. And I think that we see challenges in our 

communities where people are expecting more from different 

services, especially I think of housing — as I‟ve just said and 

I‟ve become very familiar with — where people are doing 

things, renovations. And you know, of course we see the 

renovation shows on TV. And what happens when things go 

wrong? Are they going to take it to a Justice of the Peace and 

say, listen, we think you can make a decision on this? I‟m not 

sure if that will fly very well. 

 

As well, you know, Mr. Speaker, I had a chance to just sit one 

afternoon in the family court, and it was very interesting to see 

how professionals carry themselves in those kind of settings. 

Because it‟s important, as I said, that ordinary people who live 

their lives, if they ever unfortunately find themselves in a 

circumstance where they‟re brought to a court, just want to 

make sure that they feel that they‟re getting the best services 

possible. 

 

And if this is a cost-saving measure, then I have a worry. Is this 

a way of . . . We know judges are being paid fair wages, and 

some might point that their wages are costing the ministry a fair 

bit. If that‟s the case, I guess that is the case. But they do 

important work. They do important work. And where justices of 

the peace . . . I‟m not sure how they are paid. If this is a 

cost-saving measure, we have some concerns. 

 

And of course . . . So I do, and I may come back to that because 

it‟s a very important point that I feel strongly about because in 

my neighbourhood, the people I represent, they can‟t really, as 

many people often say, lawyer up. They have to represent 

themselves. They don‟t have the resources to go out and hire 

the high-priced help, the high-priced lawyers to make sure their 

cases are heard or taken to the next level or whatever. Quite 

often they only get one kick at the can. And sometimes it‟s 

about small claims because it‟s their reality. And so I do have 

some concerns about this. 

 

And I know that this minister, the Minister of Justice, in his 

opening comments did talk about — and he refers to it actually 

twice in his speech — he talks about this Bill and the 

consequential amendments to The Small Claims Act, 1997. And 

I quote, “. . . focus on providing the court with additional tools 

to reduce the time to trial in criminal matters.” And he goes on 

again and talks about, and I quote: 

 

That amendment allows justices of the peace to become 

more involved in resolving small claims matters. Again, 

this will help free up Provincial Court judges to focus on 

criminal matters when backlogs occur. 

 

So here we see another relationship being brought in here in 

terms of the whole criminal backlog or time-to-trial issues. I 

guess they are related because essentially the backlog is 

time-to-trial issues. 

 

And so if that is an issue, then why not address it head-on and 

say, we need more judges, we need more judges to do that. This 

robbing Peter to pay Paul I‟m not sure makes a lot of sense. I 

mean if the small claims courts were working, fine, then leave 

them. I think that‟s an important thing. We don‟t know if they 

were working badly. We haven‟t heard that, and we need to 

know that if we‟re to support this Bill. 

 

But this issue around the criminal matters, we think this is one 

of concern because we know that there is, especially at the 

federal level, a real push, a real push when it comes to the 

tough-on-crime agenda. And while we believe criminals should 

not get a free ride, obviously no one in Canada believes that, we 



November 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6271 

feel that there are better ways of dealing with those issues than 

trying to rearrange the court system so that these folks, when 

they‟ve made a political decision at the federal level that they‟re 

going to put more people in jail for a longer period of time — 

and they‟re going to get it there, they‟re not going to lose cases, 

and they are doing that on a roundabout way through legislation 

like this where they‟re taking from the small claims courts — 

I‟m not sure if this has been communicated well. If I‟m 

misunderstanding it, I need to hear it. I need to understand that. 

We‟ll have questions about that. 

 

But if there‟s two agendas here working, where there‟s 

something else more afoot, I‟m not sure the minister has really 

communicated this well, if this is this government‟s agenda or 

this is the federal government‟s agenda. And this government 

better be ready to deal with the provincial fallout. And if that‟s 

the case, we have some real concerns about that. We have some 

definite concerns about that. 

 

Well as I said, and the minister did talk about this, the Bill 

provides authority and procedures for the appointment of judges 

from other provinces to work as temporary judges in 

Saskatchewan. And he talks about conflict of interest, and that‟s 

fair enough. Sometimes you have to deal with those matters, 

and this may be one way to do this. But we‟re not sure where 

this came from and whether this will be the best way to go. 

 

But again a very interesting, innovative approach. And if this is 

. . . We‟ll hear more about this in committee. And we want to 

make sure that it‟s communicated well so we fully understand 

the ramifications of doing such a thing. We‟re not sure if this 

often happens, but we understand that Manitoba and British 

Columbia allows a Provincial Court judge from other provinces 

to be temporarily appointed as a judge in their province. So this 

gives them some flexibility, and perhaps we should be looking 

at that. 

 

I have to, and I did talk about this earlier, talk about the whole 

issue of integrity and transparency. And I will quote the 

minister here. And he goes on, and I quote, Mr. Speaker, 

“Integrity and transparency are fundamental to public 

confidence in the court and the administration of justice in the 

province.” He talks about how the Provincial Court is held in 

high regard. And I would agree with that, very much so. So we 

have to make sure that we maintain that high regard. 

 

And he talks about how, in some of the issues around 

disciplinary procedures, we have to make sure that the public 

feels that when things go awry, when things go wrong with 

judges, that the hearings are fair, transparent, and accountable. 

 

We do have to, as I said earlier, draw the connection to this 

government and its record for being transparent and 

accountable. And when we think of, I believe it‟s Bill 9, the 

superannuation Bill, that‟s a problem when they‟re raising the 

amounts from 50,000 to 350,000. We have an issue there. So on 

one hand in this Bill here, Bill 153, you see this where they‟re 

asking judges or demanding judges be more accountable and 

transparent; but Bill 9, not so much. Not so much. We have a 

real, real concern with that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think that it‟s sometimes you‟ve got to walk. 

When you do the talk the talk, you‟ve got to walk the walk, and 

it should be ride it through. And when we look at the Bills that 

come before us, there should be some sort of screening process 

to say, how‟s the accountability? How‟s the transparency? Is it 

working both ways? It‟s not just a one-way street. 

 

Often we see this and we go, you know, we have some issues 

here because you‟re asking one group to be more transparent, 

more accountable. But for the government . . . And we raise this 

consistently and quite often. And the reason it‟s quite often is 

because we have some problems quite often with the Bills that 

are brought forward because they‟re allowing less transparency 

and less accountability when the government is involved. But 

when another group, a third party is involved — in this case the 

judges — they‟re being held to a much higher regard. And we 

don‟t think that‟s fair. 

 

We think the people of Saskatchewan deserve better, much 

better. And especially when this government over here 

campaigned on this, when they campaigned on transparency 

and accountability and then they aren‟t. That‟s a real problem 

for the people of Saskatchewan. It‟s a real problem. And while 

they make others . . . It‟s a real, a real issue. So we have some 

concerns about that. And while some of these things are 

seeming to be relatively straightforward, we want to make sure 

that all these questions are answered in committee. It‟s 

important that they‟re answered in committee and that the 

minister understands that not only must justice be seen to being 

applied . . . It must be seen to be applied. And with that, I think 

it‟s important that when we get to committee that we have some 

of these questions here. 

 

I want to just review my colleague‟s comments from Regina 

Lakeview, because as a former minister of Justice he would 

understand this quite well. And I always appreciate hearing 

what he has to say about these things because he has an awful 

lot of insight. In fact many of us have joined into this debate 

and I know whether it‟s from Saskatoon Riversdale or 

Cumberland, they‟ve all made comments on this piece of 

legislation and I think it‟s been very interesting and insightful 

what they‟ve had to say. And I think that the more people hear 

some of the comments, as we start to dissect the issues before 

us, that we appreciate these things. Because you know, Mr. 

Speaker, we won‟t be back to visit this Act for some time, for 

some time, and we‟ve got to get it right the first time, the first 

time. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And you know, in fact, actually what I would do, Mr. Speaker, 

is I will read and I will quote the member from Regina 

Lakeview and he says and I quote, “we have to be especially 

vigilant in what we‟re doing to make sure there aren‟t 

unintended consequences or that the intentions . . . make sure 

that the intentions are entirely clear as we proceed.” 

 

So not only does he talk about the consequences, but he talk 

about the intentions. And I think one of the key points that the 

member from Regina Lakeview, when he‟s talking about Bill 

153, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, really talks about 

where did the impetus come from for this Bill. Who drove the 

changes here? Now there‟s about eight changes or core groups 

of changes, but the issue really becomes who drove this, and 

was there an opportunity for public input? We know that . . . 



6272 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2010 

Obviously we sure hope the Law Society was involved, but this 

especially when it comes to talking about their Judicial Council 

and how they‟re going to be involved with this, I think this is 

really critical. 

 

But I‟m hoping that the judges were involved in some of their 

discussions. And I‟m wondering if the justices of peace . . . I 

don‟t know if they have a group, an association. I‟m not sure 

about that. How do they feel about their new work? This is 

quite a change for them. Some of them may be thinking that, 

especially in rural Saskatchewan . . . I mean I don‟t think it‟s 

even a rural issue. I think it‟s an urban issue. They may be 

thinking this is a job that I can do without a lot of demands. It‟s 

not a heavily onerous job in terms of time commitment. I could 

be totally wrong on this, because we need to hear from these 

justices, the JPs on this issue. But I think that we need to hear 

from those folks about what their thoughts are on this. 

 

And I think that that‟s critical because they‟re going to be put 

into a new light, and the work may be a little different than 

what they were originally planning for. And the worst-case 

scenario is if we were to lose a lot of JPs over the next little 

while because they said, that‟s not the job I signed up for. So 

has the minister done his consultations or are we looking at a 

new type of JP? Maybe we are. Maybe that‟s the concern and 

maybe that‟s the direction this government wants to go — some 

sort of a different type of Justice of the Peace who does a little 

bit more work. 

 

Will they have more training? I don‟t know. We haven‟t heard 

that. That wasn‟t part of the speech. What kind of background 

will they be bringing? Will they be transferring all over the 

province? You know, justices of the peace tended to be working 

in their own community because that‟s what brought them 

standing, as a Justice of the Peace, their standing within that 

community — people who knew them. Will this now become 

almost like a full-time job and they‟ll be looking around? Will 

there be a hierarchy? 

 

Now I‟m only speculating here, Mr. Speaker, but I do think 

there‟s a lot of unanswered questions here about the new role of 

Justice of the Peace when it comes to the small claims court. I 

think that this may be a bit of — as I‟m thinking out loud here 

— a bit of a Pandora‟s box. What are we asking for here? 

Because as we had judges before, we all kind of knew the 

limitations and the expectations and how do you move a court 

system forward. But we‟re adding a brand new wrinkle into this 

system and we‟ve got to make sure that we‟re moving forward 

with the right intentions. Because when we get into the 

consequences, we‟ve got to make sure we‟re good with that. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think this is a very interesting, 

important Act that we have before us. It‟s one that I hope that 

we get a good amount of time to talk about it more. More 

people I know, on this side, will want to talk about the issues 

before us, and clearly they have some things that they want to 

say. And then after that, when we get to a committee, that we‟ll 

have some very good discussion there when we can actually ask 

the minister his intentions. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I now 

move adjournment on Bill No. 153, The Provincial Court 

Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 

moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 153. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 155 — The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very pleased to 

join in the debate. And of course the issue that we‟re making 

reference to — if the member in Meadow Lake agrees — Bill 

155 and The Natural Resources Amendment Act. And if I have 

his concurrence and blessing, I‟ll proceed with my discussion 

on Bill 155, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, The Natural Resources 

Amendment Act, as people have indicated prior to me joining 

the debate, really spoke about the importance of the Fish and 

Wildlife Development Fund Advisory Council. And for those 

that are listening and may want to know what the Bill‟s all 

about, the Minister of the Environment for the Sask Party 

government is proposing that there be a few changes to the 

manner in which the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund 

operates. And I understand there‟s a new role being played by 

an advisory council and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I had a couple questions too. 

I‟m informed that Bill 154 should have been called ahead of 

155. So we‟ll move forward on that. Call the Clerks. 

 

Bill No. 154 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 154 — The 

Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010/Loi de 

2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The 

Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the opportunity to briefly enter into the debate 

around the Provincial Court amendment . . . the consequential 

amendments. This is a relatively straightforward Bill, you 

know, and it‟s always interesting when you see these Bills come 

forward. Really we‟re only reflecting on the word judge, but of 

course my previous comments around judges and justices of the 

peace, I could repeat them. I could go through that again but I 

think that I‟ve made my points well and I would refer people to 

that. 

 

And so with that we do have some concerns about what the 

impacts of that will be. But of course one follows the other and 



November 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6273 

they‟re all both interconnected with that. So, Mr. Speaker, I 

move adjournment of Bill 154. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 

moved adjournment of Bill No. 154. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 155 — The 

Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I was 

saying, Mr. Speaker, the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund 

is a fund that is typically used as they collect fees that the 

fishers and the hunters and the trappers submit on an annual 

basis. They buy their licences and a portion of that, of the 

licences that they pay for, form the basis of the Fish and 

Wildlife Development Fund. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from the minister‟s opening comments he 

mentioned the fact that $3.5 million of what the fund generates 

each year . . . And that‟s about one-third of what they generally 

collect on an annual basis. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s 

important that people know that if you collect roughly ten and a 

half million dollars each year from every hunter, fisher, and 

trapper out there, this ten and a half million dollars that they 

actually collect each year, one-third of that, roughly 30 per cent, 

goes into a Fish and Wildlife Development Fund. 

 

And this fund typically in the past was managed by a number of 

different groups in an advisory role. And I understand from the 

Bill itself that there‟s going to be a little change on it, Mr. 

Speaker. And it appears that the Bill may be innocuous in terms 

of what is being proposed, but we do have some questions and 

do have some concerns that as it relates to the potential 

implication in that the advisory council and the rules and 

regulations under which they operate are being changed 

somewhat, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as we mentioned in the past, the opposition, the NDP 

opposition certainly supports the work attached to the Fish and 

Wildlife Development Fund. Because as I mentioned in the past 

and certainly mentioned briefly here as I began, the Fish and 

Wildlife Development Fund is a very sound way of helping 

people out there that do pay these fees to know that some of the 

money is being spent on habitat, on education programs. I think 

they do some firearm safety courses out of that as well, if I‟m 

not wrong. But it‟s all about making sure that at least a portion 

of all the money that people pay for their permits and their fees 

and their licences, that it goes back into helping the hunting and 

fishing, fisher and trapper themselves. 

 

So in theory, the Wildlife Development Fund is a good fund. It 

works to help habitat. It works to educate people. It comes from 

the hunters and fishers and trappers themselves. And people out 

there should know that, as I mentioned at the outset, ten and a 

half million dollars is being collected each year. A third of that 

is set aside to this fund. And then people of course give the 

government advice on how to distribute that money. 

 

And there‟s a couple of areas that we have to be concerned 

about, Mr. Speaker, and of course one of them is to make sure 

that money is properly used. There hasn‟t been any problems in 

the past. There is an accountability and transparency guideline 

attached to the use of that fund. And certainly I think, in the 

past, the different folks in government had the opportunity to 

see where the money is going. And they‟re part and parcel of 

providing that transparency and accountability. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the groups that they actually consulted with, 

I think groups like the Wildlife Federation, I think were quite 

actively involved with advising the government how to use that. 

 

Some of the proposals . . . The proposal that they have in this 

particular Bill is kind of removing the government‟s 

involvement with that whole notion of being accountable and 

transparent, that they‟re saying, okay the Fish and Wildlife 

Development Fund, as we understand it, three and a half million 

dollars is sitting in this pot. We‟re now going to take that 

money, we‟re going to give it to the advisory council. And the 

government is not going to have anybody on there to see how 

the money is being spent, and so on and so forth. 

 

And in theory that practice may work, Mr. Speaker, because the 

vast, vast majority of people that have given the government 

advice in the past, when the government controlled that fund, 

they were excellent people. They‟d done their work, and they 

worked well as a team. And there was no problems whatsoever, 

and some of the advice that the Fish and Wildlife Development 

Fund actually gave to the government itself was valuable — 

very, very valuable. And now what they‟re doing here today is 

they‟re giving the advisory council more and more control over 

that fund, and more and more control and say how the money is 

being allocated. 

 

And I‟m certain, and we‟re hoping that this is the case, that the 

whole notion of an annual report and where the money‟s been 

spent and how the progress is being submitted back to the 

government so the people could see, and every hunter and every 

fisherman and every trapper out there can actually see what‟s 

happening with their money — in essence, you know, that 

they‟re able to see exactly where the money‟s going and how 

it‟s being spent. 

 

So the transparency I think is twofold in the sense that the 

province could (a) do it themselves or turn this over to the 

committee itself — the advisory council — and they could start 

doing some of the work on their own. But we want to make 

sure, as everybody wants to make sure throughout 

Saskatchewan, that the money‟s properly accounted for and that 

there‟s good transparency. So I‟m hoping that is the case, and 

I‟m assuming that the government‟s not so foolish as to say no, 

and there‟s not going to be no reporting back, that in fact there 

would be that aspect attached to this Bill. 

 

The problem, Mr. Speaker, is what I worry about whenever you 



6274 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2010 

have the notion of increasing responsibility, and in this case for 

the transparency of the fund and the decisions of the fund, 

taking it away from government and giving it to the advisory 

council. In theory that should work fine because you have some 

excellent people there. 

 

But what I hope that doesn‟t happen is that you also transfer 

responsibility to that group to do some of the things that the 

province has typically done before. As an example, they always 

give extra support to the advice given by the Fish and Wildlife 

Development Fund board. They give the government advice, 

and a lot of times they do some of our own staffing and some of 

our own monies to do some of the things that the Wildlife 

Federation wants us to do or the ducks people want us to do. 

Like all these different things that we used to do, there‟s a lot of 

co-operation. There‟s a lot of collaboration on what they 

envisioned would be helpful in terms of the use of this money, 

but the government and the province always done more. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Now the worry I have here is under this Bill, as they transfer 

responsibility for the actual decisions of the fund, are they also 

quietly transferring other responsibilities as well? And that‟s 

always the worry that we have on this side of the Assembly. 

Because if you‟re transferring further responsibility and not 

really . . . and not giving them more resources, then what you‟re 

doing is a great disservice to that organization. 

 

And that‟s some of the worry that we have a lot of the times, 

Mr. Speaker, is because if it‟s as simple as transferring dollars 

and decision making, in theory that‟ll work okay. However if 

we need to make sure that there‟s accountability and 

transparency back, and I‟m sure that would be part and parcel of 

this proposal . . . But equally there isn‟t other responsibility 

shifted onto this board, and over time they gradually take more 

and more responsibility over, thereby eating up that 3.5 million 

that may be used for habitat. All of a sudden they‟re paying 

officers now. All of a sudden they‟re paying other costs 

attached to what we would assume would be the natural 

provincial government‟s responsibility anyway. 

 

So I think it‟s important that people out there know that, as an 

opposition member, we want to make sure that this is not the 

case. 

 

If the intent of this legislation is very clear, of this Bill, it‟s 

primarily to allow this group to have a bit more control in 

decisions around the $3.5 million, and there‟s assurances of 

accountability and transparency. And as I mentioned at the 

outset, there‟s some very, very good people there. I don‟t think 

that there is any major, major challenge with this Bill if those 

conditions are met. 

 

I would certainly want to make sure that people out there knew 

that over time there isn‟t increased responsibility attached to 

this process. Then again we should be okay there as well, but 

there‟s always that concern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And finally I would also point out that it is becoming an 

alarming trend — and that‟s why I think people out there are 

really watching this particular Bill — it‟s becoming an alarming 

trend of this government to kind of outsource some of these 

avenues of finances. And while there is that opportunity to 

outsource some decision making of different departments, 

we‟ve done some of this work in the past, and the only two 

things we‟d always remind people is that there has to be 

accountability and transparency and that you don‟t download 

some of your responsibilities typically and traditionally 

assumed by the provincial government onto these groups that 

you‟re setting up. Because if you‟re doing that, then obviously 

there are some major problems for that group. 

 

And as much as and as often as people are willing to take the 

extra responsibility, they‟re excited about the opportunity, what 

happens sometimes is all of a sudden they realize that what 

they‟ve asked for, they‟ve got. And sometimes it‟s not always a 

pleasant situation. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, in relation to Bill 155, The Natural Resources 

Amendment Act, I just want to point out to folks out there 

listening that in theory we have good partnerships with all these 

groups that are out there. We have $3.5 million to work with. 

This Bill is talking about transferring responsibility and 

decision making to them alone. We want to make sure on this 

side of the Assembly — and it‟s obviously with these quality 

people we have involved with this advisory council — that we 

have good transparency and accountability and a reporting 

mechanism so we can let everybody know that‟s paying into 

these funds where the money‟s going. 

 

The two points we‟d to worry about is (a) as long as it‟s not 

transferring responsibility to them, and (b) is that somewhere 

along the line that the government is planning on giving them 

less money to work with or increasing their responsibility, as I 

mentioned, to a point where they can‟t afford to do anything. 

Three point five million dollars is not a lot of money in terms of 

the environmental challenges out there. Three point five million 

dollars is not a big opportunity for this board to do a lot of 

wonderful things for the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

So again that lends credence to my argument that if it‟s all 

about transferring responsibility in a small fund to a large group 

of volunteers and expecting them to do all these miracles with 

that small amount of money then, Mr. Speaker, I think once 

again we‟re showing that this government has no vision, no 

support whatsoever. 

 

So that being said, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to make a motion that 

we adjourn the debate on Bill 155, The Natural Resources 

Amendment Act. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved 

adjournment of debate on Bill No. 155. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. I recognize the Deputy 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To facilitate 

the work of committees, I move that this House do now 

adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Deputy House Leader has moved that in 



November 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6275 

order to facilitate the work of committees, this Assembly stand 

adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until 

tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 16:51.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6245 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6245 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6245 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6245 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6245 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6246 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6246 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6246 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6246 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6246 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6246 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6257 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6246 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6247 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6247 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6247 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6247 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6247 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6248 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Thank You, Roughriders 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6248 

 Rider Pride 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6248 

 2010 Saskatchewan Book Awards  

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6248 

 Provincial Debt 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6249 

 Santa Claus Parade in Moose Jaw 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6249 

 La Ronge Supports Food Bank 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6249 

 Battle of the Blades Contestant Thanked 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6249 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Contract Negotiations and Supply of Physicians 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6250 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6250 

 Arrangements for a Long-Term Care Facility 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6251 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6251 

 Contracts With Information Technology Office 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6252 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6252 

 Support for Affordable Housing 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6253 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6253 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6254 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 160 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6254 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6255 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 157 — The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2010 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6255 

  



 

 Bill No. 158 — The Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2010 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6257 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6259 

 Bill No. 147 — The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6260 

 Bill No. 149 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6263 

 Bill No. 150 — The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment Act, 2010 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6265 

  Harrison (point of order) ....................................................................................................................................................... 6267 

  Yates (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................. 6267 

  Deputy Speaker (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................ 6267 

 Bill No. 153 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6268 

 Bill No. 154 — The Provincial Court Consequential Amendment Act, 2010 

 Loi de 2010 portant modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2010 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6272 

 Bill No. 155 — The Natural Resources Amendment Act, 2010 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 6272, 6273 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


