




















































Hansard: April 28, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 52B  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 28, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5167 

 April 28, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 13:30.] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 1:30, the House will resume 

with routine proceedings. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With request for 

leave to make a statement relating to the National Day of 

Mourning. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave to make a 

statement in regards to the National Day of Mourning, related to 

the National Day of Mourning. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 

National Day of Mourning for Workers 

Killed or Injured on the Job 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With flags at 

half-mast across the country and pins on display in this 

Assembly today, we recognize the National Day of Mourning 

for workers killed or injured on the job. On this solemn 

occasion, our thoughts and condolences go to all of the family, 

friends, and co-workers of those who have lost their lives. 

 

On behalf of our government and the people of this province, I 

am honoured to recognize the families of the late Jason 

Schwindt, Michael Peters, and James Gallenger who are 

honouring us with their presence today in your gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, each year this one special day, solemn and sombre 

as it is, is set aside for Canadians to mourn those killed in the 

workplace. Sadly, here in Saskatchewan 34 people have lost 

their lives as a result of work-related incidents and injuries. 

However, the pain goes well beyond these victims. The lives of 

the families, friends, and colleagues of these 34 have been 

altered forever. 

 

However, out of this tragedy hope can be born. Understandably 

misfortune can embitter, but it can also inspire. In his inaugural 

address as president of South Africa, Nelson Mandela spoke of 

how the pain his country had experienced could embolden 

citizens to create a better future. He said, “Out of the experience 

of an extraordinary human disaster . . . must be born a society 

of which all humanity will be proud.” 

 

With that spirit in mind, let us reflect on the importance of 

occupational health and safety in the workplace and redouble 

our shared commitment to protect Saskatchewan workers from 

needless illness, injury, and death. Together let us resolve to 

prevent the loss of life and the tragic toll that loss takes on 

families and across communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the reading of the names into the official 

record of Saskatchewan, we make permanent our recognition of 

the women and the men who have lost their lives at work. At 

this time, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to please rise 

as I read the names of the deceased. They are: 

 

Denis Belair Shawn Berg 

Eberhard Bordt Ron Burridge 

John Carrier Darcy Delorme 

Billy Francis James Gallenger 

Phillip Hoffman Joseph Holten 

Wayne Huget John Kalyn 

Robert Leslie John Loch 

Dale Loucks Wayne McClean 

Wade McEwen Robert McKillican 

Thomas Merritt Guy Ouellette 

Mervyn Paproski Jennifer Peel 

Michael Peters Lionell Pillar 

Abram Reimer Harvey Riehl 

Danny Rist Elmer Sarauer 

Jason Schwindt Adrian Scott 

Harvey Sigfusson Yanfeng Tian 

Mark Wilson Evan Yost 

 

On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan and the people 

of this province, I express our most sincere condolences to these 

workers’ families and loved ones. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members now observe a moment of 

silence in this House. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 

 

The Speaker: — Thank you members and guests. I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — I ask leave to make a statement. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I too want to make a statement 

on the Day of Mourning, Mr. Speaker, and to welcome the 

families here today. Mr. Speaker, today we remember those 

workers who have made the ultimate sacrifice. We remember 

their labour, the labour that benefitted their families, and the 

labour that created the standard of living that we all share. 

 

Our thoughts also turn to the families. We reach out to them. 

We try to understand their pain. Today we honour and 

remember those fallen heroes who were killed at work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1984, the Canadian Labour Congress began to 

observe April 28th as a day of mourning. In 1991, after much 

lobbying by the occupational health and safety activists, the 

Parliament of Canada passed the Workers Mourning Day Act, 

initially recognizing April 28th as a day to remember workers 

who gave their lives or were injured just because they went to 



5168 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the canary in a cage has become a symbol of 

occupational health and safety groups and April 28th. At one 

time, Mr. Speaker, canaries were the only safeguard 

underground miners had against dangers in their workplaces. 

When the canary died, it was time for workers to evacuate the 

mines. Mr. Speaker, I remind everyone today of this because in 

some ways we have come a long way, but not far enough, not 

enough for the 34 workers whose names were read into the 

record today by the minister. Today we pause. We pause, we 

honour, and we remember. 

 

Mr. Speaker, unions have always been at the forefront of 

fighting for safe standards in the workplace. And today I want 

to read into the record a statement from Ken Georgetti, 

President of the Canadian Labour Congress and the statement is 

as follows: 

 

Over the past twenty-five years, successive governments 

have pledged their support to workers and their unions. 

They announced new workplace health and safety laws 

and regulations — some of the best in the world. 

Unfortunately, they have failed to provide the resources 

needed to enforce those new laws. 

 

Over the last twenty-five years, the number of Canadians 

who die every year because of something that happened 

to them at work has been steadily growing. We know that 

hundreds more deaths occur due to exposures to 

carcinogens and toxins in the workplace, but they are 

never identified or accepted as work-related by Workers’ 

Compensation Boards. 

 

The slogan for the CLC National Day of Mourning, “Is 

today the day you die at work?” asks, why is it that so 

many Canadians unjustly lose their life? 

 

Sadly, for 2008, the most recent year for which we 

have statistics, 1,036 Canadians lost their lives because 

of their work. 

 

This is the reason why Canada’s workplaces claim a 

growing number of lives very year; the laws are not 

enforced, so reckless employers are allowed to carry on 

without consequence. 

 

It’s time for the federal government and the provincial 

and territorial governments to appoint special prosecutors 

to lay charges under the Criminal Code against employers 

when their actions cause death or serious injury. More 

inspectors must be hired to ensure employers comply with 

the law. Government regulators must be held accountable 

for this carnage that seems to go unchecked. 

 

As we take time today, April 28th, to remember those 

who have lost their lives, been injured or became ill, due 

to their work, I ask you to do no more than reflect on the 

importance of health and safety. I ask you to think of 

those who are closest to you, your child, your spouse, 

your sibling, your parent, your best friend. Consider the 

role they play in your life and your family’s lives. 

Imagine if their life was taken from them. Every single 

one of those 1,036 lives that ended in 2008 had dreams, 

had a mom and had people who loved and continue to 

love and miss them. 

 

Signed, Ken Georgetti, President, Canadian Labour 

Congress. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these workplace injuries and deaths won’t stop on 

their own. It takes commitment. It takes tougher laws and 

resources and better enforcement of those laws before we will 

see the day where no more names are being read into Hansard. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — We have a number of guests in our Chamber 

today that we will be recognizing, and rather than every 

member asking to ask for leave to respond or to express their 

wishes, I’m just going to ask the Assembly if we would allow 

for a blanket leave to acknowledge that. Is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. Thank you. 

 

Members, it’s my pleasure today to introduce to the Assembly 

someone who needs no introduction, especially to members of 

this Assembly. And in a moment, I will invite him and his wife 

and family to stand when I introduce them. 

 

With us today, we have Mr. Fred Wendel, the Provincial 

Auditor, who is retiring as of April 30th after 10 years of 

service as an officer of the Assembly. Mr. Wendel has worked 

as a professional auditor for 40 years in both the private and 

public sectors; 39 of those years were in the Saskatchewan 

public sector. 

 

Today we want to extend our appreciation and gratitude to Mr. 

Wendel. So I would invite Mr. Wendel to stand. Mr. Wendel is 

accompanied by his wife today of 46 years, Dianne, and his 

family. We have his daughter, Janie and her husband, Dale 

Markewich and their children, Daniel, Katherine, Julianne, and 

Thomas. His son, Jeff and his wife, Erin Wendel and their 

children, Dylan, Ethan, and Nolan. Daughter, Jeana and her 

husband, Jeff Craigen and their children, Kaitlyn and Caroline. 

 

We’re also privileged, I believe, to have guests from the 

Provincial Auditor’s office. For the past number of years, 

members have had the privilege of sitting there around a table 

with the auditor as he has explained his report to the members. 

And so I would like to invite, at this time, members to express 

their appreciation by extending a warm welcome to Mr. Wendel 

and his family and staff who have joined us today. 

 

I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont, the Chair of 

the Public Accounts Committee. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you it’s my pleasure to join with you to introduce, 

seated in your gallery, and to welcome Mr. Fred Wendel, his 

wife Dianne and their family to their Assembly. Later today we 

will be recognizing Mr. Wendel’s contributions to our province, 

providing thanks, and wishing Mr. Wendel well with his 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5169 

retirement. 

 

As Chair of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts and on 

behalf of all my colleagues, present and past, I am honoured to 

offer our gratitude to Mr. Fred Wendel for his great service to 

our province. Mr. Wendel has served with integrity, integrity, 

and dedication. I would be remiss not to thank Mrs. Dianne 

Wendel and their family for their many years supporting Mr. 

Wendel’s service, respectively sharing a husband, a father, and 

a grandfather with our province. 

 

At the next meeting of the Public Accounts Committee, I will 

move a motion of appreciation and support, a formal and 

recorded thank you. On behalf of my colleagues, it is my 

honour to simply say, thank you, Fred Wendel. We wish you 

and Dianne a happy, healthy, and fulfilling retirement. It is well 

deserved. I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in 

showing our gratitude. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford, the Deputy Chair of the Public Accounts 

Committee. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Further to the 

comments from my colleague and member for Regina 

Rosemont, on behalf of the government, I would also like to 

thank Mr. Wendel for his years of service in the auditing 

profession, for those many hours of number crunching but 

more, Mr. Speaker, for his recommendations to the 

governments of the day for practical, best-practice solutions to 

assure accountable and transparent governments for the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to the role of auditing and reporting on 

past transactions, Fred and his office provide invaluable 

recommendation for future planning for our ministries and our 

government in areas such as succession planning, emergency 

preparedness, security, and so on. We wish you, Fred and 

Dianne, all the best in your retirement. Thank you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, earlier today there was a 

very special function, a special ceremony at Government House 

honouring this year’s recipients of the Volunteer Medal — the 

15th such installation. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 

provide just a general introduction to those very special people 

who are seated on the floor of the legislature today, and they 

will of course be introduced much more specifically as we go 

through this afternoon. 

 

Just before I do that, I would want to say as well, on behalf of 

the Executive Council, thank you to Fred for his good work on 

behalf of various governments in the province of Saskatchewan, 

frankly on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, to make sure, 

as members had pointed out, that government is transparent and 

accountable. And to Dianne, thank you for sharing him with us, 

with members of the Assembly, with the people of the province. 

And we wish them well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, for 15 years now we have been 

honouring volunteers. It was a great idea implemented by the 

Romanow administration, and it’s a highlight every spring. As 

we hear the citations of the volunteer recipients, we are 

reminded of what is absolutely the best of our province and of 

our communities. 

 

And we are reminded that without people, the likes of which 

that we celebrate today, there would be no soup kitchens, Mr. 

Speaker, for those who need it. There would be no charity in 

this province; the Salvation Army kettle bells would be silent. 

Our history would not be told, Mr. Speaker. Sporting activities 

for kids wouldn’t be available; neither would musical activities. 

Neither would, in some cases, the basic necessities of life that 

are provided in our urban centres and also in rural 

Saskatchewan by volunteers, Mr. Speaker. There would be no 

summer arts festivals. There would be no World Junior Hockey 

Championships to celebrate as we did yesterday. 

 

All of that is provided for us by our volunteers. It’s made 

possible by them. And today we celebrated some very special 

people and, Mr. Speaker, as I said I think it was a highlight for 

all of us there. I only wish the whole province could be here 

every spring or through some other medium to be able to hear 

the citations read of all of these people. They would know what 

a great inspiration they are. 

 

There are two things that happen on every occasion such as this, 

as my predecessor would point out quite aptly and properly. 

The two certainties of the Volunteer Medal presentation is the 

modesty of the recipients, Mr. Speaker, who will deflect and 

defer to others and give credit to family members and others for 

their good work. That’s one certainty. And the other is that the 

rest of us are inspired, hopefully to do what they have done by 

example. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the government, on behalf of the 

Legislative Assembly, I would just welcome them here to their 

Legislative Assembly. And we look forward to meeting them 

more directly just in a few minutes. Mr. Speaker, this year’s 

recipients of Saskatchewan’s Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 

Premier in welcoming to the great Assembly of Saskatchewan 

10 very important recipients — and honoured today — of the 

Volunteer Medals that were given out by the Lieutenant 

Governor. And also to thank the government for carrying on 

this fine tradition, and to the Premier for being there and 

sponsoring the event and the great luncheon we had together. 

 

When the description of the work that these individuals do and 

have done in their past, it was really heartwarming to know that 

they are the people who make our communities the great places 

they are to live. But in addition to that, I think it’s fair to say 

that not only these individuals, but their families because I 

know that the members involved in gaining these awards today 

have many family members who sacrificed as well, either by 

joining them in their endeavour or by staying at home and 

looking after things at home to make sure everything was 

working out. 

 



5170 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

And I just want to join the Premier in saying welcome today, 

and very special congratulations to you, your families, and your 

community on a job well done. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it is my privilege to introduce to you and through you to the 

Legislative Assembly, Mr. Jack Ambler. Jack is from the 

constituency of Regina South, who today received the 

Volunteer Medal. Thank you very much, Jack, for all your work 

that you make our community a better place to live. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege and honour to 

introduce Mr. Dennis Bleier from the constituency of Prince 

Albert Northcote who today received the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Medal. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to 

introduce Sergeant Keith Briant from the constituency of 

Saskatoon Northwest who today received the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today and want to say 

to you and through you to Mr. Speaker and recognize a very 

important individual from my riding. And it’s a privilege to 

introduce to you Mrs. Judy Lyons from the constituency of 

Regina Douglas Park who today received the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast, the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

privilege to introduce Mr. Sidney Katzman from the 

constituency of Saskatoon Southeast who today received the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose, the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

my privilege to introduce Mrs. Marie Knutson from the 

constituency of Rosetown-Elrose who today received the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce Mr. 

Denis Chisholm from the constituency of Regina Douglas Park 

who today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River, the 

Minister Responsible for Corrections, Public Safety and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

indeed my privilege to introduce Ms. Thelma Poirier from the 

constituency of Wood River who today received the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn, the 

Minister Responsible for Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to 

introduce Mrs. April Sampson from the constituency of 

Weyburn-Big Muddy who today received the Saskatchewan 

Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great 

privilege to introduce Mrs. Vaughn Schofield from the 

constituency of Thunder Creek who today received the 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena, the Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments, the Provincial Secretary. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you, it’s a great pleasure today to introduce 13 

employees who are here today to take part in the parliamentary 

program for public service. They’re seated in the west gallery. 

 

The participants are from six different ministries: Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour; Agriculture; Environment; 

Health; Social Services; Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. We 

also have employees from the Office of the Chief Electoral 

Officer and office of the Legislative Assembly. And today their 

program is going include an in-depth tour of our Legislative 

Building, briefings by the Legislative Library, by the 

Legislative Assembly Office of the Clerk, Executive Council, 

and observing the House proceedings. And today they also had 

acknowledged some of the important work we’re doing here 

today, acknowledging the Day of Mourning and our Volunteer 

Medal recipients. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everyone in the Assembly knows that we do not 

do the work of the people by ourselves. We do it with the good 

work with the people in the Public Service Commission. So I’m 

extremely looking forward to meeting with you later and 

discussing the important work that we do together. Welcome to 

your Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition I too would like to welcome the 

members from the public service that are here with us today. 

We all recognize, as members of this Assembly, the very 

valuable work they do on behalf of all the people of 

Saskatchewan on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker. So on behalf of the 

official opposition, I’d like to join with the minister in 

welcoming them to their Assembly. 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5171 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome a 

group of students from the Douglas Park School. They’re seated 

in the east gallery. There’s 26 students. I wonder if they’d just 

give us a wave. They’re here with their teacher Joe Filson, and 

Lois Maeland. 

 

Now Douglas Park School is well-known for the home of the 

Lions, their sports team. And I know that all members will want 

to join with me in welcoming the students here today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

to introduce to you and through you someone who’s no stranger 

to this Assembly, or really pretty much every corner of the 

province, a former member of the Legislative Assembly, 

someone who has contributed much to the province, both in 

business, through his charitable activities, and then of course in 

public service. We welcome back to the Legislative Assembly 

former MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] Ted 

Merriman. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, it 

gives me great pleasure to introduce in the west gallery, Heather 

Malek. Can you give us a little wave, Heather. 

 

Heather is a film and television producer here, in Regina. She 

moved here from Alberta and has been working hard to help the 

government understand the error of their ways with the closure 

of SCN [Saskatchewan Communications Network] Matters. So 

I’d like all members to welcome her to her Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you and to this Assembly, I’d like to introduce some 

people in the Speaker’s gallery. With my wife, Heather are 

friends of ours, Harry and Yvonne Sugimoto from Lethbridge. 

 

Harry and I lived on the same floor in residence a couple of 

years ago, our first two years of university. Harry graduated 

with a degree in agriculture, majoring in poultry science. And, 

Mr. Speaker, if you’re having any problems with your chickens, 

this might be your man. I would like the Assembly to welcome 

our guests. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of concerned citizens of 

Saskatchewan who are concerned over the safety of our 

highways. This petition pertains to Highway No. 10 between 

Fort Qu’Appelle and the junction of No. 1. This particular 

portion of highway, Mr. Speaker, serves three major grain 

inland terminals as well as it is the major artery of commerce to 

northeastern Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and 

the junction of No. 1 in order to improve the safety for 

Saskatchewan’s motoring public. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Fillmore, Regina, Fort Qu’Appelle, and Cupar, Saskatchewan. I 

so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of the protection of wildlife habitat 

lands. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s presented on behalf of concerned 

citizens who understand that The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act protects 3.4 million acres of uplands and wetlands, or 

one-third of all wildlife habitat lands in Saskatchewan in their 

natural state, and that repealing the schedule of listing of these 

designated lands by the proposed amendments — in the 

amendments before, currently before the House — will 

endanger protection and designation of these lands. And: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately and 

without delay recognize the importance of the protection 

of wildlife habitat lands and immediately withdraw 

proposed amendments that will negatively affect the 

protection of wildlife habitat lands; 

 

And in so doing, cause the provincial government to 

commit to meaningful and adequate consultation with all 

stakeholders that will be affected by future legislative 

changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Melville, 

Estevan, Broadview, Wapella, and Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition from people who are concerned that many 

Saskatchewan seniors live on fixed incomes and are victims of 

physical, emotional, and financial abuse, and that many of the 

seniors believe that they have a right to social and economic 

security and a right to live free from poverty, and that 

Saskatchewan seniors have a right to protection from abuse, 

neglect, and exploitation. 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to enact a 



5172 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

Saskatchewan seniors’ bill of rights which would provide 

Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic security 

and protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. 

 

And this petition is signed by citizens from Choiceland and 

Melfort. I so present. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition in 

support of maintaining educational assistants in the province. 

The petition indicates that children have a right to learn in a 

supportive and stress-free environment, that the government’s 

data shows a growing number of students that require additional 

support to succeed, and that there was a document published by 

the Ministry of Education which substantially would reduce the 

number of educational assistants in the province. Mr. Speaker, 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Cause the government to provide funding for the required 

number of educational assistants to provide special needs 

students with the support they need and maintain a 

positive learning environment for all Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

And this petition is signed by people from Saskatoon, Wapella, 

Regina, Moosomin, Humboldt, Lanigan, and Wynyard. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of affordable rents in 

housing in Saskatoon. And we know that the vacancy rate for 

rental accommodation in Saskatoon continues to be low, but yet 

the price, the cost of the rental accommodation is increasing, 

sometimes at an alarming rate. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to develop an affordable housing program 

that will result in a greater number of quality and 

affordable rental units to be made available to more 

people in Saskatoon and Saskatchewan, and that the 

government also implement a process of rent review or 

rent control to better protect tenants in a non-competitive 

housing environment. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of Highway 135. The petition addresses the concerns 

of the community of Pelican Narrows. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to pave the 7 kilometres of Highway 135 

through the community of Pelican Narrows as committed 

on August 24th, 2007. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Pelican Narrows. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of financial assistance for the town 

of Duck Lake water project. The petition is signed because the 

town of Duck Lake has been shorted for their water system, and 

they’re being charged an exorbitant amount on their monthly 

bills for upwards of $200 a month. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from the town of 

Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition 

supporting an exemption for Furdale from ministry’s directives, 

with respect to having to have a new water treatment system or 

different water lines brought into the community. The 

government ministry has directed that customers can no longer 

use their non-potable methods, which were approved by Sask 

Health, and that they’ve done so for over 30 years and have 

paid a considerable amount of money for this in-home treatment 

equipment. The alternative water supply that’s being referred to 

them by the government ministry is a private operator offering 

treated, non-pressurized water at great cost, with no guarantee 

of quality, quantity, and availability of water. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly that your honourable 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to withdraw its order to cut off non-potable 

water to the residents of the hamlet of Furdale, causing 

great hardship with no suitable alternatives, to exempt the 

hamlet of Furdale from further water service cut-offs by 

granting a grandfather clause under The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act, 2002, and The Water 

Regulations, 2002, and that this government fulfills its 

promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5173 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Saskatoon and Furdale. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a 

petition in support of protecting Saskatchewan workers. Mr. 

Speaker, we heard today that 34 people were killed in 

workplaces in Saskatchewan in 2010. Mr. Speaker, the working 

people of Saskatchewan should never be expected to put their 

lives at risk when doing their jobs. 

 

And we, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: 

 

To cause the government to immediately recognize the 

important of creating a safe and healthy working 

environment for all people of Saskatchewan; 

 

And in so doing, cause the government to support the hard 

work and integrity of occupational health and safety 

officers and respect their authority by supporting them in 

their performance of their duties; 

 

And in so doing, create a culture and atmosphere of respect 

for working people by upholding the high standards of 

occupational health and safety and by honouring those 

workers who have been killed in the workplace in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon, Colonsay and 

Warman. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 

with a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 

about this government’s continuing disregard for legal, 

constitutional, and human rights. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners pray that your honourable 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to direct marriage commissioners to uphold 

the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan couples 

and to withdraw the reference to the Saskatchewan Court 

of Appeal that would allow marriage commissioners to opt 

out of their legal obligation to provide all couples with 

civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon. I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive $1 billion deficits put forward by the 

Sask Party and the billions of dollars of debt growth under the 

Sask Party the past two years. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Regina. I 

so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased again today to rise to present a petition in support of the 

film and television industry here in Saskatchewan. This petition 

is signed by residents concerned this government has let the 

film and television industry languish for two and a half years 

and then has made a very poor decision with the closure of 

SCN, which has basically kicked the industry to the curb. I’d 

like to read the prayer. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action:  

 

To cause the provincial government to make changes to 

the film employment tax credit that will allow the 

Saskatchewan film industry to be more competitive with 

other provinces and to reverse its decision to shut down 

the Saskatchewan Communications Network and to work 

with the industry to reverse the decline in film production. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon 

and Regina. I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 

National Day of Mourning 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The National Day of 

Mourning is a day to honour the men and women who have lost 

their lives or have been injured on the job. It’s also a day for 

everyone to join together to renew our commitment to 

preventing workplace injuries, illness, and death. Workplaces 

across the country will observe this solemn day through 

moments of silence, candle lighting, and donning ribbons or 

black armbands. Workplace deaths are preventable tragedies 

that bring grief and sorrow to the people throughout 

Saskatchewan and across this land. 

 



5174 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, because of a terrible workplace death in January 

of 2009, new legislation came into effect on July 1st last year. 

These legislative changes were suggested by Sharon Gallenger. 

Sharon’s husband, Jim, a Ministry of Highways snowplow 

operator since 1984, was tragically killed while in the aid of a 

stranded motorist on the highway near Belle Plaine. The new 

legislation was put into place so that hopefully no one else will 

have to go through what Mrs. Gallenger did. 

 

The opposition member from Regina Coronation Park 

introduced the new legislation on behalf of Mrs. Gallenger. This 

legislation is an example of government and opposition 

members working together when the safety of Saskatchewan 

workers is at risk. MLAs came together to try and ensure that 

tragedies like this are avoided at all cost. Together we can 

prevent the loss of life and the tragic toll it takes on our families 

and communities. 

 

Let’s all embrace health and safety in our daily lives and make 

getting home safely the most important part of our work day. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, today marks a Day of 

Mourning, a day for all of us to honour workers who have been 

injured or lost their lives on the job. A Day of Mourning was 

introduced by the Canadian Labour Congress in 1984, and in 

1988 the Saskatchewan legislature became the first jurisdiction 

in Canada to make April 28th a day of mourning for people 

who were killed or injured on the job. Now it has spread to 80 

countries around the world. 

 

While we have certainly made progress since the first Day of 

Mourning in 1984, we have not gone far enough. The number 

of people killed in the workplace in Saskatchewan in 2009, 

according to the Workers’ Compensation Board, was a 

shocking 34. And, Mr. Speaker, even one person killed in the 

workplace is one too many. 

 

The annual observance of this day will strengthen the resolve to 

establish safe conditions in the workplace for all. It is as much a 

day of remembering those who have died in the workplace as it 

is a call to protect the living. But it will take respect, 

commitment, and fundamental change before we can create a 

culture of the utmost respect for workers and their safety. 

 

I ask all members to join with me today and every day in 

honouring those workers, their families, who lost their lives in 

the workplace. In their memory, may we continue to fight to 

ensure that the workplace deaths come to an end. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Batoche. 

 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Week 

 

Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s no better 

place in Canada to see the power of volunteerism at work than 

right here in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan’s spirit of 

volunteerism is renowned far beyond our borders. We are 

recognized for our extraordinary high rate of volunteering. 

Those visiting Saskatchewan have been astounded by the 

volunteer-driven events we have hosted. 

Mr. Speaker, our province’s successful events include the 

Scotties Tournament of Hearts, the Brier, the Grey Cup, and of 

course our most recent event, the World Junior Hockey 

Championship. Volunteers are active at all Saskatchewan 

communities. Many of our sports coaches are volunteers. Our 

neighbours who shovel senior’s walks or help them buy their 

groceries are volunteers. Saskatchewan’s volunteers help to 

raise millions of dollars a year for worthwhile causes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when fires or flood force people from their homes, 

volunteers help distribute food, blankets, and arrange for 

shelter. Volunteer Week highlights these contributions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of this House to take this 

week to say a heartfelt thank you to our many volunteers. You 

are truly making Saskatchewan a greater province. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Community Association Opens Toy Library 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. City Park is a 

neighbourhood in my constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin. In 

early February, the community association of City Park opened 

a toy library. The toy library is a volunteer-run lending library 

of toys housed in a room of City Park Collegiate. With this new 

library, parents can access a variety of toys that help their 

children develop a wide range of motor skills and cognitive 

ability, including imaginative play. 

 

Moreover, the library can assist parents in pinpointing particular 

toys that are most suited to their child. As importantly, 

neighbourhood families can share toys instead of individually 

buying them and then wondering what to do with them when 

their child outgrows or becomes tired of the toy. 

 

Since opening just a couple of months ago, the toy library has 

been receiving donations of toys from neighbourhood residents 

and already has over 150 toys available for loan. The toy library 

will accept donations on an ongoing basis in order to build its 

inventory significantly. 

 

The toy library is a valuable asset to the City Park community. I 

encourage members of this Assembly to join me in 

congratulating both the City Park Community Association for 

launching this innovative neighbourhood project and City Park 

Collegiate for providing space for it. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Regina Residents Fight Hunger and Poverty 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently residents 

of Regina took part in an annual 30-hour famine. Through this 

event every individual has the power to fight hunger, poverty, 

and injustice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a story of a young child named Rachel. 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5175 

Rachel is an example of one of these types of situations these 

impoverished people find themselves mirrored in. Rachel 

walked a week from her home to Goma, an internally displaced 

person’s camp in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Her 

mother was shot and killed by rebels, and she lost her father in 

this displacement. She’s one of 160 orphans who lived in the 

camp. Food can be scarce and diseases like diarrhea and malaria 

are widespread. 

 

When one participates in the famine, in only 30 hours they will 

make a difference in the lives of children like Rachel and 

communities around the world. During the famine, groups take 

part in a variety of activities — some of them small, some of 

them involving participants from across Canada — to help 

create awareness about hunger and have fun in the process. As 

well, due to the recent earthquake that has struck Haiti, the 

money raised will also go towards supporting the relief efforts 

that are needed in Haiti. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while fasting for this cause, we remember there 

are so many people who are not as fortunate as we are. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Conservatives  

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are finding 

out who the real conservatives are in this province. The 

dictionary tells us conservatives are, “characterized by a 

tendency to preserve or keep intact or unchanged.” Sounds like 

conservatives like to hold onto things, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, has a plan to let 

go some of the 3 million acres of Crown land currently 

protected by The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. So much for 

that government’s tendency to preserve the environment, Mr. 

Speaker — not very conservative. 

 

Now in politics, Mr. Speaker, people often tie the name 

conservative to sound fiscal management, but that government 

is now running a $1.3 billion deficit after they let go of a $2.3 

billion surplus left behind by the fiscally conservative NDP 

[New Democratic Party]. So much for keeping the province’s 

finances intact, Mr. Speaker — not very conservative. 

 

If they can’t hold on to a $2.3 billion surplus or a 3 million acre 

Crown jewel, what are the so-called conservatives holding on to 

over there, Mr. Speaker? Well there’s one thing they’ve got a 

firm grip on. In fact they’re holding on to it for dear life — $3 

million that belongs to another political party. That’s right, Mr. 

Speaker. They may hold Sask Party cards, but the PC 

[Progressive Conservative] fund trustees and others named in 

the court documents pretend they’re more conservatives than 

the Conservatives to hold onto power. 

 

No matter, Mr. Speaker. However many pseudo-conservatives 

the Assembly holds today, the people of Saskatchewan will 

ensure that it holds a lot fewer come November 11th. And that 

estimate, Mr. Speaker, is a conservative one. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

National Kids Help Phone Week 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our children are the 

most important people in our lives. Every parent wants to be 

there to support their children at all times. Unfortunately, Mr. 

Speaker, there are certain instances that a parent may not be 

able to help. It is at these times such as this when it’s important 

to have an organization — the Kids Help Phone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, April 26th to May 2nd marks National Kids Help 

Phone Week. The Kids Help Phone line is an organization 

which makes it their mission to improve the well-being of 

Canadian children. They provide anonymous, confidential, 

professional counselling, referrals, and pertinent information. 

They offer immediate bilingual professional counselling to 

children 24 hours a day. Every day Kids Help Phone 

counsellors answer calls and online questions from across 

Canada. Counsellors are there to provide immediate and caring 

support and information to the children that reach out to them. 

 

In the last year, Mr. Speaker, they helped Canadian children in 

need. Well over 2 million times, the phone and online 

counselling services were used. I would like all members of this 

Assembly to recognize the efforts of the hard-working 

counsellors of the Kids Help Phone. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Interprovincial Agreement 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the Assembly I 

asked the Premier about the new trade deal with British 

Columbia, Alberta, and Saskatchewan and asked when the deal 

would be signed. And the Premier said . . . I asked if it would be 

signed soon and he said no. Today I have a media advisory 

which we received a few moments ago that says on this Friday 

at 12:30 p.m. there will be the signing of the new partnership, 

new West partnership agreement. 

 

My question to the Premier is this: when will he become open 

and transparent on this issue? And my question is, when will 

the public be consulted on this trade deal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have Hansard in front 

of me, but I believe yesterday the member said, will this 

government be signing a new trade deal/TILMA [Trade, 

Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement]? The answer was 

no because we are not signing TILMA. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Premier said 

there was no need for public consultation because there had 

been consultation with TILMA. Then later the Premier said, but 

this isn’t TILMA; this is a new agreement. How is it that the 

consultation on the old deal was okay when he’s signing a new 

deal? When will the public see either one of them and have an 



5176 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

opinion, and when will this be shared with the public of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in opposition 

and through the last election campaign, the Saskatchewan Party 

said we would not sign TILMA, that we were interested in 

removing barriers to trade between the provinces, that we were 

interested in potential trade deals with other provinces. But a 

couple of things bothered us, Mr. Speaker, with respect to 

treatment of the municipalities, subsidiary Crown corporations, 

Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, if those can be dealt with, then 

we are very much interested in being part of the new West, 

being part of the largest economic force in the country. 

 

And in the meantime, from September 2009, Mr. Speaker, is 

when consultations have happened since we signed the MOU 

[memorandum of understanding], including with our 

commercial Crowns, the big city mayors. In October, city 

managers, Saskatchewan urban municipalities, SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], the 

Association of Health Organizations, our two universities. Then 

in November, health regions, Sask Association of School 

Business Officials, SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology]. Mr. Speaker, there has been a lot of 

consultation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we welcome the questions. We welcome the 

debate. We know the NDP are opposed to these, to improved 

trade between the provinces. They know they’re opposed to the 

new West, but it will be happening soon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, what the public is opposed 

to and what the opposition’s opposed to is this Premier saying 

one thing and doing another. That’s what we’re opposed to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only is the Premier not being open, but the 

Deputy Premier, in a letter to the Leader-Post on March 10th, 

2007, the member for Canora-Pelly said, and I quote: 

 

Given the impact of TILMA across the province, we also 

believe the provincial government has an obligation to 

consult with stakeholders and the public prior to 

accepting or rejecting Saskatchewan’s participation in 

TILMA. 

 

Now he’s saying, it isn’t TILMA; it’s a new agreement. Is the 

Deputy Premier saying that because it’s a deal they’re signing, 

it doesn’t need consultation, but anyone else’s deal does? Is that 

what the Premier’s saying? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we signed a memorandum of 

understanding with the province of Alberta and the province of 

British Columbia on a new West partnership that may include a 

trade deal, that may include us co-operating on marketing 

internationally, that may include us co-operating on an 

innovation agenda. 

 

And let me be very clear about this for the hon. member. I’ll 

slow it down. Subsequent to that MOU . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well he’s saying, where is it? If he would 

just stop talking and listen, I’ll tell him. Since we signed the 

memorandum of understanding, we have consulted with all of 

those groups. September ’09, October ’09, November ’09 . . . 

The member says, which groups? I just read them, Mr. Speaker. 

I will happily table them and send them over. We’ll increase the 

font and we’ll highlight them. Soon he will get it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier can laugh about 

consulting with the public. He has a chosen 10, chosen 10 

groups, but we will bring him many hundreds of people who 

have not been consulted with — labour groups, First Nations, 

Métis, many others; municipal governments who have called 

our office asking for consultation. 

 

He can laugh at those people if he likes but I want to say to the 

Premier: when is he going to become open and transparent 

about this important arrangement and let the public see it, talk 

about it, debate it, so they know whether it’s in their best 

interests or not? What is he afraid of? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the hon. 

member would know a little bit about saying one thing and 

doing another, Mr. Speaker. He was a part of a government that 

campaigned to improve rural health care. He closed down 51, 

52 hospitals, Mr. Speaker. His party campaigned on no tax 

increase in ’04 and months later they increased the PST 

[provincial sales tax], Mr. Speaker. 

 

His party campaigned on open and transparent government and 

he gave us Channel Lake and he gave us SPUDCO 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company], Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

If the hon. member knew the former agreement, knew TILMA, 

which we are not signing, but if he knew what the consultation 

was about, he would know the areas that were exempt from that 

agreement, Mr. Speaker, like First Nations policy, Mr. Speaker 

— exempt. If there’s to be another agreement I would expect 

exemptions like that to continue, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Habitat Protection and Sale of Crown Land 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, on March 8th the Minister of 

Environment claimed that she consulted with environmental 

organizations like Nature Saskatchewan and the Wildlife 

Federation before introducing far-reaching changes to The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, changes that removed 3 million 

acres from the Act. But Gary Seib with Nature Saskatchewan 

wrote to the opposition yesterday stating, “We can assure you 

that no meaningful consultation regarding the sale of Crown 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5177 

lands has occurred with Nature Saskatchewan.” 

 

To the minister: why did she claim she consulted with these 

organizations when she clearly did not? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, consultation . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, consultation took place 

between my ministry and various organizations — I have a list 

of them here — on the changes that we are proposing to WHPA 

[The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act] land in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. We believe that the people who are . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the members to 

allow the minister to respond. But I would also ask members 

not to be casting aspersions about the character of individuals 

from their chair. I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, included on the list of 

people that we consulted with is the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation, Nature Conservancy of Canada, Nature 

Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association, 

Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I noted yesterday about the Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen’s Association, the Stock Growers Association are 

urging us to get this Bill passed, Mr. Speaker. They are using 

this land. They are managing this land well. They want to be 

able to own this land, Mr. Speaker. We don’t have a problem 

with land ownership. Apparently the NDP do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, her version of consultations 

is clearly different than other organizations that say they 

weren’t consulted at all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Wildlife Federation is calling the minister’s 

actions a betrayal, noting that she assured people last year that 

land under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act would continue 

to be protected. Last June, in response to concerns about the 

sale of Crown land, the minister stated in a letter, “The Act 

prevents the sale of designated land and is therefore not eligible 

for sale.” 

 

To the minister: how can she claim that people were adequately 

consulted when in fact she told them that wildlife habitat lands 

were not eligible for sale? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is 

apparently quite easy for the members opposite to be selective 

in the information they’re presenting to the Chamber, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The letter that was sent out was in response to the sale of 

agricultural land last year. Mr. Speaker, when the Minister of 

Agriculture announced that there was going to be ag land for 

sale, we were inundated with requests for that sale, Mr. 

Speaker. A lot of the requests were for wildlife habitat 

protection land because people who were using it for grazing 

and ranching purposes had been leasing this land and wanted to 

purchase it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That land sale through the Ministry of Agriculture was for land 

outside of WHPA, Mr. Speaker. So when people were asking to 

buy this land, the letter that was sent out was for verification 

that that land sale was for ag land. That WHPA land was not 

involved in the ag land sale, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the letter 

clarified. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — It’s amazing, Mr. Speaker, that absolutely no 

one in this province, including the opposition, can understand 

what the government is trying to say or do at any given point in 

time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister claims she consulted with Ducks 

Unlimited about the process she’s using to decide which lands 

can be sold off. But Brent Kennedy of Ducks Unlimited told the 

Leader-Post, “We’re not convinced that they have the means to 

be able to accurately define which lands have greater or which 

lands have lesser ecological value.” 

 

[14:30] 

 

In other words, the minister is taking 3 million acres out from 

under the Act and will now base future decision on which lands 

will be sold off on a process that wildlife experts believe is 

flawed. And she won’t listen to the concerns of the people she 

claims to be consulting. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why won’t she listen? Why is she 

barging ahead with a plan that so many people feel is flawed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the men and women 

within the Ministry of Environment have been working on the 

science-based modelling for the ecological assessment of 

Crown land within my ministry for many, many months, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I have met with them. The Minister of Agriculture and I have 

both met with them to go over this modelling, Mr. Speaker. 

They have done an amazing job. These are professional people 

who are trying to do their job, Mr. Speaker. They are in charge 

of the science-based modelling, Mr. Speaker, because that’s 

what they do. They’re biologists and agrologists, and Mr. 

Speaker, they understand how to do these sorts of things. 

 



5178 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

And if people want further information on the modelling that 

was used, I’m sure that we will be happy to provide that 

information, Mr. Speaker. But I would like to commend the 

men and women within my ministry who worked so very hard 

to put this in place. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a wonderful quote that I 

heard the other day. And it’s a quote: “Whenever there’s a 

conflict between humans and wildlife, wildlife gets the silver 

medal.” Mr. Speaker, this quote was by someone by the name 

of Colin Maxwell. And it seems like the environment under this 

government is only getting the silver medal and not the gold. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even the PC minister who brought in the Act 

thinks the government is on the wrong track. Colin Maxwell 

says, “Without habitat there is no wildlife. It’s that simple.” 

And while the government justifies its decision by the fact that 

the current lessees of the land have been good stewards, 

Maxwell points out: 

 

The problem is the same stewards may not be there 10, 20, 

or 50 years from now. Somebody else might be. Who 

knows what the new owners might decide to do with that 

land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you’d think the opposition from the minister who 

brought in the Act would convince the government to 

reconsider. But the minister said the government still intends to 

pass this Bill in this legislative session. Will she pull back the 

Bill and give people with real concerns an opportunity to be 

heard? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to 

restate the fact that under these proposed changes, the vast 

majority of land will still continue to be protected. Mr. Speaker, 

a large chunk will be under wildlife habitat protection Act. A 

large chunk will be under The Conservation Easements Act, Mr. 

Speaker. There is only a very small percentage that would be 

sold without protection at all, Mr. Speaker, because the 

ecological values have changed. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, well over 90 per cent of this land will remain 

under protection. And I think it’s important that when the 

members opposite are out talking to people that they remind 

them of that, Mr. Speaker, that it is over 90 per cent of land that 

would be under protection, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The conservation easements are a very important tool. 

Organizations like the Nature Conservancy of Canada use them 

all the time. The Leader of the Opposition was the board Chair 

of that organization, Mr. Speaker. He understands how they 

work. Mr. Speaker, we have increased the penalties for 

individuals from $2,000 to $100,000, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I find it totally inappropriate that the member 

who asked the question interfered and didn’t even give the 

minister to actually respond clearly. Next question. 

I recognize the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 

 

Revenue Sharing with Municipalities 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, Regina City Council passed their budget last night and 

Regina residents will pay 4 per cent more for their property tax 

this year, more than double the rate of inflation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is the minister hiding behind his broken 

promise, which is nothing more than a backdoor tax increase, 

and forcing Regina residents to pay more in property tax? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. And I appreciate the question and the opportunity to 

talk about what this government has done on revenue sharing, 

which is to increase revenue sharing by 43 per cent over the last 

two years, Mr. Speaker. The city of Regina has received in the 

last two years $26 million this year for revenue sharing, an 

increase of $10 million from when we first formed government, 

Mr. Speaker. The city of Regina and municipalities across this 

province are doing very, very well under this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, according to a story on 

NewsTalk this morning, and the quote was, “Ward 9’s Terry 

Hincks says the province is solely to blame for the property tax 

increase, insisting it failed to stick to its revenue-sharing 

formula.” It’s the province’s fault this year and we’re already 

hearing promises they’re going to make next year. But as Sean 

Shaw says, and I quote: 

 

. . . as the City learned all too well this year when the 

Province broke that very same promise, they should be 

very wary about including money they don’t have in the 

bank — Provincial election year, or not. 

 

To the minister: how can Saskatchewan families have any shred 

of trust that this government will live up to their promise to 

municipalities next year when they broke their promise this 

year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

member opposite can quote NDP bloggers if she wants, but let 

me read her a quote from February 1st, 2010 on NewsTalk. Mr. 

Speaker, let me read this quote. “Whether we were going . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, let me read a quote from 

February 1st, 2010, on NewsTalk, and this quote says: 

 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5179 

Whether we were going to get an increase in revenue 

sharing or not, there was going to be a property increase. I 

think I made that perfectly clear. 

 

That quote, Mr. Speaker, was from Mayor Pat Fiacco. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this government has 

off-loaded expenses and responsibilities to municipalities every 

chance they get, whether it’s municipal revenue sharing, 

whether it’s Dutch elm, whether it’s the mosquito program, 

doctor recruitment, and the list goes on and on. 

 

And now, to no one’s surprise, municipalities are forced to 

increase their property tax. Residents of Weyburn, Tisdale, 

Swift Current, North Battleford are all facing at least a 4 per 

cent increase. In Prince Albert on the municipal side, they’re 

looking at a 7.35 per cent and the city will also be cutting 

funding to maintenance, construction, and affordable housing. 

 

To the minister: when will this government offer municipalities 

more than off-loading expenses, broken promises, and tax 

increases? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, I think we need to get the 

facts straight with regard to revenue sharing. Over the past two 

years, this government has increased revenue sharing by 43 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker, 43 per cent over the course of the last two 

years that we have . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

Responsible for Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — And the NDP record, Mr. Speaker, is 

to have clawed back $600 million of revenue sharing over the 

16 years of that term. That member voted to claw back $20 

million from her own city, Mr. Speaker. How they can have the 

gall to stand up and claim that this party isn’t supporting 

municipalities is . . . I can’t believe it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister wants a lesson in 

facts, well maybe he better listen to a few of these. 

 

They signed the agreement on revenue sharing. They made a 

promise, attached it to PST because PST doesn’t fluctuate like 

resource revenues, Mr. Speaker. Except when the government 

can’t calculate their own budget, mismanages the potash 

projections, and then scrambles — keeps spending the money, 

Mr. Speaker, by the way, even though it isn’t coming in — and 

then they have to scramble to cover their own behinds because 

they failed to budget and manage the provincial finances. Mr. 

Speaker, the facts show clearly this government has broken 

promises and downloaded on municipalities. And when will the 

minister keep his promise? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the fact is that that 

party clawed back $600 million from municipalities over the 

course of the last, over the course of their 16 years in 

government. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? We heard it 

again, the members opposite running down the province of 

Saskatchewan, running down the economy of this province, 

which is poised again to lead the country, Mr. Speaker — the 

lowest unemployment rate in the country, Mr. Speaker, the 

highest population total in Canada and growing, Mr. Speaker. 

They should be applauding this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Financial Management of Crown Corporations 

 

Mr. Yates: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to take the 

opportunity to talk about the Sask Party business logic. Mr. 

Speaker, yesterday the Minister Responsible for the Crown 

Investments Corporation claimed in this Assembly that 

increasing the debt to equity ratios in our Crowns will somehow 

add to their overall value. 

 

To the minister: is that the logic behind the Premier’s decision 

to drive up Crown debt by 95 per cent in the next four years, to 

increase the value of the Crowns? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I was very 

pleased today to table the annual report of CIC [Crown 

Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] that talked about 

their work in the last year. They successfully met the challenge 

of increasing the demands that we had in 2009, and at the same 

time we have positive earnings. And they increased, they have a 

dividend for our treasury as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is actually, the earnings from ongoing 

operations last year was $15.9 million higher than it was in 

2008. As far as the actual creating value in the Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to know that 

this year we’re going to be spending $1.4 billion in capital 

expenditures in the Crowns, and with this expenditure, the total 

value of the Crowns are going to increase by 21 per cent since 

we took power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how much did the NDP increase the value of the 

Crowns in their last three years? Eight per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad she’s sticking to her script 

today. It’s a little better. Mr. Speaker, if the minister’s 

incompetence wasn’t weakening our Crowns and driving up the 

cost of living for Saskatchewan people, it would be laughable. 

 



5180 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

The Premier and his government have destabilized our Crowns 

by stripping 100 per cent of their revenues. According to the 

Leader-Post, “Rarely has a Crown corporation been required to 

provide a dividend equal to 100 per cent of its profit.” But, Mr. 

Speaker, that’s the Premier’s new agenda. 

 

To the minister: why has the Sask Party government turned a 

rare practice into standard operating procedure for their 

government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the questions from the 

member opposite really are laughable as well. I wonder if they 

remember in 2003 when the NDP government took a dividend 

from SaskPower that was based on the paper foreign exchange 

gains. That was equity stripping, Mr. Speaker. We’re not 

managing the Crowns like that. Crowns like SaskPower are not 

paying a dividend. 

 

I wonder if the members opposite remember when in 1990 

when SaskTel and SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] 

paid more than twice their earnings in dividends. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s fairly 

obvious that this Premier and his minister learned a great deal 

from Grant Devine and the operation of Crown corporations 

during the 1980s. Mr. Speaker, there are so many similarities 

between what Grant Devine did to our Crowns and what the 

current Premier is doing to them that it’s unbelievable. 

 

In the dying days of his government, Grant Devine took more 

money from the Crowns than they actually earned. According 

to the Leader-Post, “A CIC official said in 1990 the 

cash-strapped government of the day required some 

corporations to pay dividends that actually exceeded earnings.” 

 

To the minister: is this why the Premier has tabled in this House 

legislation to raise the borrowing limits of one Crown 

corporation so he can take even more than 100 per cent of 

Crown revenues? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

would like to talk about Grant Devine. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would anticipate the 

opposition would like to hear the response to the question. So 

I’d ask the members to allow the minister to respond. I 

recognize the Minister Responsible for Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — I know that the members opposite would 

like to talk about Grant Devine because then they would be able 

to talk about . . . They wouldn’t have to talk about their leader 

and the fact that their leader is 30 points behind our leader. 

Mr. Speaker, right now our Crowns are well positioned to pay a 

high dividend. SaskTel has the lowest debt to equity ratio of 

any of the telecoms. SGI has no need . . . It has minimal 

infrastructure. SaskEnergy’s debt to ratio equity is comparable 

to all the industries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, maybe the members opposite would like to talk 

about some of the companies that we have in Canada. Canada’s 

most indebted companies are companies like Enbridge, 

companies like Encana, companies like Royal Bank. There 

actually is a need to have some debt in companies, Mr. Speaker, 

and our Crowns are doing very well. 

 

[14:45] 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize . . . Order. Order. I would ask the 

members to come to order so that we can proceed with the 

orders and the reports from standing and special committees. I 

recognize the Chair of the Standing Committee on the 

Economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 125, The Crown 

Minerals Amendment Act, 2009 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, yes, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Energy and Resources has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 125, The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 

2009 and that the Bill be now read a third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 125 — The Crown Minerals 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — I move this Bill be now read a third time 

and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Energy and 

Resources has moved that Bill No. 125, The Crown Minerals 

Amendment Act, 2009 without amendment be now read the 

third time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5181 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 107, The Weed 

Control Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

committee? I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has requested 

leave to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 107, The Weed Control Act without amendment and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may move to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 107 — The Weed Control Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that this Bill be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Agriculture that Bill No. 107, The Weed Control Act without 

amendment be now moved and read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 117, The 

Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read in Committee of 

the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 117, The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping 

Heritage Act without amendment and that the Bill be now read 

the third time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the minister to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 117 — The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping 

Heritage Act 
 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 

Environment that Bill No. 117, The Hunting, Fishing and 

Trapping Heritage Act without amendment be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 

the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 106, The Labour 

Market Commission Repeal Act without amendment. 

 



5182 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d ask members to come to 

order. If members want to discuss things together, it would be 

. . . it would certainly facilitate hearing the Chairs and the 

ministers as they move and as the Speaker calls the questions 

before the Assembly. 

 

When shall this Bill be considered in Committee of the Whole? 

I recognize the Minister Responsible for Enterprise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that this Bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Enterprise has requested 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 

No. 106, The Labour Market Commission Repeal Act without 

amendment and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. The minister may proceed to third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 106 — The Labour Market Commission 

Repeal Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

that this Bill now be read the third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Enterprise that Bill No. 106, The Labour 

Market Commission Repeal Act without amendment be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 129, The Enforcement of 

Money Judgments Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in the Committee of the Whole on this Bill and 

the Bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

129, The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act with 

amendment, that the Bill and its amendments be now read the 

third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 

time? 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 129 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that the amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice may proceed to move 

third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 129 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved that Bill 

No. 129, The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act with 

amendment be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5183 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee of Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 130, The Enforcement of Money Judgments 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

130, The Enforcement of Money Judgments Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2009 without amendment, that the Bill be 

now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 130 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2009/Loi de 2009 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Enforcement 

of Money Judgments Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 130, The Enforcement of Money Judgments 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 without amendment be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 

 

Standing Committee on Human Services 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 135, 

The Prescription Drugs Amendment Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole of this 

Bill and that the Bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

135, The Prescription Drugs Amendment Act without 

amendment and that the Bill now be read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 135 — The Prescription Drugs 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 

that Bill No. 135, The Prescription Drugs Amendment Act 

without amendment be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Crown and Central 

Agencies. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 



5184 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to 

report Bill No. 98, The Municipal Financing Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2009 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

98, The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 

2009 without amendment and that the Bill be now read the third 

time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 98 — The Municipal Financing Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 98, The Municipal Financing Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2009 without amendment be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 1,551 through 1,554. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1,551 through 1,554 are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 138 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2010 

(No. 2)/Loi n
o 
2 de 2010 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour 

du Banc de la Reine 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 

2010 (No. 2). Mr. Speaker, you will recall that amendments 

were introduced last spring to The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 to 

make beneficiary designations in tax-free savings account, or 

TFSAs, effective. These amendments came into force on May 

14th, 2009. The changes responded to the TFSA’s [tax-free 

savings account] provisions in the Income Tax Act of Canada 

that came into force on January 1st, 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Bill is to introduce 

amendments to The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 to specify that 

beneficiary designations are made in accordance with tax-free 

savings accounts instead of referring to the Income Tax Act of 

Canada. 

 

The provision that was added to The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 

last spring provides that where the holder of a TFSA designates 

his successor, holder, or beneficiary and the original holder 

dies, the amount in the account can be paid to the designated 

person rather than being considered an asset of the holder’s 

estate. Without that amendment, the amount in the account 

would have been distributed according to the will. If there is no 

will, the rules of intestacy would apply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, two Canadian financial institutions have taken the 

position that the Saskatchewan legislation should have been 

worded differently. Consequently these institutions are not 

allowing clients to make these beneficiary designations. 

Although we are confident that our approach is correct, these 

financial institutions have refused to change their position, and 

thus their customers are unable to make beneficiary 

designations in their TFSAs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most financial institutions in Saskatchewan do 

allow TFSA holders to make beneficiary designations. However 

efforts to persuade these two banks to change their approach 

has been unsuccessful. It appears that the prudent thing to do 

for the sake of the customers of these banks in Saskatchewan is 

to amend our legislation. We recognize that amendments have 

also been made to the TFSA legislation in Nova Scotia and the 

Yukon, and we are also prepared to take this step to ensure that 

all Saskatchewan customers have the benefit of TFSAs and 

being able to designate beneficiaries. 

 

Accordingly this Bill will amend the new provision of The 

Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 to substitute wording that all banks 

and financial institutions will accept as satisfactory. The 

institutions concerned have reviewed the proposed legislation 

and their representatives are satisfied that it responds to their 

concerns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the original TFSA provision passed last spring 

received second and third reading on the same day without 

going to committee. The opposition recognized that it was for 

the benefit of purchasers of TFSAs. For the same reason I 

would hope that the opposition would support the timely 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5185 

passage of these changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Queen’s Bench 

Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2). 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved second 

reading of Bill No. 138, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 

2010 (No. 2). Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

comments I think will be brief. The history of the legislation 

was accurately described as far as it went by the minister in his 

second reading remarks. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Sometimes, sometimes, quite often members of the government 

seem to be concerned with the amount of time that opposition 

members speak to legislation, feeling or at least saying that they 

feel that the opposition is impeding the passage of legislation in 

the House. And as a matter of fact, today we are still operating 

under hours unilaterally extended by the government majority 

because of this alleged concern. 

 

This legislation may be a case of where the opposition was too 

co-operative. If you needed evidence — I’m not sure you did — 

that you could be too co-operative in facilitating the 

government with legislation, this may be an example of that. 

 

My experience with this legislation, Mr. Speaker, was that a 

constituent of an opposition member raised the issue with his 

MLA who forwarded it to me as Justice critic. And I wrote to 

the minister and explained that we had come to believe that 

there was a gap in the legislation, that the ability of people to 

designate beneficiaries for the purposes of the Registered 

Retirement Savings Plan was not there for tax-free savings 

accounts, that it should be there, that it was a parallel piece of 

legislation and program on the part of the federal government, 

and that the provisions in The Queen’s Bench Act should be 

parallel as well. 

 

The government brought forward the original legislation that 

now the government proposes to amend, and I believe that — 

and the minister may have referenced this at the end of his 

second reading speech; I didn’t quite catch it — I believe that 

we waived even sending it to committee in that circumstance, 

that the legislation went straight through the legislature without 

going to committee and being subject to some questions in 

committee as to for example consultation with financial 

institutions. 

 

Perhaps if the opposition, even to the irritation of government 

members, had been more diligent in asking questions, perhaps 

the original legislation would have sufficed and we wouldn’t be 

here today because two significant institutions, significant in 

size . . . And I believe I mentioned which ones I understand 

them to be when commenting on some other matter on my feet 

in the House. There was, I believe, the Royal Bank and the 

Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce — not financial 

institutions of insignificant size and with a number of 

customers, I would think, in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And although every other financial institution operating in the 

province may accept the wording that’s in the legislation, they 

have not. And we failed to ensure as legislators that the 

understanding of the intent of the legislation would be 

sufficiently understood by all financial institutions operating 

tax-free savings accounts. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, again we supported the legislation. We 

called for the legislation. We continue to support the legislation. 

Of course we want changes to be made so that all financial 

institutions will acknowledge the legislation and allow for the 

designation of beneficiary. We have no wish to hold the 

legislation up, and that’s why my remarks will probably be the 

only remarks made by an opposition member in the House. And 

upon sitting down, we will gladly see this go to committee. 

 

We don’t want to waive committee in this case, Mr. Speaker. 

Once burned, twice shy. But I expect its time in committee will 

also be very short, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 138, The 

Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 138, The 

Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2) be referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 139 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

move second reading of The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010. Mr. 

Speaker, I am pleased to introduce a Bill that will amend 

several statutes. These amendments will eliminate boards, 

commissions, and foundations that are either no longer 

operational or whose duties can be transferred to another 

committee, board, or foundation. Mr. Speaker, this Bill will 

ensure that the province’s resources are used in the most 

cost-effective way. 



5186 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

The Bill will eliminate the Co-operative Securities Board, the 

Geographic Names Board, the Saskatchewan Heritage Advisory 

Board, the Saskatchewan Heritage Property Review Board. The 

powers and duties of these boards will go to other pre-existing 

organizations so as to avoid duplication of duties. The Bill will 

eliminate in their entirety the Educational Boundaries 

Commission and the farm support review committee since these 

bodies are no longer operational. 

 

In order to achieve the purpose outlined above, the following 

statutes will be amended. Firstly, The Agricultural Safety Net 

Act, The Credit Union Act, 1998, The Heritage Property Act, 

The New Generation Co-operatives Act, The Saskatchewan 

Financial Services Commission Act, The Education 

Regulations, 1986. In addition, The Geographic Names Board 

Act and The Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation Act will be 

repealed. 

 

Similar amendments regarding bilingual statutes are currently 

being addressed in The Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining 

Government) Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2). 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill will amend The Saskatchewan Financial 

Services Commission Act to transfer the powers of the 

Co-operative Securities Board to the Saskatchewan Financial 

Services Commission. The Co-operative Securities Board 

performs an important function as a financial marketplace 

regulator by approving and reviewing the issuance of securities 

by co-operatives. However, duties of the board can be 

transferred to the Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission 

which is the primary securities regulator in Saskatchewan. 

 

The substance of the provisions of The Co-operatives Act, 1996 

will not change. The SFSC [Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission] will also take on the powers that were previously 

assigned to the Co-operative Securities Board under The Credit 

Union Act, 1998 and The New Generation Co-operatives Act. 

These Acts also consider the issuance of securities and approval 

and review of those securities by the Co-operative Securities 

Board. The powers, duties, and requirements under each Act 

will not change but will now be undertaken by the 

Saskatchewan Financial Services Commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill will also amend The Agricultural Safety 

Net Act to eliminate the farm support review committee. 

Membership to the committee has been terminated and the 

committee is no longer needed. The committee’s duties can 

now be undertaken by Ministry of Agriculture staff. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will also repeal the Geographic Names 

Board and The Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation Act and 

transfer the powers and duties of each to The Heritage Property 

Act. The Heritage Property Act considers heritage property and 

allows for the preservation, interpretation, and development of 

certain aspects of heritage property. The Bill will establish The 

Heritage Property Act as the main Act in relation to heritage 

matters. 

 

Under The Heritage Property Act, the Saskatchewan Heritage 

Foundation will be continued. The foundation will, through the 

use of committees made up of board members, take up the 

duties and powers of the advisory board and Heritage Property 

Review Board that presently exist under The Heritage Property 

Act, and will also take on the role of the Geographic Names 

Board. Where currently four separate bodies take on 

overlapping roles, the Bill will ensure that all powers are now 

undertaken by one oversight body. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, currently an education boundaries 

commission may provide recommendations to the Minister of 

Education with respect to school division boundary changes. 

However boundary changes can be determined by the Ministry 

of Education with the minister, as now, retaining the ultimate 

authority for determining if boundaries need to be altered. As 

the commission will be eliminated in the companion Bill, this 

Bill will amend The Education Regulations, 1996, to remove 

reference to the commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this consolidation of various statutes is consistent 

with this government’s movement towards reducing the 

footprint of government. Also by eliminating boards and 

commissions that are no longer required and by having 

pre-existing boards take on more than one role, this government 

is encouraging cost saving and multi-tasking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Miscellaneous 

Statutes (Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 139, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010. Why is the 

member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — I rise on a point of order. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Okay. Will the member continue on 

his point of order. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order today on 

the issue of written questions. Mr. Speaker, we received replies 

for written question 1,552, 1,553, and 1,554. Mr. Speaker, in 

written questions the government has three options: to either 

answer the question; to convert to debates returnable, Mr. 

Speaker, and change the question; or to order the question 

unanswered for 180 days. 

 

But the government owes respect to the members of this 

Assembly to answer the question or order it, if they don’t want 

to answer for 180 days, or to convert it. Mr. Speaker, what we 

have today, and I’m going to read into the record answers to 

questions that show a great disrespect to the members of this 

Assembly: 

 

The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is currently before the 

Assembly, detailed questions regarding this bill are better 

directed to the minister in the committee stage as per the 

regular legislative process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not up to a minister to determine how 

members of this Assembly should ask questions. Under the 

rules of this Assembly and the Parliament of Canada, you have 

three options. The option of putting forward an answer saying, 

we don’t have a right to have the answer unless we ask it 

someplace else, is not an answer and shows a blatant disrespect 

to the members of this Assembly. 

 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5187 

Mr. Speaker, a government who doesn’t want to answer a 

question has other means not to answer a question. But to show 

that level of disrespect, Mr. Speaker, is unacceptable. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

believe what the member opposite is referring to is legislation 

that is currently before this Assembly for consideration and, Mr. 

Speaker, because that legislation is here before the Assembly 

for consideration, that is the appropriate venue, Mr. Speaker, to 

deal with those kind of questions. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I will have to take time to look at the 

written questions, to look at the answers, and review the rules 

on procedures in this House. So with indulgence of the House, I 

will come back later with a ruling. We will carry on with 

second reading of Bill No. 139. 

 

I recognize the member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 

maybe be progressively briefer as the second reading debate 

goes on, on the Minister of Justice’s Bills. 

 

In respect to the streamlining legislation that the minister spoke 

to just a few moments ago, it is well understood that institutions 

are created, agencies are created by government to perform 

certain functions, that they do so for some period of time. 

Legislation changes, practice changes, other institutions are 

created to engage in those functions, and no one much worries, 

quite often, as to whether the original boards or agencies, other 

types of institutions are actually doing anything any more, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Their existence is not a footprint of government, I would 

suggest, because they’re not active. They’re not costing money. 

They may not be, they may not be staffed. They may not have 

any individuals appointed to them, Mr. Speaker. In all 

probability, that is the case. 

 

That’s not a reason for maintaining their existence, Mr. 

Speaker. But I hope the minister didn’t mean to suggest the cost 

of government’s going to be reduced by these measures. I 

expect it won’t be reduced a penny by these measures. But 

boards, agencies, commissions that no longer exist should not 

be referred to in law. 

 

At some point this type of housekeeping — and this is almost 

literally housekeeping legislation, Mr. Speaker — is required to 

clean up outdated references to organizations that have served 

their purpose and whose function is being taken somewhere 

else. 

 

[15:15] 

 

But also I think there is some active reorganization of 

government in this Bill and there may be some questions of 

members of the Legislative Assembly, certainly members of the 

appropriate committee, as to the effect of that reorganization. I 

noted that even government members of the intergovernmental 

and justice committee have had questions about legislation 

recently, based upon their reading of the legislation or their 

experiences with the area. 

 

And so I believe that, although there may not be much cause for 

debate on second reading in the Legislative Chamber, there may 

very well be lines of inquiry that we need to pursue in 

committee and, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that that is where this 

legislation now proceed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 139, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining Government) Amendment 

Act, 2010 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

designate that Bill No. 139, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

Amendment Act, 2010 be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill. No. 140 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2)/ 

Loi corrective (rationalisation administrative) n
o 
2 de 2010 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 

second reading of The Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining 

Government) Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2). Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to introduce a Bill that will amend two bilingual 

statutes to eliminate the Co-operative Securities Board and the 

Educational Boundaries Commission. Similar amendments are 

concurrently being addressed in The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill will amend The Co-operatives Act, 1996 

to eliminate the Co-operative Securities Board and transfer the 

powers of the board to the Saskatchewan Financial Services 

Commission. The Co-operative Securities Board performs an 

important function as a financial marketplace regulator to 

approve and review the issuance of securities by co-operators. 

However, this function can be transferred to the Saskatchewan 

Financial Services Commission. The substance of the 

provisions in The Co-operatives Act, 1996 will not change. 

 



5188 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill will also amend The Education Act, 1995 

to eliminate the Educational Boundaries Commission. Under 

the Act, the commission may provide recommendations to the 

Minister of Education with respect to school division boundary 

changes. However, a commission is no longer needed to 

provide recommendations to the minister who will continue to 

retain the ultimate authority for determining if boundaries need 

to be altered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as with the English Bill, this Bill will ensure that 

various bodies are not performing similar tasks that can be 

performed by a pre-existing entity and that organizations that 

are no longer needed are eliminated from legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Miscellaneous 

Statutes (Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 

2). 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 

second reading of Bill No. 140, The Miscellaneous Statutes 

(Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2). I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, I think 

my response to the second reading speeches would become 

briefer as they go on. This Bill, of course, is only required as a 

companion piece to the previous Bill and only in respect to 

legislation that is in the bilingual form. What these Bills remind 

me of is how little of our legislation has been translated into 

French, or how much is left to be translated into French. 

 

Of the number of Bills that were being amended by the previous 

Bill that we discussed, I think only two are being amended 

because of the bilingual version by this Bill. It is appropriate 

that this Bill travel in companion with its sister, and for those 

reasons, Mr. Speaker, I don’t imagine there would be any more 

debate on this Bill than on the predecessor, referring to the Bills 

that are only unilingual version or are in a bilingual version. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, I think the appropriate thing to do is to 

refer this matter to committee where any questions that would 

be asked, I would think, of the first Bill would apply to this 

companion piece as well. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 140, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining Government) Amendment 

Act, 2010 (No. 2) be now read a second time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill be 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I designate that Bill No. 140, The 

Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining Government) Amendment 

Act, 2010 (No. 2) be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 123 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 123 — The 

Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2009 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

When we left off, I was going through a number of the 

questions that had been raised by the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

I’m getting a little help from the member opposite. Which one 

was it again? 

 

An Hon. Member: — 91. 

 

Mr. McCall: — 91. There we go. 

 

I guess what I’ll do at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think 

I’ve made the point in terms of the great number of questions 

that the FSIN has concerning legislation that has been brought 

forward by this government under the guise of, you know, 

consultation proclaimed, but anything but consultation actually 

having taken place. It’s almost getting to the place, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, where you can do sort of a reverse code of this thing. 

If they say that consultation has been done, you can almost bet 

that it hasn’t. And that’s certainly the case as regards First 

Nations and Bills 121, 122, and 123. 

 

And again, there are a great number of questions have been 

brought forward by the FSIN in terms of these pieces of 

legislation. And I guess what that would seem to signal to me, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is again, if you go back through my 

remarks in the earlier part of this intervention, the length and 

breadth of the concerns raised by First Nations in terms of what 

this government is doing and their need to get things in black 

and white because they can’t get a straight answer out of the 

government otherwise, it’s fairly alarming, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And so I guess we’ll be, we’ll certainly be submitting 

these questions in written form to see if we can elicit some kind 

of a direct answer on the part of the government in this regard. 

 

But I think this is part of a relationship that should be working 

well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. For all the times that we get 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5189 

members opposite proclaiming that we are in fact all treaty 

people, you’d think that it would be more than just a slogan, 

that it would be treated with some respect and with some 

substance. 

 

And what we see coming forward in the case of Bills 121, 122, 

and 123 is that there isn’t that respect, and there isn’t that 

substance in terms of trying to work in partnership and to move 

things forward together. 

 

So the minister in the second reading speech on December 2nd, 

2009, would say something to . . . and would say, and I quote: 

 

We continue to work with First Nation and Métis people 

to find meaningful approaches to incorporate their 

interests as we move forward on a results-based 

environmental regulatory system. 

 

You know, we find that, we find that almost sort of sad, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in terms of what we now know has gone on 

behind the scenes, in terms of a process that wasn’t served in 

good faith, in terms of engagement with First Nations that did 

not take place, in terms of a system that would seem to be, or an 

approach on the part of the Ministry of the Environment and the 

Minister of the Environment that is at best confusing. And at 

worst, I don’t know if I’ve got a parliamentary word for it, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

But again, and to wrap up, I mean, the February 25th, saw a 

letter and a submission because of course the FSI was trying to 

get answers — as they should, as doing work on behalf of their 

member First Nations, in trying to get a straight answer out of 

this government — and that letter of course, closes off . . . It’s 

from Vice-chief Lyle Whitefish, February 25th, 2010. It closes 

off: 

 

Minister Heppner, while I have not received a response 

from you with respect to my previous request for a 

meeting to move forward with such consultation process, 

I repeat this request today. 

 

I look forward to receiving the Crown’s response and 

working together with the Ministry of Environment to 

ensure that First Nations Treaty rights are protected, for 

present and future generations. 

 

Then of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, more than a month passes 

and the next that the FSIN hears from the ministry on this point 

is by phone call on budget day. Not addressing the concerns 

raised around Bills 121, 122, 123, though it’s very hard not to 

link the two things in some kind of causal connection, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but again in this letter, from Vice-chief 

Whitefish, he states: 

 

Firstly, I must express serious concern that you did not 

provide due consideration and respect to my office by 

contacting me personally to discuss this decision prior to 

such decision being made. 

 

Secondly, I am extremely disappointed with your actions 

as a Minister of the provincial Crown, particularly in 

breaching the terms within our Partnership Agreement. 

 

Later in the letter it says: 

 

As you can surely appreciate, such above-noted telephone 

conversation took me by complete surprise. The decision 

by the Ministry of Environment to terminate funding 

essentially terminates our agreement. At no time have 

either you, or representatives of the Ministry, indicated 

that any major decisions regarding our agreement were 

being contemplated. As such, I would have expected your 

office to respect our long standing relationship by at the 

very least, engaging the FSIN in discussions. 

 

We go on a little further in the one letter that other of my 

colleagues have quoted at length. The Vice-chief states: 

 

The telephone call on March 24, 2010, advising that your 

Ministry will no longer provide funding illustrates 

insensitivity and lack of appreciation of First Nations 

people in Saskatchewan. We see it as a clear indication 

that the Ministry of Environment has no regard for the 

Inherent and Treaty rights of First Nations people in 

Saskatchewan . . . 

 

Further on in the letter it says: 

 

The message you are sending to First Nations leadership is 

that the Ministry would prefer an adversarial approach on 

dealing with matters between First Nations and the 

provincial crown. 

 

That again, these members opposite in that Ministry of 

Environment can’t seem to run a straight consultation process, 

that where you have clearly understood objectives, you have a 

clearly outlined process. And you’ve got this, instead you’ve 

got this process that has led to confusion and, you know, seems 

to reward legitimate questions being answered by the revoking 

and the removal of funding. I think says a lot about the 

approach of the members opposite to consultation in general, 

and consultation with First Nations and Métis people in 

particular, Mr. Deputy Speaker. At the end of the letter it says: 

 

My previous experience in working with provincial 

Ministers and Ministries has been very different than what 

has occurred in this situation. I am therefore dismayed 

with your Ministry’s actions, which brings into question 

whether First Nations can trust the Ministry of 

Environment to live up to its commitments. This is 

illustrated in the unilateral action to terminate a sixteen 

(16) year relationship. 

 

And I should add — and you know perhaps this isn’t, this isn’t 

the most popular thing to do — but he’s not just talking about 

ministers in previous governments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 

terms of who he’s had a productive, respectful, co-operative 

working relationship. He’s actually talking about ministerial 

colleagues of the member opposite in terms of the Minister of 

the Environment, in terms of other ministers who the 

relationship has been very different and in terms of being more 

productive and more co-operative. 

 

So in terms of the important role of the Ministry of the 

Environment though, in terms of the duty to consult and 

accommodate, and in terms of the management of environment 



5190 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

and to lands and resources in this province, the Ministry of the 

Environment obviously has a critical role to play. 

 

[15:30] 

 

So that minister is unable to pursue a functional, productive 

relationship with a very key stakeholder in this regard, and not 

just a key stakeholder because it’s the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations or First Nations in particular, but 

these are things that are mandated by a Supreme Court decision, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And again, when they talk about if you’d rather pursue an 

adversarial approach, what they’re talking about is of course the 

fact that either we can do this, you know, without compunction 

through the courts — and no small amount of effort, time, and 

resources expended like that — or they’ll take it through the 

courts. And in other jurisdictions, of course, there have been 

different cases taken through the courts which has built up the 

body of case law that has become the duty to consult and 

accommodate groups of decisions in the Supreme Court rulings. 

 

And that so, sort of, in such a wanton fashion, Mr. Speaker, that 

this ministry seems to want to proceed in a way that is so 

disrespectful and dysfunctional with what should be a key 

stakeholder in the future of this province and the management 

of the environment and lands and resources. And you know, 

that is not just a key stakeholder just by virtue of being a large 

part of our population and a rich part of our heritage and society 

and economy here in Saskatchewan, but by the fact that we are 

indeed all treaty people, and that from those treaties flow 

responsibilities under the duty of the Crown and the honour of 

the Crown to live up to those treaty undertakings. 

 

And that you’ve got a ministry that with these Bills and with its 

actions, seems to have such disdain and disrespect for that 

responsibility as it regards First Nations, we find hard to 

understand on this side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I know that other of my colleagues have a desire to participate 

in this debate, and certainly others have preceded me. And at 

this time I will conclude my remarks and cede the floor to other 

of my colleagues on this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 

intend on speaking for a long period of time on this piece of 

legislation, the forest management Act, Bill 123, but I did want 

to put some remarks on the record, and in particular I wanted to 

say this. You know, it was practically 40 years ago that the 

province of Saskatchewan introduced the first Department of 

the Environment. And since that time, the department’s name 

has certainly changed title on many, many occasions, but 

fundamentally the objectives and purposes of the Department of 

the Environment or the Ministry of the Environment remains 

fundamentally the same as it was when it was first established 

in 1972. 

 

Fundamentally the job of the ministry is to coordinate, develop, 

promote, and enforce policies and programs that protect and 

enhance the environment and they’re to do this in a manner that 

promotes the physical, economic, and social well-being of the 

people of our province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister when she introduced this 

particular Bill, she said in the House that this was part of a 

whole suite of legislation that she was introducing that was to 

encourage streamlining of regulation and it was to encourage 

innovation. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there are some Bills that are significant, and 

the significant piece is this: that in the province of 

Saskatchewan, we have The Environmental Management and 

Protection Act, which is the primary piece of environmental 

legislation in the province. And then built around that Act, we 

have The Wildlife Act, The Environmental Assessment Act, the 

forest management Act, the watershed authority Act, The Parks 

Act, and then we have a number of other pieces of legislation 

that are smaller in statute, but nevertheless important when it 

comes to complementing the environment and the legislation 

that’s in our province to protect the environment. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I read the minister’s remarks for all of her 

pieces of legislation and it seems to me that there’s a bit of 

doublespeak going on. There’s a bit of doublespeak. On the one 

hand the minister talks about sustaining our environment, and 

on the other hand she talks about industry. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that, you know, I’ve always believed 

that one of the roles of government is to ensure that we have a 

vibrant economy, that we have good social programs in place to 

support vulnerable citizens, and that the public good needs to 

trump private interests. The public good needs to trump private 

interests on some occasions. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, I think one of the occasions that the public 

good should trump the private, a few private interests, is when it 

comes to the environment. And I think all of us have started to 

think, certainly as post-war baby boomers start to look around 

and see what’s happening to some of our friends and family — 

some environmental illnesses, degradation, climate change, 

these kinds of things — we start to think that maybe unbridled 

consumption isn’t necessarily the way it needs to be and that we 

need to think more about the future than we think about 

ourselves at this particular moment in time. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the minister’s words, she’s 

talking about deregulation, in many respects. She’s talking 

about moving towards a result-based environmental regulatory 

system that is controlled not by the public, but by industry. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that we need to think long and hard 

about whether or not this is the way we want to go. And is this 

really, is this really our vision for the future of Saskatchewan? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister on this particular piece of 

legislation says that over half of our province is forest, and that 

is true. Over half of our province is forest. And this particular 

piece of legislation, The Forest Resources Management 

Amendment Act, up until now, has regulated our forest, how we 

treat our forest, what we do with our forest. And, Mr. Speaker, 

as the minister said, this is one piece of legislation, of many 

pieces of legislation, that is about streamlining how we treat the 

environment. 

 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5191 

And, Mr. Speaker, if we had some sense of a vision for the 

environment and some sense of a vision for our province, I 

think this would be easier legislation to understand because 

when she talks about the forest, she talks about adapting the 

forest industry in order to meet competitive pressures. Well is 

that private interests or public interests? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I thought as legislators, when we were 

elected to represent our constituents, we came here for the 

public interest, the public good, and not on a few, for a few 

private interests. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what does a results-based regulatory 

approach mean? Apparently the changes are going to place 

greater emphasis on using expertise of our forestry 

professionals. But our forestry professionals that work on behalf 

of the public good or our forestry professionals that work on 

behalf of private interests? And this really isn’t clearly defined. 

 

Now apparently the licensing requirements are going to be 

streamlined in a variety of way. Well, Mr. Speaker, streamline 

to me often signals weakened. Mr. Speaker, the minister also 

tells us that these amendments have been developed following 

extensive discussions with industry, both large and small. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, once again my colleague, the critic for First 

Nations and Métis people, has pointed out very succinctly some 

of the issues that have been raised by First Nations people. And 

First Nations people, Mr. Speaker, certainly live in our forest 

area and forest fringe. And I think that they might have 

something to say about this, but they feel as though they have 

not been spoken to and spoken with on this legislation in a 

meaningful way. 

 

So now, Mr. Speaker, here is what is worrisome. What the 

minister says is that the legislation’s going to enable a 

regulatory system that moves away from controlling activities 

with permits, to requiring the regulated bodies to meet defined 

objectives which are to be established in an environmental 

code. But we don’t know what that environmental code will be. 

And the minister tells us that there’s going to be reliance on 

audits to ensure that licensees are achieving environmental 

performance objectives — but we don’t know what that means 

— and therefore compliance. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you’ve looked at government in say the 

last 20 years, government fundamentally all over the globe has 

moved to more of a deregulated environment. And when I say 

environment, I’m speaking about government generally. And 

that, of course, can lead to some pretty significant issues for 

citizens because deregulation often is about private interests and 

not public interests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister — and this is the piece of legislation 

we’re going to talk about tomorrow — but the minister has also 

indicated that she is going to move on behalf of her government 

over 3.4 million acres of Crown land out of legislation and into 

regulation. 

 

And I know I’ll get to speak about this tomorrow, but one of the 

things that troubles me about that is, once again, it’s about some 

private interests and not public interests. And that’s one of the 

things that a former colleague of mine, the minister in the Grant 

Devine government that introduced the legislation in the late 

’80s, he talked about this morning on the CBC [Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation]. He talked about public interest and 

private interest, and I think that’s what we need to put the lens 

on when we look at legislation like this. Is this about the public, 

our citizens, the overall good of the province, or is this about 

some people, a few people? And that’s what we need to 

consider. 

 

And we need to consider that when we consider all of these 

pieces of legislation that the Minister of the Environment has 

put forward, is it about the Environment minister or is it about 

some private interests? And is it about the public interest or is it 

about some private interests, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, we had a piece of forestry 

legislation that was about the entire forest. And if I recall, I 

believe there are nine provincial forests in the province that are 

covered by this particular piece of legislation. And those nine 

provincial forests represent, in terms of land mass, over half of 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what this legislation has done in the past, 

those forests have been protected by and designated by this 

piece of legislation, The Forest Resources Management Act. 

And then, of course, out of the Act came forest management 

agreements. And the forest management agreements in the past 

have been negotiated between various private interests and the 

provincial forest service, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that the Sask Party has a 

record at the moment that is spotty when it comes to the 

forestry industry. There doesn’t appear to be a plan for forestry 

other than at the moment it looks as though the government is 

intent on deregulating the forestry industry by these 

result-based indicators, a result-based regulatory approach. But 

it looks as though it’s going to be controlled by the forestry 

industry. 

 

This is a government that had appointed a task force that was 

headed by the MLA from Batoche. He was to come up with a 

series of recommendations, but those recommendations have 

never been made public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a government that doesn’t seem to work 

well with First Nations and Métis people and northerners when 

it comes to strengthening the forest industry. And it’s very 

interesting that we have Big River — and it’s an area of the 

province that I am familiar with, Mr. Speaker — but here we 

have an area of the province that, if I recall, voted for the Sask 

Party in the last provincial election. And this is one area of the 

province where they have fundamentally left out the people of 

Big River when it comes to forest allocation and the whole 

notion of getting their mill up and running again. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, even when you look at the federal 

government money, when the province, which had some 

involvement in it, when it came to the allocation of the federal 

Community Development Trust, I note that Hudson Bay got 

$3.2 million for water supply improvements and refurbishment 

of a warehouse. Carrot River got $1.1 million to build an access 



5192 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

road to the peat plant and to fund a feasibility study for a 

regional park and an industrial park. Air Ronge got over 

300,000 for a regional information centre. Big River got 

$55,000 for asset mapping and a community development plan. 

I can tell you the Big River people aren’t that pleased about 

that. 

 

Beauval got 50,000 for an economic development plan. Green 

Lake got $75,000 for an economic development plan. And P.A. 

[Prince Albert] got $100,000 to study viability of green energy 

products. And I don’t think Meadow Lake has gotten anything 

thus far. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when the former government was putting 

together the forestry strategy, it was about an integrated forestry 

approach. The entire forestry industry was about integration, in 

order that there would be cost benefits along the way as various 

functions were provided by various components of the forestry 

industry. And, Mr. Speaker, when the pulp plant went out of 

P.A., that created some very significant difficulties for the 

industry. And it was because the industry was so dependent 

upon each other in terms of its processes and sustainability, in a 

sense. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, you know it’s interesting, the 

government, the Sask Party government didn’t like the deal that 

we had with Domtar. But I have to tell you that since the deal 

which they did not honour has come to pass, they presided over 

the closure of the Hudson Bay OSB [oriented strand board] 

plant or mill and three other mills — two in Meadow Lake and 

then one in La Ronge. And that represents a lot of jobs, and not 

to mention all of the indirect jobs. 

 

Now I know that they formed the Sask Enterprise forestry 

sector team, and they did this a year after coming into 

government, so they’ve been on the job for close a year and a 

half. I note that they’ve changed the name of the forestry centre 

in P.A., so I know they’ve got new letterhead, but it hasn’t 

meant a new job in the forestry industry. 

 

I know that they commissioned the Montreal-based 

FPInnovations in April of ’09 — so that’s about a year ago — 

to analyze best matches between Saskatchewan’s existing and 

potential wood products and the demands in the global markets. 

I’m not sure whether or not FPInnovations has made any 

recommendations, but certainly as legislators, we haven’t seen 

those recommendations because it’s about how do we have a 

more integrated approach to forestry, I presume. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think this is about changing our approach to 

the forestry industry in order to — because the minister has said 

this — in order to make forestry more competitive, I guess . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . And they say I’m right. Okay. But 

the question is, and I think this is an important public question: 

how is this legislation going to protect the forest for future 

generations? I think that’s an important question. How is this 

legislation going to protect the forest, which you know some 

people say are the lungs of our environment. How is it going to 

protect the lungs of our environment for future generations? 

How are we going to ensure that the forests are managed in the 

province of Saskatchewan in the public interests and not just the 

interests of a few? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the minister needs to . . . she talked about 

transparency in her remarks in second reading. This is about 

transparency but it feels as though this is about deregulation, 

Mr. Speaker. It feels as though this is about putting the forest in 

the hands of private interests and not in the hands of the public. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move this Bill to 

committee in order that we will have an opportunity to 

challenge the minister to be much more transparent when she 

provides questions to the committee. And I would say to the 

minister this other point: that when members of the opposition 

ask written questions, I think it’s incumbent upon the minister 

to not be too cute and too funny, but to answer those questions. 

And if she doesn’t want to do that, she knows that she can 

convert them or she knows that she can amend them. 

 

And I think in terms of having, trying to have a more respectful 

workplace — if that’s what we want to call this place — it 

would be important that the minister treat, treat those written 

questions with some rigour when she’s answering them, in 

order that the opposition can do its work on behalf of the public 

and in the public interest. 

 

So thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure that this Bill 

will go to the appropriate committee. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 

a motion by the Minister of Environment that Bill No. 123, The 

Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2009 be now 

read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Which committee shall this be 

referred to? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 123, The 

Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2009 be 

referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This Bill stands referred to the 

Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 126 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 126 — The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone. 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5193 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

To rise and participate in this debate concerning Bill No. 126, 

The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act, it’s 

with a certain sense of irony that I rise to participate in this 

debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A certain sense of skepticism. 

 

Because of course I think, as I’ve said in other debates, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, of course in the 2007 election, it’s a very busy 

time. All of us have different responsibilities in terms of the 

campaigning. And one of those responsibilities for myself saw 

me participate in a debate at the University of Regina with a 

number of candidates from other political parties, including the 

member from Martensville, the current Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

And one of those questions that was raised by the young people 

in that debate, who took a great deal of interest in the 

proceedings and the election, who were participating out of the 

Political Science Students’ Association, obviously people that 

were very engaged . . . And they were working for one of the 

professors there, Professor Tina Beaudry-Mellor who does a 

great job of engaging students and getting them interested in 

current affairs and into the political and social systems around 

us that affect our daily lives. 

 

And so, you know, every now and then we hear about young 

people being cynical concerning the political process, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but I can assure you that these were not those 

young people. These were young people that were intelligent, 

that were articulate, that were very much interested in the 

debates and the comings and goings in the election, and that 

really had a passion for the issues that they were demanding 

questions and explanations from the various candidates at the 

debate. 

 

So of course there was myself, obviously, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

participating in the debate. There was a fellow named Mark 

Lloyd who was the Liberal candidate in Regina South, a sharp 

fellow, and there was a Green Party candidate, Vicki Nelson 

who again, very intelligent young person. And there was the 

member from Martensville, the then Environment critic for her 

party, I believe, and of course now the Environment minister. 

 

And in that debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the students took us 

through a range of topics, were very incisive in their questions, 

and thoughtful in their formulation. And one of the questions of 

course concerned the different environmental platforms of the 

respective parties. And of course there was a mix of viewpoints 

being presented, Mr. Speaker, but of course one of the central 

planks in the platform of the Saskatchewan New Democratic 

Party was that we were standing for a 32 per cent reduction in 

greenhouse gas emissions by 2020. 

 

And for the Liberals, they sort of took a different tack. They, 

you know, had a few different things to say about that. For the 

Greens of course it wasn’t enough. But again, I think, in terms 

of trying to balance off the competing interests, but recognize 

that if you don’t have a . . . If you screw up Mother Earth to the 

point where you’ve got the violent swings in the climate change 

and that you poison your atmosphere and your environment to 

the extent that it’s no longer habitable, well then trying to 

balance that with economic development doesn’t do you a 

whole lot of good, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So that’s something 

that we’ve tried to pursue, is that balance between the 

environment and economic development, but with the 

recognition that if you lose your environment, then it’s no good 

to anyone. 

 

But one of the planks in our platform that we put forward and 

had different measures and, you know, cash on the table to back 

it up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was the plank around the 32 per cent 

reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. And it was most 

interesting that of course the Sask Party, as represented by the 

member from Martensville, the now Minister of the 

Environment, in that debate their position as regarded 

greenhouse gas reductions was, well the NDP position is our 

position, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And it sounded kind of phony-baloney at the time. I’ll have to 

say that, Mr. Speaker. But you know it’s always kind of 

interesting that if somebody is willing to get up in front of a 

crowd of young people and say whatever they think they want 

to hear, and then once they get elected and do something 

completely opposite. When I referenced the young people that 

get cynical or that aren’t engaged in the process, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and there are a lot of different people that are 

disengaged with our system. A lot of that has to do with the fact 

that there is the stereotype of politicians who will say anything 

to get elected, who will get up and tell you whatever you want 

to hear. But come getting elected then, you know, it’s a 

different story entirely. 

 

[16:00] 

 

And in terms of typifying that kind of behaviour that drives 

people out of the process in droves and that should be met at the 

ballot box with a certain answer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, well 

that’s the kind of behaviour that we now clearly realize is on 

display by the member of Martensville. So when asked about 

their greenhouse gas reduction targets, the member from 

Martensville said, we’re with the NDP; we think that’s a 

reachable target. Thank you very much, next question. And it 

wasn’t months after the election, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where of 

course the real truth came out and we got into this race to the 

bottom, in terms of what their actual targets would be. 

 

So it was good enough during the election. And they take great 

pride in putting up promises on their website, in terms of a 

promise made is a promise kept. And even in those cases, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we’ve seen promises that are up on that list 

that are pretty suspect in terms of, well who says it’s been kept. 

Because, you know, I know for example, in terms of the 

promise that was made around strengthening the relationship 

with First Nations and Métis people, I know a lot of First 

Nations and Métis people that would take exception with the 

notion that that’s somehow a promise kept by that government 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when it comes to something that they’ve very blatantly 

broken, in terms of the promise around greenhouse gas 

reduction targets, well it wasn’t months after the election — 

where in the election they promised a 32 per cent reduction in 

greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 — then last May and again 

last December, they reduced it to 20 per cent. And you know, 

again very interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 



5194 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

But as of today, as far as we understand what the members 

opposite are saying — and again, you’ll forgive us if we have 

some trouble, some challenge in following the bouncing ball of 

the way things proceed over there — Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

what’s the target today as far as we understand it? It’s 17 per 

cent. So 32 per cent promised in the election and 17 per cent as 

of today. 

 

So the members opposite, in terms of . . . And I’m sure that 

there were other members that got up on platforms throughout 

the province and talked to people that were concerned about the 

environment and concerned about green issues. And they said, 

yes we’re in for that 32 per cent reduction for the 2020, just like 

the NDP. Nothing to see here, please move along. Just, you 

know, close your eyes and think about this, hope trumps fear, 

and a brand new government coming in. And isn’t our leader 

witty and all of this. But of course the substance has been a very 

different thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it went from 32 per cent come election time and what the 

people over there had to say on platforms across this province 

and what they had to say in their election platform itself, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, which . . . You know, you hear the Premier say 

different, fancy things about what that is and how that should be 

a covenant with people. Well if this was the old times, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in the Old Testament, I think somebody would 

be coming down the mountain to tell them what they’d done 

with that covenant. So today’s target, now 17 per cent. 

 

And the very start of the minister’s remarks, as kicked off in the 

introduction of this legislation on December 2nd, 2009, in this 

debate in the introduction of this, the third sentence in her 

comments at that time is, “Our government is committed to 

taking action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to meet our 

national-international obligations.” Let me repeat that again just 

to, you know, drive the point home: “Our government is 

committed to taking action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 

to meet our national-international obligations.” 

 

Well how can you believe them on that, Mr. Speaker, if they 

can’t even meet the obligation that they set out on their platform 

and that they stood on stages throughout this province at 

election time and said, you know, 32 per cent reduction by 

2020, we’re on board. So if you can’t even get that right, Mr. 

Speaker, how is it that, you know, somehow the 

national-international obligations are going to be met? 

 

And again we’ve seen from this government, you know, in 

terms of international obligations, we’ve seen what’s happened 

with the International Labour Organization coming forward to 

say that what this government is doing is bad for workers, to 

condemn actions of that government opposite. And you know, 

mark my words, Mr. Speaker. In the days and weeks and 

months ahead, we’ll see other decisions come forward that say 

what this government has been doing on different sectors is not 

just bad for workers or bad for a certain segment of the 

population but is also contrary to law. And we’ll see them 

paying a price for that. 

 

But the problem is of course, as with many other things, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they’ll make the mistake, and it’ll be the 

people that pay the price through court fees, through the 

damage done to the good name of Saskatchewan, and to the 

setting back of progress in this province, to marching the state 

of affairs backward. 

 

So you know, from the very second line in the legislation that’s 

being brought forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker — “Our 

government is committed to taking action to reduce greenhouse 

gas emissions to meet our national-international obligations” — 

well I heard something very similar at this debate in 2007, 

heard the words come out of the now minister’s mouth that yes, 

we’re in it for the 32 per cent reduction by 2020. And that was 

worth the hot air that was expended in making that statement 

apparently, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So if you can’t believe them at that time, when they’ve got all 

this other fancy language about how their election platform is 

their covenant with the people and how they’re the people about 

hope and, you know, keeping their word, and we’re not 

politicians all like the others . . . You know I think that’s the 

worst kind of politics, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to knowingly stand 

up on that stage and to just tell people what they wanted to hear 

to get through the debate and then have something very 

different clearly in mind come immediately after the election. 

 

So I know that other of my colleagues are very interested in 

participating in this debate and that they will have an 

opportunity to do so, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But again, if the 

masthead of this legislation is how we’re going to meet our 

national-international commitments when we’ve seen so very 

clearly on this file in particular, Mr. Speaker — let alone the 

sort of general disregard for keeping their word, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker — for their disregard for consultation and working in 

genuine partnership with different parts of our economy and our 

society, the fact that when they say consultation you can almost 

count on the opposite having taken place, when that’s the case, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we see that . . . You know, they say 

they’re committed. Well that’s the first place we get nervous, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of them being able to keep their 

word to the people of Saskatchewan because we’ve seen this. 

And it’s not been a terribly long period that these members 

opposite have been in government. But to rack up the kind of 

record they have off the bat in terms of this blatant disregard for 

keeping their word, it’s some kind of record, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, some kind of record. 

 

So in the interests of allowing other of my colleagues to 

participate in this debate at this time, I will cede the floor on 

this, the Bill No. 126, The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Act. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. It is a pleasure to stand 

and enter the debate on Bill No. 95, An Act respecting the 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases and 

Adaptation to Climate Change, a very interesting Bill. And it 

really is sort of the symbol, the metaphor for how this 

government’s been managing since it’s come to power. It’s a 

record of broken promises. It’s a record of introduction of Bills 

at the last minute, and a real betrayal of the trust that the people 

of Saskatchewan has placed in those who are supposed to be 

representing them as the government of the people. And we 

have some serious questions about this Bill and its intent and its 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5195 

structure. 

 

And earlier today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I spoke a bit about the 

sea change that’s happening in Environment in this province, 

where it’s being market driven. And clearly, if there’s ever any 

example of a Bill that’s being driven by the marketplace, this is 

an example of this. 

 

And this should be done much better, much better by the 

ministry than the kind of work that’s put forward here. I take a 

look at the press release from December 1st, 2009. This is our 

final days of the winter session. And the Government of 

Saskatchewan . . . and it is sort of par for the course for this 

minister to introduce her Bills right towards the end of the 

session and then say it was introduced in the fall. And I’ll read 

from it. “Government re-introduces climate change legislation.” 

And that is true because of the problems with its first 

introduction. So they had to reintroduce it: 

 

Today, the Government of Saskatchewan re-introduced its 

climate change legislation that establishes the framework 

for how the province will meet its target for reducing 

greenhouse gas emissions by 20 per cent from 2006 . . . 

by 2020 and foster innovation in low-carbon 

technologies. 

 

Now it goes on to quote the Environment minister: 

 

“Saskatchewan is offering real solutions to reduce 

greenhouse gas emissions through this legislation,” 

Environment minister [and this is in the quote] Nancy 

Heppner said. “We are making strides to reduce our 

emissions while supporting the development of 

technologies that can be used around the world to . . . meet 

reduction targets.” 

 

Oh I can just hear the staff saying, real or is it really? It sort of 

like reminds me of the Saturday Night Live news. Really? 

Really? You’re really going to do this, really? I just have to say 

I don’t think I can quite believe it. Now this minister has not 

asked that her quote be withdrawn and that she was misspoke in 

her own press release, like other ministers have. We have seen 

this would be a trend in the ministers over there, to say that they 

were misspoken in their own press releases. But this is 

something, when she says real solutions — real solutions. I 

have to tell you, all I can say is, really? I have to wait and see 

this because 2020 if we see reduction of 20 per cent from the 

2006 levels . . . 

 

And I’ll go on. I mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is quite, quite 

the piece of work this. And it’s not a prop. It’s the work that we 

do in this House. This is the Bill that was introduced. So I’m 

not suggesting that it is a prop. But boy, some people might 

consider it a prop here. 

 

When I take a look at this Bill, Bill 126, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

when we’re talking about greenhouse gases, and I’m going to 

make sure I’m quoting from the right thing here. And yes, the 

Sask Party climate change promise, climate change plan, if it 

can be called that, is a confirmation of a broken promise. They 

promised a 32 per cent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions 

by 2020. Then last May and again last December, they said it 

was 20 per cent. And what’s today’s target? 17 per cent. Yet 

another way the Sask Party wants to race to the very bottom. 

 

Now this Bill 126, in Bill 126, here it is, An Act respecting The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases and 

Adaptation to Climate Change. And here we talk about Part II, 

“Emission Baseline, Emission Targets, Monitoring and 

Reporting”. And we talk about section 4, “Greenhouse gas 

emission baseline”. And this is really, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

part that I find kind of shocking because, if you read the press 

release, when it talks about the reduction, they have real targets. 

And section 4 says, “The Lieutenant Governor in Council may 

establish [and I think that’s an operative word may] establish a 

greenhouse gas emission baseline for Saskatchewan for a year 

selected by the Lieutenant Governor in Council.” 

 

Well that’s got real teeth. That’s got real teeth. I can’t believe 

that. That’s really something. This is really binding legislation. 

You “may establish a greenhouse gas emission baseline for 

Saskatchewan.” Wow. That’s got to be . . . They worked very 

hard on that one. Now who wrote that? Who wrote that? Who 

wrote that? Who wrote that? “For a year, selected by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council.” Wow. We picked the years 

and we pick the baseline and we may get around to it. We may 

get around to it. 

 

Now here’s the next part, where they say in their press release 

. . . Now the minister wasn’t misquoted here because she didn’t 

really actually say it. It was her writers who talked about 20 per 

cent from 2006 by 2020. Section 5: “The Lieutenant Governor 

in Council shall establish a greenhouse gas emission reduction 

target for Saskatchewan for a year or years selected by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council.” So real teeth. 

 

[16:15] 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I have to say that I am a little 

concerned about the headline, the quote offering real solutions 

. . . Well I tell you, if people have some concerns about how 

much faith or trust they can have in this government, when they 

see the legislation as weak as that . . . Here we have a 

government, a government who wants to talk about real targets. 

But there are no real targets in this, so real baselines and there 

are no baselines. We have some real problems. So I have some 

questions about that. 

 

And of course there’s lots in this Act too that I can go on and 

talk about, some of the other things in here. I wanted to talk 

about this one section about the emitters, section 17, 

establishment of baseline emission levels. In 17 it says: 

 

Every regulated emitter shall: 

 

(a) establish a baseline emission level for each facility 

owned or operated by that regulated emitter; or 

 

(b) in the case of a regulated emitter that is a member of 

a prescribed class of regulated emitters, establish a 

baseline emission level for some or all facilities owned 

or operated by that regulated emitter in any [any] 

prescribed manner. 

 

Now I got to say that doesn’t sound like real teeth either when 

you say any prescribed manner. We would hope at least it was 



5196 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

prescribed by the Executive Council or the minister, but here 

it’s saying any prescribed manner. But we have some real 

questions about that because here you have a group of regulated 

emitters who really get to set out how they put their information 

forward in a prescribed manner, any prescribed manner. 

 

The questions we have is, how are they going to establish the 

amount of emissions, CO2 emissions or greenhouse gas 

emissions, when several of these emitters may have facilities 

throughout the province? And if they’re doing it facility by 

facility, are they getting under the baseline or the line that the 

minister would like to see as a base, as a standard for these 

regulated emitters or can they . . . Is it an aggregate of how 

much CO2 is emitted in the province? So we have a question 

about that. So what does that really mean? We have some real, 

real concerns about that. 

 

And of course we have some concerns about the number of 

organizations that are set up here. It’s going to be quite a thing 

actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we get to see the outcome 

of this Bill, you know. And we hope . . . Well in some ways I 

hope it’s real quick, in some ways not. I mean we do hope the 

reduction of greenhouse gases happens very quickly and we 

want to see that as soon as possible. But when I take a look at 

these three different groups that are being set up — this Sask 

Climate Research and Development Corporation, the Sask 

Climate Change Foundation, and the Environment Corporation, 

and each one has a board and each board, I understand, is about 

11 people. And each one, each of the three boards is set up by 

the government, appointed by orders in council, I understand. 

 

So there’s some 33 people who are now involved in this, but 

there’s no, no mention of any groups. Or who are these people? 

Who are they representing? Are they friends of the 

government? Do they bring expertise? 

 

And we know this minister talks a lot about bringing capacity to 

the table, but yet we have a question. When you’re bringing 33 

people to the table to talk about greenhouse gases, what kind of 

people will be brought to the table? And, you know, especially 

this group over here, the government, when we’ve seen such a 

checkered background in terms of science and how they feel 

about climate change science. It will be very interesting to see 

who’s at the table, who’s directing these three organizations 

when it’s all said and done. 

 

So it’s going to be quite a bureaucracy. It’s going to be quite 

something in the . . . You know, one I understand is a charity; 

one is not. How do they function together? 

 

Here we have . . . And the support. As we see this government 

do a reduction in terms of staffing, we see the minister’s 

committed to hitting the staff and reduction targets that they’ve 

set out — some 16 per cent or more in her ministry. And yet 

she’s creating more demand for infrastructure here. So will they 

have the human resources to support these organizations? So we 

have some real questions here. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have some real concerns, and I want 

to say that when it comes to The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Act that there is an awful lot of work here 

that causes some real concern. 

 

Now I want to get on the record here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of 

course, that we are talking about Bill No. 126, An Act 

respecting the Management and Reduction of Greenhouse 

Gases and Adaptation to Climate Change, one that is very, very 

important. And we are looking for important things, good work 

out of this government, but I do have to say that some of the 

things that have happened, we have some concerns. 

 

And I just have to reflect back on several articles, several 

articles. It’s been quite a year when it’s come to CO2 emissions 

and the kind of things that have been happening around the 

world. Of course we’ve had the Copenhagen conference in 

December and of course the minister went. And we did not see 

the kind of results that we had hoped to. In the end, they did 

come to some decisions and there is a framework moving 

forward, but we were hoping for so much more. So many 

people had high hopes that things could happen and that Canada 

and the provinces would play a real leadership role in this. 

 

And so we have, we have hopes. We want to see the best thing 

done here in this province, but we have to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that the track record of this government, this Premier, and 

particularly this minister and the broken promises around this 

and not making the kind of commitment that needs to happen to 

follow through . . . And of course we have to say about the 

Premier’s commitment to environment, when we’ve seen a 

government cut a budget in Environment by so much and then 

ask so much of those people in the ministry, that we have some 

serious concerns, some serious concerns. 

 

And I want to say that when we take a look at some of the 

comments that have been made, and we’ve gone into this and 

we know . . . And it’s not my intention to repeat all the things 

that were said in the fall, particularly in November when we 

were talking about the Copenhagen conference, that we were 

hoping that this government would have more. 

 

But I do want to say, and I do think it’s interesting to quote an 

article from . . . Actually this is from the Leader-Post. This was 

done in May 2009 and an article by Murray Mandryk, and it’s 

“Saskatchewan adopts Harper’s hot-air plan.” And this looks 

. . . It is amazing how we see déjà vu, déjà vu all over again. 

And he goes on and he writes, and I just want to quote, Mr. 

Speaker, and I quote: 

 

. . . the least understandable aspects of the highly complex 

greenhouse gas emission strategy and legislation unveiled 

by the Saskatchewan Party government is its reasoning 

for going with the federal government’s 

20-per-cent-reduction-by-2020 target. 

 

Even if one accepts the Sask. Party’s premise that its own 

2007 campaign promise of a 32-per-cent reduction in 

greenhouse gases was just too costly to the provincial 

economy (and more in a moment on how the 

Environment Ministry sounds far too much like an 

economic development ministry), why did it have to be 

20 per cent? Why not a 25-per-cent reduction? 

 

He goes on, and I quote: 

 

Well the only magical thing about a 20-per-cent emission 

reduction target is that it happens to be the same as the 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5197 

federal Conservative government’s, which takes us to the 

biggest problem with this supposed 

“made-in-Saskatchewan” strategy: It’s really a 

“made-in-Ottawa” strategy. 

 

It’s [not] bad enough [and I’m quoting here] Premier Brad 

Wall’s government now has to break its own election 

promise to appease the federal government, but Wall must 

also again deal with the perception his government is too 

closely tied to that of Prime Minister Stephen Harper. And 

about the last area in which the Saskatchewan Party should 

want to be tied to the federal Tories is the environment and 

greenhouse gas emissions. 

 

And of course it’s so true, so true, and I just have to agree with 

that. And then we did see the signing of this agreement with the 

federal government and with Jim Prentice, the Environment 

minister. And we had talked about this earlier, the deep, deep 

concern about how closely this government is tying itself to the 

federal government. I have some deep concerns about this. And 

so we need to make sure that this plan really, truly is a 

made-in-Saskatchewan plan. And so I have some real deep 

concerns about this. 

 

And we know that, as we take a look at this, that we are 

concerned that these targets are not nearly good enough. We 

had much more aggressive targets and we actually had money 

to back this up and we had some $300 million set aside for that. 

But we know that this government has taken that money and 

actually spent it on other things. And this could be a real 

problem. 

 

Yes. And so we have some concerns and we know this 

government is just not credible, just not credible at all when it 

comes to the environmental issues. And we see that just in the 

last two days, and whether you talk about The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act and its consequential amendments, the 

conservation easements where we’re asking stock growers and 

landowners to assume much more responsibility, and this 

government is off-loading those responsibilities, really, much in 

a cash grab . . . So we hear that the minister’s willing to sell up 

to 10 per cent of the land at first go. At first go she’s saying 10 

per cent, and so that’s a fairly significant amount of land that 

we wonder, what’s the purpose of selling it? What is the 

purpose? 

 

And of course we see a government that is mired in financial 

problems and we know that they’re looking for ways to raise 

funds. And so when they had a plan, when they had something 

that was working, now they’re dismantling it. And so we 

wonder why. They wonder why they are just not credible and 

why people are not trusting them when it comes to 

environmental issues. So we have some concerns. We have 

some concerns, Mr. Speaker, that in many ways this may, this 

will let the major industrial emitters off the hook for various 

violations of the federal environmental law. 

 

And of course the minister’s gone on at great lengths to talk 

about the equivalency agreement with the federal government, 

and we understand that’s the cornerstone of this plan. And 

really it’s just . . . They’ve had a signing agreement. We all 

heard that. We all understood that happened, but we have some 

deep concerns that there’s not much to it other than a signing 

announcement and nothing more is coming from that. 

 

So we see a federal government that continues to lower its 

standards and we wonder if this is the same thing that this 

government intends to do, is continue to lower its standards. Of 

course to be fair, Mr. Speaker, we’ve actually not seen the 

standards. We’ve not seen the baseline and, as I said with the 

legislation where I pointed out that there are some significant 

holes, some significant problems about what really is in the Act. 

 

And again we are seeing a government that is saying, trust us; 

we will have the information later; we will get it to you later. 

You know, and this government, Mr. Speaker, is nearing the 

three-quarter anniversary. The third anniversary is coming right 

up in November and we’ve seen very little action, very little 

action from this government in terms of really anything 

meaningful on climate change except the announcement that 

they intend to break their promise. And so if they were serious 

about these targets and really wanted to send a message, they 

would put those targets in legislation. But they haven’t. And it’s 

clear that they want to go on. They want the freedom to go on to 

make promises and not to keep them and to actually not tackle 

the problem at hand, not tackle the problem at hand that we 

know needs to be tackled. 

 

[16:30] 

 

You know, I find it somewhat ironic that the minister would 

take a trip to Europe, to Copenhagen, and spend significant time 

there, and do media and all of that. But really, we have to say, is 

her heart in this? And is there really going to be movement on 

this when we see such a weak plan? And I know that she has 

her work that needs to be done, and people are expecting more, 

much more from this. 

 

And we saw the last-moment effort last spring when they 

introduced Bill 95, the first version of this Act. And now today 

we’re talking about Bill 126. But still we have some questions. 

And we still see — and we get this information from written 

questions, and of course this is a government’s getting to be 

known for not answering written questions — we understand 

from written questions that most of their consultation was in 

fact with industry. And the list of the groups consulted, 

including mining companies and oil and gas producers such as 

Viterra and Evraz, all of them legitimate people to consult with, 

legitimate, but no opportunity for organizations like 

Saskatchewan Environmental Society to put their thoughts 

together for further input. 

 

And we have some concerns about that because we know these 

groups would have pushed for binding targets because that’s 

what they want to see. That’s what everybody wants to see. And 

there’s absolutely no reason why those targets couldn’t be in 

legislation and make them debatable in the House. 

 

We are seeing a ministry that wants to do more and more of 

their work through regulation and not through the House. We 

find that shameful. We believe that is a step backwards, and if 

they’re not going to consult with the public or NGOs 

[non-governmental organization] then at the very least they 

could have the things upfront right in this House. So we have 

some real concerns. 

 



5198 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

Well we know what this Premier has said, and we have some 

concerns about the Premier’s real commitment to the 

environment when we see a budget like this. The Premier told 

business audiences in Washington, when he thought no one was 

listening, that he believes North America and Saskatchewan 

should rag the puck. Well shame, shame on that. Shame for 

thinking that we should just rag the puck. And in fact actually 

we need to get down to work and get things done. We need to 

get things done. 

 

This is a government that’s famous for ragging the puck. So as I 

said, when we have 33 people who are going onto these boards, 

who are they going to put on the boards? We know, as I said 

earlier, the folks over there have a checkered history of some of 

the comments they have on record, about what do they believe 

about climate change. And we know that the member for 

Thunder Creek, member for Estevan, Wood River, Last 

Mountain-Touchwood have all made comments, and you would 

have to question about how deeply are they committed to 

climate change. 

 

And so when we see three boards being set up of 11 people 

each, 33 people, and we don’t know where they’re going to 

come from, and they’re not accountable to the public because 

who knows, they’re not being selected by any NGOs, it’s going 

to be an interesting time as we move forward here, as this 

government moves things out of the arena of the legislature, out 

of the arena of public input and into their own private groups 

where . . . We have some real questions about that. 

 

So we believe that we are really risking our economic future. 

We thought that there was a way that we could put a plan 

forward, a green strategy where in fact we embrace change. We 

in fact embrace the fact that we have to think of a new way of 

how we do things in Saskatchewan. But we don’t think that’s an 

impediment, in fact we think that’s a positive. We think that’s a 

positive. 

 

And so when we see the challenges in front of us, we see 

sectors that need to be fully engaged, sectors such as 

agriculture. And I am not sure if agriculture is part of this. We 

think that clearly we know, for example the folks who’ve done 

work around soil, the Saskatchewan soil group that do things 

around . . . They started in the ’80s and they were doing . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Soil conservation group. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Soil conservation group. Fantastic group. The 

kind of work that they’ve done in terms of the impacts of CO2 

emissions, and of course they deal with other things, not just 

CO2. They’re dealing with methane. They’re dealing with the 

other greenhouse gases that actually come much more through 

agricultural production. And we think we should be embracing 

the kind of things that they’re talking about. Will they be part of 

this plan forward? We’ve not heard that, Mr. Speaker. And I 

know they do very, very good work. And it’s a shame. It’s a 

shame that we’re not counting agriculture for example as one 

sector that should be at the table talking more about this. 

 

We’ve not heard much from the other sectors. We know that oil 

and natural gas is very much a key part. But as I said, I hope 

that we have a way of regulating those folks so that it’s seen as 

a landscape issue, much more holistic; not as a one-off, not on 

one facility by one facility, and then it doesn’t look like an 

awful lot. But actually that their emissions are considered in the 

aggregate, and that actually we can have some real, real work 

done and make some real accomplishments. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, we see a Bill before us that 

we feel is much too late, much too late. And so we’re anxious to 

see this go forward. But even in the fact that it’s late, doesn’t set 

real targets, doesn’t set targets. And as I said earlier, when I 

looked at section 4 and 5, it’s a real emission, you know — 

omission I guess is the word, omission — that they don’t 

actually set the years selected and actually use the word “may”. 

And I’ll read it again because I feel like this is a record. It’s a 

short line, but where it says: 

 

Greenhouse gas emission baseline 

 

4 The Lieutenant Governor in Council may establish a 

greenhouse gas emission baseline for Saskatchewan for 

a year selected by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 

Now that might be old language. It might have been in some 

other Bills or whatever, but the fact is that we’re late. We’re late 

right now, and we should be moving forward. So that research 

should have been done and put into legislation that we could all 

rally around. 

 

But when it’s in regulations, who knows when the regulations 

will happen. And of course, we see the greenhouse gas 

reduction target. Interesting that they’ve shifted the language 

here: “. . . shall establish a greenhouse gas emission reduction 

target [so that’s good, but] . . . for a year.” So we don’t know 

whether it’s the 2006 that the minister said in her press release. 

 

I have to say just in closing, and I know that others do want to 

talk, that actually this Act comes into force on proclamation. So 

if we were to move on this, and I understand that most likely we 

may be moving on this in the next few weeks ahead, that 

actually this will become law pretty quickly. But it’s a 

meaningless, meaningless piece of law unless we know what 

those two pieces are. What’s the baseline? And what year are 

they talking about? What’s the baseline? 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know many other people do want to 

take their feet, and I will be taking my seat to allow other 

people to speak for a bit on this issue. So with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I do have some concerns. I look forward to hearing 

more about this in committee, and we get into that kind of 

debate. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to enter in on debate here this evening, this afternoon, 

as it relates to Bill 126, The Management and Reduction of 

Greenhouse Gases Act. 

 

And what we have before us is something that’s representative 

of the Sask Party on so many other fronts, and that’s a 

significant and substantial broken promise, Mr. Speaker, and on 

an issue that is of huge importance to, not only Saskatchewan, 

but our country and certainly our world, Mr. Speaker. 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5199 

Something that’s intended to set out and to address climate 

change, an issue that many would argue, and I think very fairly, 

that may be the largest issue facing our generation, Mr. 

Speaker, and something that if not addressed adequately and 

properly we have significant, significant changes to the 

detriment of our quality of life, our well-being, and our natural 

environments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What’s disappointing on this front, Mr. Speaker, is that we had 

a Sask Party that on the hustings during an election of 2007 

were out there making statements that in fact they had no 

intention of following through with, Mr. Speaker. We had the 

Sask Party at that point in time, and I know many debates 

during that time and in many different communities and many 

different forums, the Sask Party made statements that they were 

committed to what was at the time the New Democrat’s plan to 

reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 32 per cent by 2020, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I know I can cite the specific example of when the member 

from Regina Elphinstone was in fact sharing a podium with the 

now-Environment minister, Mr. Speaker. And the Environment 

minister, at that point in time an opposition MLA, made the 

very, very clear and distinct and strong message that her 

government, the Sask Party, would in fact keep the plan of the 

day of the NDP, being 32 per cent reduction in greenhouse 

gases. And that wasn’t just the member from Martensville that 

was making that promise. It was the Premier, the now-Premier, 

the then-leader of the opposition, that was making those kinds 

of promises, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now it doesn’t come as a large surprise to Saskatchewan 

people, municipalities, organizations, taxpayers, or businesses 

that the Sask Party would break this promise, Mr. Speaker, 

because it’s really endemic of the kind of behaviour that the 

Sask Party has exhibited in their two and a half short years in 

office, Mr. Speaker. Their long list of broken promises, of 

abandonment of former commitments in campaign promises is 

growing by the day, and it’s substantial, Mr. Speaker, in 

causing grief to Saskatchewan people. 

 

So it’s of no surprise, Mr. Speaker, to the people of this 

province that this government’s willing to break its climate 

change plan, its greenhouse gas emission targets. And what 

they’re saying out there is, why should we expect anything 

different on this front than we have in health care for example, 

Mr. Speaker, where we’ve seen the Sask Party completely 

abandon a plan at one point, where they offered great promise 

to address the rural doctor shortage that has exacerbated in so 

many of our communities and a huge issue for communities and 

for families and economic development, Mr. Speaker. And what 

we’ve seen is them completely abandon, the Sask Party 

completely abandon their promises on this front and go in the 

opposite direction, Mr. Speaker. And what we know is that the 

vacancies for doctors within this province has grown by 50 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker, in the past two years underneath the lack of 

leadership of the Saskatchewan Party government of the day, 

Mr. Speaker, and this Premier. 

 

And so when people . . . When you’re out meeting with 

community after community and they recognize that broken 

promise, Mr. Speaker, what they say is, well it doesn’t surprise 

them, Mr. Speaker, that the Sask Party’s now breaking another 

important promise. 

 

And I think the Sask Party takes the environment incredibly 

lightly, Mr. Speaker. They don’t see it as something serious, 

Mr. Speaker, something important to address. I know that 

they’ve got many individuals on that side there that in fact deny 

climate change, Mr. Speaker, that don’t believe in the scientific 

evidence and the scientific community and the case that’s been 

put forward. So we know that there’s deniers of the good 

science and objective data that’s been put forward, Mr. Speaker, 

in a global community and certainly within our province as 

well. 

 

So the fact that the Sask Party is willing to break campaign 

promises such as rural doctor shortages and health care simply 

leads many to say, well of course they’re not going to deliver on 

promises that they never even intended to keep as the 

suggestion . . . as it relates to important matters in environment. 

 

And it gets down to this matter of trust, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a 

broken trust. And it’s a disappointment because many 

individuals across this province, Mr. Speaker, had a lot of hope 

in the new government two years ago, the Sask Party. Many 

people lent them their vote and their trust, Mr. Speaker, and 

they voted for the message of the Sask Party at that point in 

time and the commitments and promises that were made. 

 

What we’re hearing now is that there’s a huge dismay and 

disappointment across Saskatchewan in many, many 

communities across this province and in rural Saskatchewan 

and in our small urban centres and in even our large urban 

centres, Regina and Saskatoon. In large, large ways there’s 

huge disappointment, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the huge 

consequences as a result of the broken promises, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And we talk about the importance of promises that are made, 

for example as it relates to doctor shortages and the needs of 

communities to have those important health services provided, 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s willing to abandon that sort of a 

promise. 

 

Certainly we see the Sask Party willing to abandon promises on 

a financial front. They put forward a spending plan in a 

spending program inside their campaign literature that this year, 

if we followed that spending plan — in fact I have a copy of it 

here — we’d be spending this year basically $9 billion. What 

we know is the reality is that the Sask Party’s spending $10 

billion, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve challenged this Sask Party 

from day one as it relates to their out-of-control spending, Mr. 

Speaker, and the unsustainability of that program and the huge 

consequences that now many other programs are bearing the 

brunt of the lack of management on that side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So we see abandonment of promises as relates to health care. 

We see it certainly in financial management, Mr. Speaker. We 

see it as it relates to surgical wait times and the fact that in 

many, many regions wait-lists are getting far longer, Mr. 

Speaker, not shorter. And this is simply completely contrary to 

the promises made by the Sask Party just a couple short years 

ago. 



5200 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

We see broken promises as it relates to our labour legislation, 

our labour environment. In fact now we find ourselves, because 

of the irresponsible legislation put forward by the Sask Party, 

we see ourselves in contravention of United Nations 

conventions, Mr. Speaker. And that’s a real black eye for our 

province, Mr. Speaker, to be at this point in time in 

contravention of a convention that’s upheld at the United 

Nations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we see the broken promises across the front of First 

Nations and Métis across the province, specifically as it relates 

to the duty to consult. There was at one point put forward a big 

concept that was much trumpeted to be the round table put 

forward by the Sask Party. We don’t hear much about it any 

more because it simply became the round and round and round 

and round table, Mr. Speaker, that never got anywhere, Mr. 

Speaker, and offered huge disrespect and disgrace to the First 

Peoples of our land, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we see it in health care. We see it in finance. We see it in 

cost of living, Mr. Speaker. So what Saskatchewan people are 

saying is, why should we expect anything different as it relates 

to the environment, Mr. Speaker, when many of the members of 

the Sask Party and likely the Sask Party caucus as a whole, Mr. 

Speaker, don’t even validate or affirm their belief in climate 

change and the scientific and objective data that’s put forward, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

And what we’re watching here right now is the fact that of 

course in 2007, the promise was that greenhouse gas emissions 

under the Sask Party — this was the promise of the Sask Party 

— would be stabilized by 2010, Mr. Speaker. And the reality is 

they haven’t even tried, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It would be one thing had they dug in, put the hard work into it, 

Mr. Speaker, put forward some legislation, and then had 

realized that due to certain consequences or circumstances, they 

weren’t able to meet their desired target. But the fact is that this 

government sat in idle, Mr. Speaker, at a time where we were 

requiring action. And the result of this, Mr. Speaker, is that just 

in 2007, when they were suggesting, when this Premier or then 

the opposition leader was suggesting that they would stabilize 

greenhouse gases by 2010, and now we’re here and they 

haven’t even put forward any, any actions to set out to meet 

those goals, and of course greenhouse gas emissions have 

increased significantly in the past couple of years and have 

grown significantly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we see is a huge broken promise and really representative 

of the broken trust with Saskatchewan people. We know at a 

time where many people, civil servants, are losing jobs or we 

see cuts across the province as it relates to important programs 

that are important to many individuals. I can think specifically, 

we’ve highlighted the broken agreement with municipalities, 

Mr. Speaker, and the dollars that have been taken away to 

protecting our Dutch elm, for example, or the risk that is related 

to mosquitoes and West Nile virus, Mr. Speaker, seeing those 

budgets completely cut, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But at the same time the budget that hasn’t been cut one bit, Mr. 

Speaker, is the expensive contract that this Premier and his 

office keep with an American and, might I say, a Republican 

firm, Mr. Speaker, to get this Premier good press and good 

appointments and meetings down in the United States, Mr. 

Speaker. And so he uses these junkets, Mr. Speaker, on the 

taxpayers’ dime to head down into the United States and to 

have fancy meals with dignitaries, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But to have meetings of no substance, Mr. Speaker, and to pay 

big money, Mr. Speaker, to a Republican firm at a time where 

we have a Democrat as a president in the United States, Mr. 

Speaker, to simply try to spin good press for a Premier, Mr. 

Speaker, that we know has ambitions beyond this office, Mr. 

Speaker. We know that this Premier has desires to be leading 

the federal Conservatives, Mr. Speaker. I know now there’s 

many, many federal Conservatives and current MPs [Member 

of Parliament] who don’t like this prospect at all. They don’t 

see in him the kind of leadership that they would want, Mr. 

Speaker. They point to the failed business record, Mr. Speaker, 

and they point to the anything but fiscal management of this — 

conservative fiscal management — of this Premier, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But the point being that in paying all of this money to go down 

for these expensive junkets on taxpayers’ dimes at times where 

you’re asking many, many in this province to get by with less 

and to pay more because of your own mismanagement, Mr. 

Speaker . . . This Premier goes down and has meetings, 

expensive meetings on taxpayers’ dollars, of no substance — 

the meetings have no substance — and have put forward 

messages where, I believe he thought he was sharing comments 

privately, but that we should rag the puck, Mr. Speaker, as it 

relates to environmental action. 

 

And this is where this directs completely or connects 

completely to Bill 126, Mr. Speaker, where we basically see a 

piece of legislation put forward that does just that, Mr. Speaker. 

It rags the puck. It’s representative of what the Premier was 

sharing down there on these expensive, taxpayer-funded 

junkets, Mr. Speaker, and he’s simply ragging the puck on this 

piece of legislation. 

 

And it might be, Mr. Speaker, that, because we know there’s 

many, many individuals on that side of the Assembly that don’t 

believe in climate change, Mr. Speaker, that don’t recognize the 

scientific community’s research on this front, Mr. Speaker. But 

as such, Mr. Speaker, they’re failing to address what I would 

argue is possibly the biggest issue before us as legislators at this 

point in time in every jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think we’re failing to take leadership, Mr. Speaker, in this 

jurisdiction, in our province, Mr. Speaker, where we should be, 

Mr. Speaker, because it’s important to us. Because if we simply 

let others make decisions on this front and we don’t provide any 

leadership, if we don’t address these issues, we’re going to fail, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re going to fail to protect the environment. 

That is something that’s so, so cherished within our province, 

Mr. Speaker, something that’s relied upon by the producers 

across our province, by our farmers, by our ranchers, Mr. 

Speaker, by our sportsmen, by our hunters, by our fishers, by 

our trappers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we look at our watersheds that of course connect to 

other jurisdictions . . . And it’s a real major question, Mr. 

Speaker, as to how we’re going to go at this issue, Mr. Speaker, 

when we have a Sask Party that continues to run away from its 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5201 

promises, rip up agreements, and treat any sort of 

environmental action with disdain, Mr. Speaker, when we need 

to be moving forward in a very objective-minded fashion, 

listening to the best data as it relates to our . . . the scientific 

community and our economic information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we as a resource-based economy, Mr. Speaker, need to 

make sure we take a lead on this front, Mr. Speaker, make sure 

that we lead and demonstrate how we can still be an economic 

powerhouse. Saskatchewan people have grown accustomed to, 

Mr. Speaker, in the last decade which is something of pride, Mr. 

Speaker, built through the hard work of Saskatchewan people, 

the good policies of New Democrats, the fine entrepreneurs and 

businesses within our province. An economic engine that’s been 

thriving in Saskatchewan for many years, Mr. Speaker, provides 

us the opportunity to make the meaningful changes and address 

within climate change, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 

environment and also do so in a way that demonstrates 

leadership within our economy. What a perfect opportunity. 

 

And the question would be, Mr. Speaker, at a time of relative 

strength within our economy, Mr. Speaker, if this isn’t the time 

to move forward with environmental legislation and to be a 

leader and be consistent with other jurisdictions, then we’re 

really failing to take action when we should be, Mr. Speaker. 

Because I’d argue that there’s no better time to do so. 

 

And when we’ve seen the changes in the promises, of course, 

we’ve seen the Sask Party come out and they offered up a 

promise that they were going to adhere to the NDP’s promise of 

reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 32 per cent by 2020, Mr. 

Speaker, the Sask Party came out in 2007 and they said to the 

Saskatchewan people that, yes that’s something we’ll commit 

to. Saskatchewan people voted for that commitment, Mr. 

Speaker, when they voted for the Sask Party. And since then, 

Mr. Speaker, they’ve done absolutely nothing. Absolutely 

nothing on this very important file and this very important front, 

Mr. Speaker, and the only thing that they have done is they’ve 

completely retreated from their position during the election, Mr. 

Speaker, as they have, Mr. Speaker, on so many other fronts. 

 

But they’ve completely retreated and it was announced just a 

while ago, Mr. Speaker, that they no longer were, their promise 

was no longer 32 per cent, Mr. Speaker, that they were going to 

ratchet that down, Mr. Speaker, to 20 per cent, Mr. Speaker, by 

2020, Mr. Speaker. So I’m wondering with more time passing 

and here we are today, Mr. Speaker, on April 28th, my question 

is, I wonder where we’re at here now. Because we had started 

out at 32 per cent; now we’re down to 20 per cent. We know we 

can’t take this government at their word. What’s the real target 

that they’re trying to achieve right now, Mr. Speaker, in 2020? 

 

Now the huge concern, Mr. Speaker, is that without the 

legislation and without any action which we haven’t seen from 

this government, that we’re in fact going to exacerbate an issue 

that’s already a significant problem, Mr. Speaker. And we’re 

going to start to see the consequences of that, Mr. Speaker, but 

we were at . . . The promise was 32 per cent, Mr. Speaker. The 

Sask Party ripped up that promise that was, that they made to 

Saskatchewan people in 2007. It was down to 20 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker. But the question is, where’s it at here now, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

And I don’t know. I mean maybe at . . . Publicly they’re still 

going to go out and pretend that 20 per cent is still their target, 

which certainly isn’t high enough, Mr. Speaker. We need to set 

the bar higher, Mr. Speaker, and provide environmental and 

economic leadership from our province at a time where we have 

economic strength, and to do so, Mr. Speaker. But the question 

is: are they going to still just continue to pretend that 20 per 

cent is their number and go about their plan, I suppose, behind 

closed doors? 

 

But the problem is we all are aware of the consequences of this 

kind of irresponsibility, Mr. Speaker, these kinds of broken 

promises. We are all aware of the consequences, as do our 

fellow neighbours, Mr. Speaker, in neighbouring jurisdictions 

and of course when we are talking about watersheds or the air 

itself, Mr. Speaker, and the movement of it, we’re talking about 

making an impact and something that impacts many, many, 

many people worldwide, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So quite simply the targets that the Sask Party has now put 

forward, even if they, even if these are the targets that they are 

going to set out to achieve — and I don’t believe they’re going 

to do even that, Mr. Speaker — but even at that, the 20 per cent 

just simply isn’t enough, Mr. Speaker. We expect more from 

this Sask Party government who’s offered up nothing more than 

a retreat from their campaign promise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we’ve seen this, of course, on so many other fronts: in 

health care where they made promises about addressing the 

rural doctor shortage and of course that’s gotten way worse, Mr. 

Speaker. They made promises about surgical wait times, Mr. 

Speaker; of course that’s gotten worse. We know that at one 

time this government, the Sask Party, pretended that they would 

balance the books, Mr. Speaker, and the Assembly almost 

laughs at that notion at this point in time, Mr. Speaker, because 

of course we’ve seen anything but responsible financial 

management, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve seen complete mismanagement, unsustainable spending 

programs, huge debt growth, huge deficits, Mr. Speaker. And 

these have huge consequences for Saskatchewan people as we 

move forward. 

 

When you start to compile the broken promises and failures to 

deliver of this Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

environmental inactivity and retreat from promises and the 

compounded effect of that into the future, Mr. Speaker, and you 

then compile that with the damage going on within our health 

care system right now, Mr. Speaker, the economic devastation 

going on within our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, and the 

financial mismanagement creating debt and burden for 

generations to come, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[17:00] 

 

We have a Sask Party who says one thing and tries to keep a 

positive message, Mr. Speaker, but if you look at the direction 

that they’re actually going in, Mr. Speaker, it’s very, very 

negative. It’s very, very backwards, Mr. Speaker. And we need 

to be able to call a spade a spade, Mr. Speaker, and be able to 

address these circumstances and talk about truly moving 

forward as a province as opposed to the sort of irresponsible 

management that we’ve seen to date, Mr. Speaker. 



5202 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

Last spring I know it was mentioned by one of the members, the 

Minister of Environment, I believe, that the reason that they 

weren’t going to be moving forward with meeting their 

promise, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 32 per cent, was because 

of an impact on power rates, Mr. Speaker. But what we realize, 

and actually from their own reports and from their own studies, 

Mr. Speaker, is that the actual impact on rates as it relates to 32 

per cent or a 20 per cent target for greenhouse gases and 

protecting our environment, Mr. Speaker, our watersheds, our 

air, our natural environment, in fact, is marginal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what we know of course, if we do the financial analysis of 

what the impacts of different actions are, Mr. Speaker, we know 

that what is driving huge, huge costs up for Saskatchewan 

Power ratepayers paying for power as it relates to on the farm 

or in your business or at your home, Mr. Speaker, and the huge 

increases under the Sask Party, that’s a direct connect, Mr. 

Speaker, not to anything related to greenhouse gas legislation, 

but it’s a direct connect, Mr. Speaker, to the financial 

mismanagement of this government who has responded to their 

own mismanagement by stripping all equity from the Crown 

Investments Corporation, Mr. Speaker, and by taking all 

dividends from many of the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, actually all 

of the Crowns except for one of them, Mr. Speaker, and simply 

not a sustainable position, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know I look over opposite, Mr. Speaker, and I actually see two 

of the members there that actually are, you know, I believe 

engaged in this discussion, Mr. Speaker, and it’s worthwhile, 

but unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, it’s two of the most decent 

individuals on that side of the Assembly — two individuals 

who in fact I think are two very good individuals, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I am dismayed by the fact that these two individuals don’t 

have elbows at the cabinet table, Mr. Speaker, because I don’t 

think that they would be allowing this kind of inaction and these 

kinds of broken promises to exist if they had elbows at that 

table, Mr. Speaker. I suspect that those two hon. members on 

that side — fine fellows, Mr. Speaker — would be pushing 

harder, Mr. Speaker. It’s too bad obviously that they can’t push 

at the caucus table there. 

 

And I’m sure it’s difficult because of course we’re meeting 

regularly in many of the constituencies and I know of course 

it’s not easy to be down in Cypress Hills right now, Mr. 

Speaker, and be talking about health care, Mr. Speaker, because 

. . . And to try to then, try to say, yes, I know we promised that 

two years ago, Mr. Speaker. I know we said we were going to 

address rural health care problems, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then people are saying, but the reality is it’s become much 

worse. And they say, well I’m not . . . I don’t know. Maybe he 

says, I’m not at the cabinet table. But it must be a difficult 

position, Mr. Speaker, for that member — a good member — to 

hear from his constituents on many, many fronts that said, well 

I thought you said you were going to have . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I have a feeling the member may 

recognize that the debate is getting actually fairly, extremely far 

away, distant from the Bill before the Assembly, The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act. So I’d 

ask the member to try and work his way back to Bill No. 126. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, and of course we’re 

talking about Bill 126 here today, Mr. Speaker, The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act, Mr. 

Speaker. And what we see on display here today with the 

tabling of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, is a major broken 

promise of the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. And of course that’s 

representative, Mr. Speaker, of the many, many, many broken 

promises of the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I was mentioning just before that it probably, I know it 

dismays the constituents and former supporters of many of the 

members, Mr. Speaker, to have so many of the broken promises 

put forward, Mr. Speaker, things that were so important and 

vital to individuals and communities. Many of them shared, 

many of the broken promises are things that were shared by 

constituents as it relates to cost of living or health care or 

financial management or environment. 

 

Some of them, Mr. Speaker, might be one issue for a 

constituent, Mr. Speaker, that stands out as the big issue that 

was the broken promise, Mr. Speaker. And I know that’s the 

case for many of my constituents and for all of our constituents, 

is that not every individual is going to have the same 

perspective on every front and not everything’s going to be as 

important to each one of them. And there’s certain priorities 

that are important to individuals. 

 

But I can be certain, Mr. Speaker, that many, many, many 

individuals across this province expect their government to put 

forward thoughtful legislation, Mr. Speaker, that addresses and 

protects our environment, Mr. Speaker. And they expect to be 

able to take the Premier at his word, Mr. Speaker. And this is a 

prime example, Mr. Speaker, that you can’t trust this Premier’s 

word. Because just before the last election this Premier came 

out and said, well we’re going to address greenhouse gas 

emissions and climate change. We’re going to have the same 

plan as the New Democrats of the day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then of course he becomes elected based on putting 

forward those kinds of promises and been given trust by 

Saskatchewan people. And what does he do shortly thereafter, 

Mr. Speaker? He comes out and says, well we weren’t serious 

on this front. Or we were just joking there. He says, I’m sorry 

on this, and puts forward excuse after excuse after front after 

front, Mr. Speaker, about why he’s no longer going to keep his 

promises, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it gets to a point, Mr. Speaker, where people say, I can’t 

trust the Sask Party Premier. They say, I simply can’t trust him. 

And I hear it everywhere, Mr. Speaker. I hear it sometimes even 

when you’re just filling up gas for example, Mr. Speaker, down 

in places like Carlyle, Mr. Speaker, where people say, well 

what the heck about this issue here? That Premier said that he 

was going to do this and now this is what is actually happening, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I could basically take that and submit the different broken 

promises into that, Mr. Speaker. And specifically as it relates to 

Bill No. 126, Mr. Speaker, I can place directly in the 

environment, Mr. Speaker, and the environmental promises put 

forward by that Premier, Mr. Speaker, a Premier that 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5203 

Saskatchewan people are realizing that they can’t trust when he 

gives them their word on something. 

 

When he says, we’re going to reduce the challenges as it relates 

to doctor shortage in rural Saskatchewan, can’t buy that. People 

know that now because they’ve seen the reality as it relates to 

surgical wait times, Mr. Speaker. Can’t buy it. 

 

And specifically we have a Premier now who’s put forward 

environment commitments, Mr. Speaker, and then put forward 

legislation that in no way is going to address the objectives, Mr. 

Speaker. And people are saying, we don’t trust this Premier as it 

relates to the environment, Mr. Speaker. We don’t trust him 

because he says one thing at the election time, Mr. Speaker, he 

says another thing afterwards in Saskatchewan. But then he 

sneaks off on expensive, taxpayer-funded junkets to the United 

States and expensive dinners, Mr. Speaker, and then he says 

something else. And he says, we should rag the puck, Mr. 

Speaker. We should rag the puck and delay anything from 

happening. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve never been very good at ragging the 

puck in hockey because I just wasn’t that talented, Mr. Speaker. 

I was never the best stickhandler. I moved around all right on 

the ice, but I was more of a, you know, straightforward, up and 

back, dig in the corners, a few checks here and there, Mr. 

Speaker. But I never had the abilities in hockey to rag the puck, 

Mr. Speaker. Just so that people back home understand the 

concept of ragging the puck, you might do that, Mr. Speaker, in 

a game to delay time and to take time to, while things develop, 

and try to hold on to something. 

 

And it directly relates to this legislation of Bill No. 126 here. It 

directly relates back to the environmental inaction that we’ve 

seen from this government, from this government, Mr. Speaker. 

And it’s representative on so many other fronts. But we see a 

Premier who then comes out and says, well we can’t address it 

because it’s going to make power rates go up, Mr. Speaker. But 

yet their own independent study says, no, that has a marginal 

impact on power rates. 

 

But we know when we do the financial analysis on these fronts, 

Mr. Speaker, when we make sure we understand the business 

case of the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, what does have a great big 

impact on power rates going up, Mr. Speaker, is grabbing all of 

the cash out of the Crown corporations — over $1 billion last 

year, Mr. Speaker. Last year alone, Mr. Speaker, stripped every 

single last dollar pretty much from Crown Investments 

Corporation, Mr. Speaker. And now going and cranking up 

dividend rates to 100 per cent, Mr. Speaker — this is simply not 

sustainable. 

 

And when you take away all the capital that you have to invest 

as equity into these corporations that require good stewardship 

and need to be run like companies, Mr. Speaker, the 

consequence of that is there’s only one other place to go, Mr. 

Speaker. And you know where that is, Mr. Speaker. It’s our 

pockets, Mr. Speaker — pockets of our constituents; the bottom 

lines of the businesses across this province, Mr. Speaker; the 

bottom lines of farm operations across this province, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s only one other place to go. 

 

So it’s completely disingenuous, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier 

would pretend that he’s not going to advance on meaningful 

climate change legislation because he states that it’s going to 

have an impact on power rates, Mr. Speaker. Yet when his very 

own independent study, Mr. Speaker, when it’s made public to 

us — which it now has been — shows that there’s a marginal 

impact, Mr. Speaker, so it’s simply a stall tactic, Mr. Speaker, 

that this Premier’s put forward. And a stall tactic on a file, Mr. 

Speaker, that the public can’t afford to wait on, Saskatchewan 

people can’t afford to wait on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is a government that was elected at a time where 

environmental regulations and legislation and action is top of 

mind and required, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve learned through the 

scientific community, through objective information that’s put 

together, and world and community leaders, Mr. Speaker — 

and we have many of those leaders in this province right here, 

Mr. Speaker. But we have a Premier and the Sask Party, Mr. 

Speaker, that have no willingness to move forward and put any 

sort of a plan forward on this front. We see raids on our Crown 

corporation that are simply increasing the cost of our Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker, nothing else. 

 

And the member from Estevan’s doing a bit of heckling here, 

Mr. Speaker. But I would urge the member from Estevan who 

. . . And I like that member, Mr. Speaker — one nice person, 

Mr. Speaker. But instead of heckling me, Mr. Speaker, while 

I’m providing a speech as it relates to the meaningful 

environmental changes that need to go on, Mr. Speaker, she 

needs to be looking in her own backyard with those coalfields 

that exist there, Mr. Speaker, and advancing and providing 

leadership to those projects, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to clean 

coal, Mr. Speaker. Because it would appear right now that, 

unfortunately for that member, the Premier simply uses the 

words clean coal as some sort of fanfare that he gets to throw 

out at expensive dinners paid for by Saskatchewan taxpayers 

down in the United States. But yet when he comes back home, 

we don’t see any action on that front, Mr. Speaker, no action. 

 

We see a delay in a potential even start-up date, Mr. Speaker, 

and we see no action and no plan, Mr. Speaker, on that front. 

And we understand that there’s going to be a go or no go 

decision on clean coal, and I know that’s a very important 

decision for the member from Estevan, Mr. Speaker. And it 

must be dismaying for that member, Mr. Speaker, to have a 

Premier that’s simply going to deliver the sound bites that he 

thinks are politically expedient in the United States, Mr. 

Speaker, and then to come back home and to do something 

completely different. 

 

So to pretend, as the Premier does, that he’s doing something 

significant as it relates to the environment by citing his clean 

coal, supposed clean coal project, Mr. Speaker, which doesn’t 

exist, Mr. Speaker. They’ve done a little bit of research on this 

thing, but they haven’t delivered a single thing on this, Mr. 

Speaker, and the community of Estevan is waiting. Those 

Crown employees down in SaskPower, Mr. Speaker, are 

waiting to deliver that technology, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And it not only concerns those individuals in Estevan, Mr. 

Speaker, that the very industry and resource, Mr. Speaker, that 

they have built an economy in their community on, Mr. 

Speaker, is threatened. But they’re concerned, Mr. Speaker, that 

the company, Mr. Speaker, the company that has provided a 



5204 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

huge piece of their economic development and a huge piece of 

their economic backbone, being SaskPower, is being eroded by 

the day, Mr. Speaker. This is of huge concern to Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

And I know the good member, a very nice member from 

Estevan, must be incredibly dismayed and frustrated, Mr. 

Speaker, by the Premier’s empty rhetoric on this front. And it 

must grow old, Mr. Speaker, to hear it. And I’m sure, you 

know, at some point some of these members are going to call 

him on it at caucus meetings, Mr. Speaker. Some of those 

cabinet ministers, I hope, at some point are going to call him on 

it. 

 

But I know something else, Mr. Speaker, is that November 7th 

of 2011, Saskatchewan people from across this province and 

community after community are going to call him on it, Mr. 

Speaker, call him on his empty rhetoric, his empty fanfare, Mr. 

Speaker. And they’re going to say, we want someone who’s 

going to be able to deliver something, Mr. Speaker — not all 

this empty rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, these polished up speeches. 

We want action on the fronts that are important to us. Very 

simple, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, he can take his polished up speeches and he can take 

them somewhere else, Mr. Speaker, but the point is they want 

action. They want action as it relates to the environment, Mr. 

Speaker. They want action as it relates to agriculture. They want 

action as it relates to health care and rural health care, Mr. 

Speaker. They want action as it relates to financial management 

and in this case, under the Sask Party, mismanagement, Mr. 

Speaker. And they want action, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 

cost of living and subsequent effects on quality of life, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[17:15] 

 

And these are the things that Saskatchewan people are going to 

call that Premier on the next election. And I know after that, 

Mr. Speaker, then of course he can go and do his thing. And I 

know that much of the money that he spends at the taxpayers’ 

dime to go out and profile himself in very friendly 

environments in the United States are simply to sort of build a 

profile for his campaign to be the leader of the federal 

Conservatives, Mr. Speaker. But what we’re hearing from so 

many federal Conservatives, Mr. Speaker, is they don’t want 

him anywhere near their party. 

 

And now the member, the Deputy House Leader, the member 

from Meadow Lake says, I don’t hear that; I’m going to run his 

campaign, Mr. Speaker. I think the member from Meadow Lake 

is organizing the campaign. And good for him, you know. And 

that would be an interesting little Saskatchewan story. 

 

But we understand, Mr. Speaker, that many, many within that 

party don’t want, don’t share the Premier’s interest in . . . 

Because we know the Premier has interest to take over the 

federal Conservative Party, Mr. Speaker. But we hear many, 

many of those MPs say, well why would we want a guy who 

can’t run a business? Why would we want a guy who can’t 

balance a budget? Why do we want a guy who can’t do 

anything with environmental . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I find it interesting that 

given the Bill that we have before us, Bill 126, that the member 

would be actually discussing so many other issues. And I’m 

concerned that down the road there might be a claim of not 

having enough time to address the issue. So I’d ask the member 

to move to addressing Bill 126, The Management and 

Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to weigh back in on Bill No. 126, Mr. Speaker, of course a Bill 

and a broken promise that’s simply representative of the many 

broken promises of this Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

And I guess when we get to this Bill and we look at it, Mr. 

Speaker, we have a government putting it forward — the Sask 

Party and this Sask Party Premier — that simply aren’t credible, 

Mr. Speaker, on this file. Simply aren’t credible, Mr. Speaker, 

as the executive government of this province, but certainly not 

credible on this file, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when we talk about rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, what makes 

something empty is the fact that it can’t in fact bind future 

changes, Mr. Speaker. So we see the Premier put forward this 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, yet he isn’t willing to legislate any of 

the actual changes in here, Mr. Speaker. He says, well we’ll 

leave those things up to regulations. 

 

Well we know what happens when you leave things up to 

regulations, Mr. Speaker, is that those changes can be made 

without the legislative debate and scrutiny in this Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker. You lose the accountability to the people for 

whom you’ve been elected and the promises that you’ve put 

forward, Mr. Speaker. So we simply don’t see the credibility 

there. 

 

We question basically the . . . We hear the Premier talking lots, 

as he does, about clean coal while he does nothing about it, Mr. 

Speaker. We hear him talking about his equivalency agreement 

with the federal government, Mr. Speaker, but there is no 

federal equivalency agreement — not one, Mr. Speaker. So 

every time, Mr. Speaker, that we hear this Premier talking about 

an equivalency agreement, it doesn’t exist. There isn’t one. And 

now I know he’s going to be convincing because he polishes up 

those speeches, but it’s simply not true, Mr. Speaker. There is 

no equivalency agreement. 

 

There is an agreement to at some point make an agreement, Mr. 

Speaker, but that’s really not what Saskatchewan people are 

looking for and it’s certainly not meaningful, Mr. Speaker. It 

simply allows for political spin and empty rhetoric. 

 

We need to be leaders on this front, Mr. Speaker, as we look at 

our environment, greenhouse gas emissions. Mr. Speaker, we 

need to take our resource-based economy and be leaders, Mr. 

Speaker. We see a government that has put forward no 

commitment to the targets they’ve put forward. We’ve seen the 

broken promises, Mr. Speaker. We see a government that has 

failed to consult, Mr. Speaker, in the broad spectrum that they 

need to with the objective and scientific community and across 

all sectors. We’ve seen a government only consult with one 

specific group, Mr. Speaker, in this case a group that needs to 

be consulted with, very important group in this, being industry, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5205 

But you can’t just simply meet with one part of the equation, 

Mr. Speaker. You have to meet across the board with the 

scientific community, the experts, with industry, and with the 

environmental leaders, Mr. Speaker. We see failed, failed action 

on this front, Mr. Speaker. I know Saskatchewan people are 

going to call the Premier on this and his many other broken 

promises at the next election, Mr. Speaker. I know that the trust 

that has been broken on the many, many broken promises and 

ripped-up agreements by this Sask Party Premier is irreparable, 

Mr. Speaker, irreparable. 

 

So as it relates to Bill No. 126, Mr. Speaker, we need to make 

sure we don’t risk our economic future. We need to make sure 

we are in the driver’s seat on this front. We need to be able to 

take leadership. We need to make sure we’re not sacrificing our 

watersheds, our air quality, our natural environment, our 

habitat, Mr. Speaker, that of course is relied upon both by our 

wildlife and then subsequently our hunters, fishers, and trappers 

and our agricultural producers, farmers, and ranchers, Mr. 

Speaker. And we need to do what Saskatchewan people expect 

Saskatchewan governments to do and that’s to lead, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So enough of the empty talk from that side of the Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker. Enough putting forward legislation that doesn’t 

mean anything. Enough with the broken promises, Mr. Speaker. 

But we’ve got many, many, many questions for this Bill at the 

committee table, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had consultations across 

the many sectors, Mr. Speaker, for whom should be consulted 

and should have been by this government, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

going to bring those to the table. We’re going to bring those 

groups’ concerns forward and we’re going to try to urge this 

government to get it right. 

 

The simple fact is that the broken promise moving from a 32 

per cent target to a 20 per cent target, a broken agreement, a 

broken promise is simply not going to address the challenges 

before us, Mr. Speaker. Doesn’t address the challenges for 

these, our subsequent generations, Mr. Speaker, and this is 

something that’s important to both the vitality and longevity of 

our communities and our families, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But not just in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We need to be 

taking a lead here in Saskatchewan and working in conjunction 

with jurisdictions across our nation and around the globe, Mr. 

Speaker. And we see nothing but failed action on this front by 

the Sask Party. 

 

At this point in time, with many, many, many, many, many 

questions remaining on this Bill, I now refer this Bill to 

committee, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

presented by the Minister of the Environment that Bill No. 126, 

The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act be 

now read the second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 126, The 

Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act be 

referred to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 105 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff that Bill No. 105 — The 

SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2009 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to weigh in on this Bill here at this point in time, Mr. 

Speaker. Bill No. 105, An Act to amend The SaskEnergy Act, 

Mr. Speaker, a Crown corporation that has served 

Saskatchewan people incredibly well, Mr. Speaker. And of 

course, our Crown corporations in general have served 

Saskatchewan people and our economy so incredibly well, Mr. 

Speaker, for such a period of time. 

 

And we see this huge decay, Mr. Speaker, under the Sask Party 

on this front, and it’s of huge concern to Saskatchewan people 

across this province as it relates to the costs they pay for the 

important services Crown corporations provide — our utilities, 

our cost of living. But it’s a huge impact, Mr. Speaker, on our 

economy. And the fact that we see abandoning best practice 

within our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, and poor 

management of those Crown corporations, puts at risk 

thousands of jobs across this province, Mr. Speaker, and a huge 

portion of our GDP [gross domestic product], Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know there’s . . . You know, I’m elected here in Regina, 

Mr. Speaker. But our Crown corporations, they play such an 

important role of our economy here in Regina, but certainly 

province-wide, Mr. Speaker. And I know one of the biggest, 

biggest impediments, Mr. Speaker, to business — and we hear 

it all the time from independent business — is that the cost of 

utilities is one of the biggest impediments and barriers and 

challenges for small business, Mr. Speaker. And when we have 

our Crown corporations that are managed well, Mr. Speaker, 

and providing those services, those important utilities to 

Saskatchewan people — businesses, farmers, ranchers — Mr. 

Speaker, we know that they’re doing their job, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I find it absolutely astounding, Mr. Speaker, that the members 

from Regina and across this province, Mr. Speaker, from the 

Sask Party don’t stand up at their caucus table or at the cabinet 

table, Mr. Speaker, and assert themselves on this front and ask, 

why are we letting the Crown corporations decay the way they 



5206 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

are under the Sask Party? Why are we doing deliberate things to 

hurt the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And I know the member from Regina Qu’Appelle was listening 

in there right now, and I know so many of the individuals in her 

constituency are reliant on strong, healthy Crown corporations, 

Mr. Speaker. She’d have many employees of Crown 

corporations within her constituency. I know that, Mr. Speaker. 

She’d have many, many, many exceptional entrepreneurs and 

small-business people, Mr. Speaker, in her constituency, Mr. 

Speaker, who rely on a strong economy, Mr. Speaker, rely on 

their neighbour having an extra dollar in their pocket to be able 

to invest in their company for whatever services they provide 

and be able to make our economy turn, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know here in Regina, Mr. Speaker, the economic impact 

in our province of our Crown corporations is significant. As a 

Regina member I focus specifically for a moment just on the 

impact here in Regina. Of course we see these multi-billion 

Crown corporations or businesses, Mr. Speaker, that have their 

head offices right here in our provincial capital, Mr. Speaker. 

This is something very significant to the economy and 

well-being of our communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And of course so many of those individuals who have been 

employed with those Crown corporations are huge community 

leaders, Mr. Speaker. They purchase homes within our 

communities. They buy their goods here. They support the 

small businesses, Mr. Speaker, that exist. They basically keep 

commerce flowing and are a big part of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And when you see a government that’s so quickly and so 

deliberately eroding and attacking the health of those Crown 

corporations, subsequently reducing those jobs and getting 

those Crown corporation head offices out of Regina and out of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the impact is huge. And we should 

be focused, Mr. Speaker, not on attacking the head offices and 

the Crown corporations that we have here, Mr. Speaker, right 

now that play such a vital role. We should be looking at, how 

do we attract other industries, other businesses to come and to 

locate here in our fine province, Mr. Speaker. And in fact to that 

front, I do think that our Crown corporations play a very vital 

part of that as well as it relates to being able to provide the 

affordable utilities that put businesses, Mr. Speaker, in such a 

competitive position to go either provide locally here, or to go 

worldwide right here from Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we need to get away from the ideological approaches of 

some members opposite, Mr. Speaker. I know the Sask Party 

sometimes pretends that they’re going to kind of tolerate the 

Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. But we need a lot more than 

that, Mr. Speaker. We need them to be able to enhance and to 

grow and make sure they’re as vibrant, as strong as they should 

be, Mr. Speaker, in playing the vital role they should within our 

economy. 

 

And the reality is that many members on that side of the House 

would like to get rid of the Crown corporations. We know that. 

Many members in that party want to get rid of the Crown 

corporations. And what we are very concerned is that we’re 

seeing basically a backdoor way to get there, Mr. Speaker, and 

that’s to attack their viability, Mr. Speaker, to burden them with 

debt, to make them unpopular with Saskatchewan people by 

poor management, and then placing on to Saskatchewan people 

the consequences of that poor management, the higher costs in 

their utilities and in other areas, Mr. Speaker, and take away 

some of the social capital that those Crown corporations have 

within our communities. 

 

But I think the Premier and the Sask Party are foolish on this 

front, Mr. Speaker. I think that Saskatchewan people aren’t 

going to be tricked by their undermining of our Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker, the burdening of debt that is a direct 

consequence of the financial mismanagement of this 

government, Mr. Speaker. And they’ll see through the, again, 

empty rhetoric of this Premier on this front, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see in this Bill here, Bill No. 105, Mr. Speaker, a Bill that is 

basically asking for legislative permission to raise the 

borrowing in Sask Energy specifically, Mr. Speaker. And we’re 

likely to see this sort of legislation passed in for many of our 

other Crown corporations as well, Mr. Speaker, because what 

we realize is that a huge burden of debt is being placed on to 

our Crown corporations that are being used, Mr. Speaker, to 

simply fund the unsustainable spending of the Sask Party and 

this Premier, Mr. Speaker, who can’t balance the books. 

 

And so we know last year, Mr. Speaker, in last year’s budget, 

the Sask Party put forward one of the, arguably, the most 

irresponsible budget in the province’s history, Mr. Speaker, and 

we saw the consequences of that, Mr. Speaker. But we haven’t 

all felt those consequences yet, Mr. Speaker. That will come as 

we move forward. 

 

But what we saw as a direct result was a basic, complete 

stripping of all equity within Crown Investments Corporation, 

Mr. Speaker, basically all cash on hand at CIC, Mr. Speaker. 

Over $1 billion has been drained — drained for one purpose, 

Mr. Speaker, for one purpose. Not for some sort of a one-time 

project, Mr. Speaker, but to fund the overspending of this 

government and to backfill for the $1 billion deficit created by 

the mismanagement of this government. 

 

[17:30] 

 

So they take all of that money out of there, Mr. Speaker, at the 

same very time they go and they crank up the dividend formula 

on Crown corporations to 100 per cent, Mr. Speaker, taking it 

from 90 per cent to 100 per cent, in essence, and completely 

taking all money, Mr. Speaker, from those Crown corporations, 

Mr. Speaker, such as SaskEnergy. And that’s a completely 

unsustainable position, Mr. Speaker. You’re saying to the very 

important businesses and corporations, the Crown corporations 

within our province, that they can’t invest any of their equity 

back into their business, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we know that the Premier has a very terrible record at 

running businesses, Mr. Speaker. But we need him to get the 

advice that’s needed on this front, Mr. Speaker, because it’s 

completely not sustainable, Mr. Speaker, to run a corporation, 

Mr. Speaker, and to take all of their profits, Mr. Speaker, 100 

per cent, to not allow them to put a single dollar back into their 

corporation. 

 

And I know the member from Thunder Creek could explain this 

to the Premier because I know he would get this principle. I 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5207 

know it because he’s kind of a straight shooting kind of a guy, 

and he could explain to the Premier that, listen, Premier, you 

can’t take 100 per cent of a company’s profits. They need to 

have the ability to reinvest some of that money back into their 

own business, Mr. Speaker. And I urge that member, who’s 

been kicked out of the cabinet, Mr. Speaker, to bend the ear of 

the Premier and say, this isn’t on; we’re jeopardizing the 

well-being of our economy and our Crown corporations, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And as a result, Mr. Speaker, we’re passing the buck to 

ratepayers across this province, Mr. Speaker, those ratepayers in 

this case, Mr. Speaker, who are reliant on heat and energy, Mr. 

Speaker. Those ratepayers, as it relates to, in his constituency, 

many business people, many, many producers, many farmers, 

some ranchers, Mr. Speaker, and individuals and families, Mr. 

Speaker. And I would urge the member from Thunder Creek to 

bend the ear of the Premier and to say, you know, listen; I know 

you don’t know how to do business. That’s okay. I’m going to 

help you with this. I’m going to tell you, you can’t do it this 

way because it’s simply not the way you do it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Businesses need to make sure that they can reinvest some of 

that profits back into their company, Mr. Speaker, because what 

we’ve seen is we’ve seen the holding company, CIC, all of that 

money grabbed by this Sask Party to pay for its irresponsible 

financial mismanagement, to pay for its deficit, Mr. Speaker. 

All of that money taken out so now basically any sort of 

expansion or any plans by these Crown corporations, they now 

need to go to one place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They can’t make sure that they can get that . . . They can’t get 

their capital from the holding company. There’s only one other 

place, Mr. Speaker. That’s you. That’s me. That’s our 

constituents. That’s the business people across this province. 

It’s the farmers across this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we know full well, Mr. Speaker, when we’re talking about 

this, we’re talking about something that’s absolutely critical to 

many, many individuals and families, Mr. Speaker. It affects the 

quality of life and cost of living, Mr. Speaker. And many, many 

individuals are simply asking, why do I have to pay for the Sask 

Party government and this Premier’s mismanagement, Mr. 

Speaker, or incompetence, Mr. Speaker? Why should I, as a 

family, have to pay for it, Mr. Speaker? And many, many across 

this province, Mr. Speaker, are having huge trouble getting by, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And unfortunately what this Premier is doing is off-loading to 

so many different individuals and organizations. We see that on 

the municipalities, Mr. Speaker. But I know in my constituency, 

Mr. Speaker, many, many individuals are burdened by their cost 

of utilities and in fact aren’t able to balance their budgets as a 

result of that, Mr. Speaker. And they’re incurring the difficult 

and challenging decisions of where do they cut back as it relates 

to the necessities of life, Mr. Speaker, and then potentially debt 

growth, Mr. Speaker, as a direct result of the higher utility rates 

and cranking up of cost of living under this Premier and this 

Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. And it’s not acceptable. 

 

We know when we meet with small business, Mr. Speaker, that 

utility costs are one of the biggest issues as an impediment, Mr. 

Speaker, for small business. And we see the Crown 

corporations as being such an essential ingredient in being able 

to make sure Saskatchewan’s competitive on this point and 

making sure that we have the kind of robust economy that’s 

been built in this province. And we need to make sure that we 

can continue to move forward with that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the direction that the Sask Party is taking our Crown 

corporations and subsequently our economy, Mr. Speaker, is the 

wrong direction, wrong direction, Mr. Speaker. To burden them 

with debt, Mr. Speaker, that has to get laid at the feet and out of 

the pockets and in the credit cards and in the loans and credit 

lines of Saskatchewan people and businesses isn’t appropriate, 

Mr. Speaker. Nor is it appropriate to undermine the viability of 

those Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, and to burden them 

with debt to equity ratios that are unsustainable and unrealistic, 

Mr. Speaker, and then puts them at risk, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what we’re getting to, Mr. Speaker, is that we’re putting at 

risk many, many, many thousands of jobs, Mr. Speaker, and a 

huge percentage of our GDP, Mr. Speaker. And what this 

government should quit doing is . . . Because there’s a few 

ideologues over there, many ideologues who want to kill the 

Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, what we should be urging 

this government to do is to enhance and protect and ensure that 

those Crown corporations are a big piece of our economic and 

social fabric. And they should be going out, Mr. Speaker, to 

find new industries and new head offices and new pieces to our 

economy to add to what we have, not take chunks away, Mr. 

Speaker, important, important pieces. And that’s a concern to 

people across this province. 

 

And I know it falls into the category of broken promises, Mr. 

Speaker, as it relates to financial mismanagement, because at 

one point, the Sask Party during the last election, they had made 

statements that they were going to balance the books. And they 

said they were going to be financially responsible. Of course the 

exact opposite’s been true, Mr. Speaker. It’s been an absolute 

case of mismanagement from the moment this government’s 

taken office, a runaway spending program that wasn’t 

sustainable. And now we find ourselves in deep deficit, and we 

find this government willing to just simply grab out of the 

Crown corporations any time they can, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This doesn’t put those Crown corporations in the kind of 

position that they should be to provide the services to 

Saskatchewan people and businesses that we expect them to, 

and it doesn’t put the many, many thousands of workers across 

this province in the kind of position that they should when they 

say that this is where I want to build my career, and I want to 

move vertically when they realize that what they’re seeing is a 

direct attack on the viability of the corporation they’re working 

for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see ideological decisions by this government, Mr. Speaker, 

that include . . . And get this, Mr. Speaker. Get this. And, you 

know, I’d like your perspective on this, but I just don’t get it, 

Mr. Speaker. A government that goes and ties the hands of the 

biggest corporations in our province, who says no, you can’t 

invest outside your boundaries. You can’t divest the risk, Mr. 

Speaker, that you have as a corporation. 

 

And we see subsequent to that the result — the sale of, an 

example being, Heritage Gas, a highly profitable company 



5208 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

owned by SaskEnergy and the people of this province that was 

bringing a big return to Saskatchewan people. Now we sold it 

for a massive increase, Mr. Speaker, a big increase — an 

investment of SaskEnergy under the New Democrat policies, 

Mr. Speaker, and a big windfall back into SaskEnergy. These 

are the kind of things that SaskEnergy should not have its hands 

tied from doing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They should be sound business decisions that the individuals 

leading these corporations should be allowed to make sure, that 

like any other corporation or any other multi-billion dollar 

corporation or business, have the ability to divest that risk, and 

to act in the best interest of their shareholder, Mr. Speaker, in 

this case, the shareholder being the people of Saskatchewan. 

The fact that the Premier has a different motive on this front, 

Mr. Speaker, and is preventing the Crown corporations from 

fulfilling their duty and their job in operating the kind of 

latitude that a multi-billion dollar corporation should be, Mr. 

Speaker, is disgraceful, simply disgraceful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Poor policy after poor policy put forward by this government, 

the mismanagement in our finances, Mr. Speaker, that we have 

witnessed since they’ve taken office have completely drained 

our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. And the result of that is 

simply going to be massive rate increases year after year for 

many years into the future, Mr. Speaker, under a Sask Party 

government, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve got challenges that are 

going to need to be addressed. I know this year alone in Crown 

corporations we’re borrowing $1 billion, Mr. Speaker, close to 

$1 billion in the Crowns this year, the borrowing. 

 

And we need to make sure we’re understanding what that debt 

is for, Mr. Speaker, because debt certainly plays a part of any 

business and any corporation, Mr. Speaker. And it’s important 

that we manage those debt to capital or debt to equity ratios, 

Mr. Speaker, with keeping in mind best practice and industry 

standards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what I’ve always been proud about our Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker, is that they are right in line with 

private sector companies, Mr. Speaker. They adhere to a 

standard beyond what many, many companies do across the 

globe, Mr. Speaker. And really we’re talking about big, 

multi-billion dollar companies here. And we have had some of 

the best administration and management within those 

companies, Mr. Speaker. We see a massive change on that. We 

see, as direct result of the mismanagement of this government, 

the deficits that it’s creating and the fact that it goes directly to 

the Crown corporations to fund those deficits, to fund those 

budgetary shortfalls, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see now, coming to this legislature, legislation that asks for 

another $400 million, Mr. Speaker, to be borrowed by 

SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker. We see this at a time where we know 

SaskEnergy’s hands have been tied, and they’re no longer 

allowed to hold on to profitable assets, Mr. Speaker, and divest 

risk. They’re forced to operate in a way that’s certainly not 

businesslike, as such, Mr. Speaker. What we need to be able to 

do is enable these organizations, empower these organizations, 

these corporations, and allow them to play the important role 

that they should be within our economy and have for years past, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the consequences of the increased borrowing, the 

mismanagement, the poor policies put forward by the Sask 

Party and this Premier, Mr. Speaker, are laid directly at the feet 

and out of the pocketbooks of my constituents, your 

constituents, every single one of ours across this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, across this province, Mr. Speaker — ranchers, 

farmers, business people, families. And it comes out of one 

place, Mr. Speaker. It comes out of the competitiveness in our 

economy. It comes out of the quality of life, Mr. Speaker, that 

Saskatchewan people deserve and expect. 

 

And what this accounts to, Mr. Speaker, is a piece of broken 

trust because we have a Sask Party government that once said 

— and members are laughing now because I know it is 

laughable — they once said that they would manage the books, 

that they’d balance the books, that they’d be financially 

responsible. And nothing has been further from the truth. And 

of course we all laugh on this side, and many of the members 

on that side laughing here now too, because they know what an 

embarrassment, Mr. Speaker, their financial management has 

been. 

 

But we see the impact of that, Mr. Speaker, on another promise 

that this government put forward. This Sask Party Premier and 

this Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, once said that they 

believed in the Crown corporations. Now we know they just say 

that, Mr. Speaker, because we know the members of their party, 

and many caucus members, want to get rid of the Crown 

corporations. That’s been a position of that crew for many, 

many, many years. They had to say something else to get 

elected, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now in a very deceitful way, they’re going about their attack on 

the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, and to the detriment of 

Saskatchewan business, Saskatchewan producers, 

Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker. And this is a huge 

disappointment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know there’s so many questions that need to be 

asked about this. What we know is that we see a ballooning of 

debt under the Sask Party like we haven’t seen since Grant 

Devine, Mr. Speaker. We haven’t seen since Grant Devine. We 

see it in the budgetary books of this government. We see them 

run a $1 billion deficit this year. It’s argued that this year the 

budgetary deficit could be in the same range, Mr. Speaker. And 

what we do see is a debt growth through the entire forecast of 

this government, Mr. Speaker. We see debt to GDP, Mr. 

Speaker, a trend of decline. A trend of bettering our 

circumstance for the past decade, Mr. Speaker, we see that 

reversed. And we see debt to GDP, Mr. Speaker, going the 

other way, Mr. Speaker, going the other way. 

 

And this is a huge shame to Saskatchewan people who have 

been complete partners in bettering our province and putting 

forward the powerful economy that we’re all proud of, Mr. 

Speaker, only to have poor policies kicking out what we truly 

could be here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Should I go till 

five to or . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Okay. And, Mr. 

Speaker, you know, many people watching at home, just had to 

check to see where we’re going here, if we were going to have 

another speaker. 

 

But there’s so many things I have to say about this piece of 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5209 

legislation that it’s important for me to . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — You have a song in your heart. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — I have the song in my heart on this issue 

because the Crown corporations are so vital to my constituency, 

to Regina, and to the province as a whole. 

 

So we see these kind of untruthful statements put forward, Mr. 

Speaker. We see the Sask Party say that they support the Crown 

corporations, but every one of their actions says something else, 

Mr. Speaker. They undermine the Crown corporations. They tie 

the hands of the Crown corporations. They reduce the social 

acceptance of the Crown corporations by passing on increases 

in cost that shouldn’t be being passed along to Saskatchewan 

people. It’s direct backdoor taxation, Mr. Speaker, backdoor 

taxation, Mr. Speaker, to cover off for the mismanagement of 

this government. 

 

So you can’t believe what this government’s saying, Mr. 

Speaker. You can’t believe what this government’s saying. I 

know here today and in question period today as it relates to not 

being able to believe what government members say, the 

Minister for Municipal Affairs actually said here today in 

question period, Mr. Speaker, that one of our honourable 

councillors here in Regina, Mr. Terry Hincks, he called him an 

NDP blogger, Mr. Speaker, here in question period today. Now 

nothing, Mr. Speaker, could be further from the truth. 

 

[17:45] 

 

Now I’m quite certain that nothing could be further from the 

truth, Mr. Speaker, because Mr. Hincks, I’m quite certain he’s 

not an NDP blogger, Mr. Speaker. And nothing could be further 

from the truth, Mr. Speaker. In fact Mr. Hincks, a good man, a 

good councillor, and he’s been a football leader and community 

leader within our city, and certainly a good business man within 

our province. But I’m quite certain, Mr. Speaker, that he’s not 

an NDP blogger. 

 

And for members to suggest otherwise is really disingenuous, 

Mr. Speaker, just as it is for members opposite to suggest that 

they believe in our Crown corporations. Yet at the same time, 

they go and basically undermine them in every other capacity, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s just as disingenuous, Mr. Speaker, as when the Sask Party 

was out on the election hustings in 2007. And they went out and 

they said, well we’re going to balance the books. We’re going 

to be good financial managers. We’re going to be good 

financial stewards. These are the things that the Sask Party was 

saying in the last election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then what do we see? Well we see the actions of the Sask 

Party don’t meet their words. We see broken promise after 

broken promise, Mr. Speaker. We see a government that was 

content and willing to come in, Mr. Speaker, and run some of 

the most reckless budgets this province has ever seen. They 

were willing to come over, to come in and be content, Mr. 

Speaker, with being anything but fiscally prudent, anything but 

fiscally responsible, and anything but fiscally conservative, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I chat with lots of conservatives, Mr. Speaker, that are 

incredibly dismayed and frustrated, Mr. Speaker, because they 

were hopeful that the Sask Party would, I guess, break the 

record of terrible financial mismanagement of conservative 

governments in this province, Mr. Speaker. And they’ve been 

disappointed, Mr. Speaker, that that hasn’t happened because of 

course they recount back to the days of Grant Devine, Mr. 

Speaker, and they count that mismanagement as something 

historic that set back this province probably a decade or more, 

Mr. Speaker, had huge consequences for our future. 

 

We’re still paying for that here right now, Mr. Speaker, just the 

same as the kind of irresponsible financial management, the 

kind of irresponsible policies that we see the Sask Party putting 

forward right now are going to have consequences for many, 

many years into the future, Mr. Speaker. And we need to 

address these. We need to call it what it is, Mr. Speaker. We 

need to call a spade a spade, Mr. Speaker. We need to expect 

more from this Premier and this Sask Party government. 

 

And at the very least, Mr. Speaker, we need to get this Sask 

Party government out of the government benches in 2011 and 

restore fiscal order to the province of Saskatchewan and restore 

the health and vitality of our Crown corporations which are so 

instrumental to our economy here in Saskatchewan and 

specifically in Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I find it absolutely astounding, Mr. Speaker, that Regina 

members of that Sask Party caucus, Mr. Speaker, are so willing 

to let our Crown corporations get attacked the way that they are, 

Mr. Speaker, to be undermined the way that they are, to tie the 

hands of those corporations, Mr. Speaker. Here we have 

multi-billion dollar corporations headquartered in our province 

and in Regina, Mr. Speaker, and we see a government and 

members that are willing to let those die or dwindle or be 

bought off, Mr. Speaker, be privatized in the long run, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I can tell you one thing, Mr. Speaker: we shouldn’t be 

moving in that direction. We should be strengthening those 

Crown corporations and ensuring their health and vitality and, 

Mr. Speaker, what we should be focusing on is the economic 

development of what other corporations, what other head 

offices can we bring into this province, Mr. Speaker. But the 

exact opposite is happening. It’s kind of like going, you know, a 

couple of steps forward, Mr. Speaker, and then many steps 

backwards. 

 

And it’s a frustrating endeavour for Saskatchewan people who 

held out lots of hope, Mr. Speaker. And they did, for that 

Premier, Mr. Speaker, for that Premier who’s broken promise 

after promise after promise, Mr. Speaker. They held out hope 

because the kind of message that he was offering was 

something that they were looking to see action on, Mr. Speaker. 

They wanted to see some improvements as it related to health 

care, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to rural doctor challenges and 

surgical wait times. And what they’ve seen is they’ve seen that 

Premier not go forward, Mr. Speaker, but they’ve seen that 

Premier go backwards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They’ve seen wait-lists grow across this province for many 

families that are waiting as we speak and listening to this 

telecast here today, Mr. Speaker. Many of those individuals are 



5210 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2010 

waiting and languishing on wait times, Mr. Speaker, that are 

getting longer under this Premier’s watch, under the Sask Party, 

Mr. Speaker. And the part that becomes such a challenge on this 

is this Premier said he was going to fix this. That was one of his 

big pieces, Mr. Speaker, and it’s gone backwards. Same thing 

as it relates to rural health care, Mr. Speaker. That Premier has 

gone backwards as it relates to rural health care — specifically 

the doctor shortages, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And across this province, Mr. Speaker, we see the result of the 

broken promises and what we see is many communities, Mr. 

Speaker, that are in huge challenge to find the health care 

services that they rightfully deserve, Mr. Speaker — access to a 

doctor, Mr. Speaker, and they need that for their families, Mr. 

Speaker. The communities need it for their economic 

well-being, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If we don’t address this, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to exacerbate 

some of the challenges in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

Instead of taking a lead, addressing some circumstances and 

moving forward with good policy, we see a Premier that was 

willing to offer up a bunch of candy, Mr. Speaker, as it related 

to promises but then take it all back, Mr. Speaker, take it all 

back, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So many individuals are out there, Mr. Speaker, knowing that 

their health care isn’t what it should be because it’s gone 

backwards under the Sask Party Premier, Mr. Speaker. What 

they’re saying, Mr. Speaker, is why am I paying more for my 

utilities? Why am I paying more for my utilities? Why am I 

paying, Mr. Speaker, for the mismanagement, the 

mismanagement of this Premier, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And I know I see the member from Regina Wascana Plains try 

to heckle a little bit here, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina 

Wascana Plains, and talk about that people of Saskatchewan are 

whining, Mr. Speaker. What I would say, Mr. Speaker, is the 

many leaders in her constituency who are leaders in our Crown 

sector, Mr. Speaker, and some of the business people in her 

constituency that are reliant on a strong economy, a balanced 

economy where the Crown corporations are a vital part of that, 

aren’t whining, Mr. Speaker. They’re saying, we want to 

continue to move forward economically from our business. We 

want to make sure our people have an extra dollar in their 

pocket to spend in our community, Mr. Speaker, and our Crown 

corporations are a vital part of that. 

 

Many of those business people in her constituency are saying, 

we don’t want to pay any more for power, specifically not 

power or gas, Mr. Speaker, and heat. That’s a direct 

consequence of financial mismanagement. They might be 

willing to pay modestly more for new generation, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s a direct pass-along cost of that power, Mr. Speaker, but 

they’re not going to pay for this Premier’s mistakes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got job after job after job at risk, Mr. 

Speaker, thousands across this province and here in Regina, Mr. 

Speaker, if you take out the Crown corporations and the head 

offices, as the Premier and the Sask Party are moving towards, 

Mr. Speaker. We’re losing a huge piece of our economy 

province-wide and in our city here, Mr. Speaker, in our Queen 

City, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we shouldn’t be focused on trying to advance ideological, 

poor, ill-advised policy that the Sask Party Premier wants to 

move forward. What we should be doing is looking about how 

we continue to diversify and grow and develop our economy, 

Mr. Speaker. And fundamental to that and critical to that and a 

huge tool to do so are our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, 

and we need to support those Crown corporations. 

 

And I hear one of the members suggest that to maybe highlight 

some of the other points that are here, and I appreciate doing so. 

What we can’t handle is that when we see a government driving 

debt to GDP in this province the wrong way, Mr. Speaker, 

increasing debt and increasing it by the billions, Mr. Speaker, as 

a direct result of the financial mismanagement of this 

government, might I say, Mr. Speaker, at a time when there’s 

more revenues flowing into that government’s pockets than 

ever before, they can’t balance the books. 

 

And where do they look to it, Mr. Speaker? They look to the 

Crown corporations. How do they get it, Mr. Speaker? They get 

it a couple of ways, Mr. Speaker. They grab every single last bit 

of dollars from CIC that they had on hand — $1 billion, more 

than $1 billion, Mr. Speaker — and they pull that in to pay for 

their mismanaged, overspending budget, Mr. Speaker, to cover 

off for their budgetary shortfall. Where else do they get it, Mr. 

Speaker? They go and they take 100 per cent. They ratchet up 

the dividend coming back from the Crown corporations to 100 

per cent, not leaving a single cent within the Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And with Saskatchewan people and business people, and I 

know within the chambers of commerce and the business 

leaders across this province, what they know, Mr. Speaker, is 

you can’t do that, that when you take a portion of your profits 

you need to be able to reinvest that in your company, Mr. 

Speaker, in your corporation, in your business, Mr. Speaker, 

and what has been done is simply unsustainable and damaging, 

Mr. Speaker. And there’s only one other place to go to pay for 

this, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the pockets of Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know the . . . I just noticed the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton area. I think he’d knocked over his water there. 

And I think it probably dawned on him, Mr. Speaker, that, you 

know, the NDP are right on this. You can’t take 100 per cent 

from a Crown corporation. You can’t take 100 per cent from the 

business. And I noticed all of a sudden he kind of had a aha 

moment and knocked over his water, and realized. So I hope 

what that member tomorrow does in caucus is says, we can’t do 

this, Premier. We can’t do this. This is bad business sense, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I urge the member from P.A. Carlton to inch his elbows 

into that caucus table and say, this is bad business policy and it 

doesn’t treat our Crown corporations the way that it should. 

And he can go at it in a nice, cautious way. He can go at it 

humbly. He can say to the Premier, you know, he doesn’t have 

to be too assertive, but he’s going to have to say you know, I 

know, Premier, you don’t know how to run businesses. Because 

I know the businesses you did run ran into the ground, Mr. 

Speaker. So I’m going to give you some advice here, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s what I’d expect the member from P.A. 

Carlton . . . In fact the member from Wascana Plains would be 



April 28, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5211 

in a good position to give advice on this front here as well and I 

hope that they do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because where we are going right now is backwards, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s costing Saskatchewan people more. It has negative 

consequences for our economy. We can’t afford to go through 

another period as we did through the Devine period and see 

massive debt growth, Mr. Speaker, because you and I and our 

constituents and the business of our province are the ones that 

pay for that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have to check with our hon. House leaders here, Mr. Speaker, 

to see at this point where we are going with this Bill. And it’s 

important to address the pieces that we have here today. What 

we know is that in our Crown corporations they’re borrowing 

$1 billion here this year. We know that we’ve taken all, that the 

Sask Party’s taken out all of the equity in these Crown 

corporations. We know that Saskatchewan people, 

municipalities are paying for it, Mr. Speaker. We know that the 

local hockey rinks, Mr. Speaker, trying to keep those ice plants 

operating and the Zambonis moving, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

paying for it. 

 

We know that the recreation facilities, the swimming pools 

across this province, we know that they’re paying for it, Mr. 

Speaker. We know that business people across this province, 

the farmers and producers within our province, the exceptional 

entrepreneurs that we have across our province, Mr. Speaker, 

we know that they’re paying for it. They’re paying out of a drop 

in competitiveness, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a concern to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We have many questions to ask on this Bill. At this point in 

time I adjourn debate on Bill No. 105, An Act to amend The 

SaskEnergy Act. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 

moved adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At this time 

I’d like to move adjournment of the House for committees to 

commence at 7 p.m. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that this House now adjourn to facilitate the working of 

committees. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Pursuant to order, this Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow morning at 8 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:58.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

 National Day of Mourning for Workers Killed or Injured on the Job 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5167 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5167 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5168 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5168 

  Chisholm ........................................................................................................................................................................ 5169, 5171 

  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5169, 5171 

  Lingenfelter ................................................................................................................................................................... 5169, 5170 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5170 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5170 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5170 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5170 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5170 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5170 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5170 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5170 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5170 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5171 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5171 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5171 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5171 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5172 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5172 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5172 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5172 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5172 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5173 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5173 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5173 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5173 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 National Day of Mourning 

  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5173 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5174 

 Saskatchewan Volunteer Week 

  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5174 

 Community Association Opens Toy Library 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5174 

 Regina Residents Fight Hunger and Poverty 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5174 

 Conservatives  

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5175 

 National Kids Help Phone Week 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5175 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Interprovincial Agreement 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5175 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5175 

 Habitat Protection and Sale of Crown Land 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5176 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5177 

 Revenue Sharing with Municipalities 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5178 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5178 

 Financial Management of Crown Corporations 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5179 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5179 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 



 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5180 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5182 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5183 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5183 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 129 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5182 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 125 — The Crown Minerals Amendment Act, 2009 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5180 

 Bill No. 107 — The Weed Control Act 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5181 

 Bill No. 117 — The Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Act 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5181 

 Bill No. 106 — The Labour Market Commission Repeal Act 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5182 

 Bill No. 129 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5182 

 Bill No. 130 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Consequential Amendments Act, 2009 

 Loi de 2009 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5183 

 Bill No. 135 — The Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2009 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5183 

 Bill No. 98 — The Municipal Financing Corporation Amendment Act, 2009 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5184 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5184 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 138 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2) 

 Loi n
o 
2 de 2010 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5184 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5185 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5185 

 Bill No. 139 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5185 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5187 

  Krawetz (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................ 5187 

  Yates (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................. 5186 

  D’Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 5187 

  The Deputy Speaker (point of order) .................................................................................................................................... 5187 

 Bill. No. 140 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Streamlining Government) Amendment Act, 2010 (No. 2) 

 Loi corrective (rationalisation administrative) n
o 
2 de 2010 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5187 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5188 

  Krawetz (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................ 5188 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 123 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2009 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5188 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5190 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5192 

 Bill No. 126 — The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5193 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5194 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5198 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5205 

 Bill No. 105 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2009 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5205 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


