




















































Hansard: April 29, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 53A  THURSDAY, APRIL 29, 2010, 8 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5213 

 April 29, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 08:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: — Before we get to orders of the day, pursuant 

to section 31 of The Ombudsman’s and Children’s Advocate 

Act, I lay on the Table the Children’s Advocate office’s 2009 

annual report. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on a Point of Order 

 

The Speaker: — Also, yesterday the Opposition House Leader 

raised a point of order regarding the responses to written 

questions 1,552 through 1,554. The member stated that the 

response given by the Minister of Environment was out of order 

as a response, and I quote, “As The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act is currently before the Assembly, detailed questions 

regarding the Bill are better directed to the Minister in the 

Committee stage as per the regular legislative process” is 

contrary to the rules. 

 

I find that the point of order is well taken. The deflection of the 

response to another venue is not in order. I would like to remind 

members that rule 20 provides that the rules that govern 

questions during question period also apply to written 

questions. In addition, on April 14th, 2010, I ruled that 

ministers must respond to a question even if it is only to decline 

to answer. This is not a proper response. 

 

Now I would like to detail the options available to ministers 

when responding to written questions. As outlined in rule 20(5), 

the government shall either table the response or convert the 

question by ordering a return or convert the question to a notice 

of motion for return (debatable). Ordering a return provides the 

government 180 days to respond to the question, and converting 

the question provides the opportunity to amend the wording of 

the question or to debate the matter by amending or defeating 

the question. 

 

Later today during written questions, the disputed questions 

1,552 through 1,554 will be called again, and the government 

must table a substantive response, order the question, or convert 

the question to a motion for return (debatable). 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 141— The Business Statutes 

Administration Transfer Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m very pleased to rise here today to move second reading of 

The Business Statutes Administration Transfer Act that will 

have an incredible impact on the business community in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

This Bill outlines legislative requirements to transfer 

responsibility for the administration of corporations branch 

from the Ministry of Justice and Attorney General to 

Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan in October 

2010. The Business Statutes Administration Transfer Act makes 

transition-enabling and consequential amendments to certain 

English-only language business statutes and other legislation 

administered by corporations branch. 

 

Mr. Speaker, corporations branch is already providing excellent 

service to the business community in Saskatchewan. It is the 

primary contact for almost all businesses in Saskatchewan and 

houses key business information. Corporations branch 

coordinates, promotes, develops, implements, and enforces 

policies and programs that relate to the registration and 

regulation of business corporations, non-profit corporations, 

co-operatives, and other businesses in Saskatchewan. 

 

The move to transfer corporations branch to ISC [Information 

Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] will leverage ISC’s 

significant registry expertise, their core competencies, and 

infrastructure to enhance and further evolve business service to 

the business community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government values the skills and the 

knowledge that corporations branch employees will bring to 

ISC. I am proud to report that no current corporation branch 

employees will experience job loss as a result of this transfer. 

Both parties are already working together to ensure the 

transition is as seamless and easy as possible for employees and 

for our customers. 

 

ISC’s core business is registry services, and corporations branch 

is a natural fit. Through its experience with land titles, land 

survey, and vital statistics registries, ISC has gained valuable 

experience in registry modernization, customer service, online 

application, and document conversion. In addition, as 

mentioned in its recently released 2009 annual report, ISC has 

successfully managed expenses through internal efficiencies 

and with a focus on improving processes. 

 

This Bill is based on a similar transfer legislation that was used 

to accomplish transfers to ISC of the land titles and surveys 

registration functions, personal property registry, and vital 

statistics registry. 

 

The proposed Bill will have number of functions. It will reflect 

the transfer of corporations branch to ISC. It will transfer the 

powers and responsibilities to ISC to carry out and provide the 

structure for the administration and enforcement of this transfer 

Bill, the business statutes, and any other legislation directing 

business statute officials. 

 

It will create a definition for business statutes that describes the 

collection of key legislation to be administered and enforced by 

ISC and business statutes officials. These include The Business 

Corporations Act, The Business Names Registration Act, The 

Co-operatives Act, The New Generation Co-operatives Act, The 



5214 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

Non-Profit Corporations Act, 1995, The Partnership Act, and 

The Companies Act. 

 

It also creates a definition for a business statute official, who 

are three individuals with responsibilities all under business 

statutes. That is the director of corporations, the registrar of 

companies, and the registrar of co-operatives. And it will also 

provide for the appointment of statutory officials under the 

business statutes. 

 

Consistent with the current fee setting authority under The Land 

Titles Act, 2000, The Land Surveys Act, 2000, The Personal 

Property Security Act, 1993, and The Vital Statistics 

Administration Transfer Act, it will provide authority for ISC to 

exercise discretion to establish fees and costs for existing, new, 

or additional services and products provided under the business 

statute or any other Act that imposes responsibilities on 

business statute officials. 

 

It will provide for the transfer of corporations branch employees 

in the public service to ISC. It will provide the transferred 

employees will continue to participate in the government’s 

superannuation and pension plans. It will provide authority for 

ISC to retain revenues derived from the delivery of the transfer 

of corporation branch functions and the responsibility and 

administration of these pieces of legislation. It will permit ISC 

to exercise control over the assets, the liabilities, contracts, and 

legal rights respecting the operations of corporations branch 

transferred to ISC. It will enshrine in legislation that references 

in any other legislation to corporations branch in the Ministry of 

Justice and Attorney General will mean a reference to ISC and 

business statute officials who administer business statutes or 

any other legislation directing business statute officials. It will 

make consequential amendments to a number of Acts to reflect 

the transfer of the corporations branch to ISC, such as 

amendments to the various professional associations legislation. 

These professional associations will be required to file 

regulatory and administrative bylaws and an annual member list 

for the director of corporations at ISC. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this transfer is also the first step in an exciting 

new initiative that will provide a more convenient and a more 

cost-effective means to deliver government services to business. 

 

To be competing and attracting and supporting the growing 

private sector, Saskatchewan must improve its online services 

to businesses in our province. Currently businesses are required 

to deal with several government ministries in order to conduct 

business in our province. The transfer of the corporations 

branch to ISC is the very first step in developing a new online 

portal that will provide a single point of access to most business 

services provided by government. This initiative will make it 

much easier to do business in our province and streamline 

processes across government. Ultimately it will reduce the cost 

for business and for government. 

 

Following the transfer of the corporations branch to ISC in 

October of 2010, an online business registry service will be 

developed and implemented in 2011 in the early months. The 

business registry service will allow new businesses to complete 

the steps required to register a business using an easy to use 

online application. 

 

The first phase will offer three registration services. The first 

one will be to register a business through the corporations 

branch; secondly, register as an employer with the Workers’ 

Compensation Board; and thirdly, register for provincial sales 

tax with the Ministry of Finance. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this is just the beginning. By the end of 2012, 

ISC will begin to expand the services beyond registration 

services and will provide business owners with a single point of 

access to most other government services for business. 

 

Business owners will self-manage their online profiles and 

work in the online environment to get necessary licences and 

permits to remit taxes and comply with other government 

requirements. The transfer of corporations branch to ISC is 

crucial to the success of the online portal. The corporations 

branch will serve as the foundation to the new online business 

registration service, and subsequent business service portals 

will make it easier to do business in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it therefore gives me great pleasure to move that 

The Business Statutes Administration Transfer Act will now be 

read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Mr. Speaker, request leave to introduce 

guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Sutherland has 

requested leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Good morning and thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

To you and through you to members of the House, I would like 

to introduce two people in your gallery, Mr. Speaker — Mr. 

Peter Carton and Mr. Brent Kennedy. These two gentlemen are 

involved with Ducks Unlimited, and they’ve come to the House 

today to watch the proceedings and hear the argument from 

opposition. I would like to welcome them and ask that members 

also welcome them to their House. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from The Battlefords on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Taylor: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords has asked 

for leave to also introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

join with the member from Saskatoon Sutherland in welcoming 

and acknowledging the guests who are here today from Ducks 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5215 

Unlimited. 

 

I have been a member of Ducks Unlimited for quite a number 

of years and actually have a number of ducks memorabilia 

items in my house and even on my presence, Mr. Speaker, 

because of the support that I have for the organization. And I’m 

very pleased to see these individuals here today. 

 

I believe that they do have something to say about the habitat 

protection lands designation Act, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very 

pleased to see them here. I join with the members opposite in 

welcoming them to the Chamber. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 141 — The Business Statutes 

Administration Transfer Act 

(continued) 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments has moved that Bill No. 141, The Business Statutes 

Administration Transfer Act be now read a second time. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 

The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased today to rise at second reading to speak on Bill No. 141, 

An Act to effect the transfer of the administration of certain 

Business Statutes to the Information Services Corporation of 

Saskatchewan and to make consequential amendments to 

certain Acts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank the minister who just spoke. 

The minister had an extensive explanation in her second reading 

speech. I advise anyone who is interested in the Act who has 

not yet fully understood what the Act might be, I refer them to 

the minister’s speech. I think her explanation hit all of the high 

points, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This province is certainly very proud of Information Services 

Corporation. When ISC was set up, Mr. Speaker, it was set up 

to do a number of things in the province, and it is evolving, Mr. 

Speaker, through normal processes. And that evolution, Mr. 

Speaker, is recognizing the work that has gone on in the past, 

the capacity and the capability of the employees who are there, 

and the ability, Mr. Speaker, to take advantage of and provide 

benefit, Mr. Speaker, for evolving trends within the information 

services area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It seems on the surface that the transfer of corporations branch 

activities to ISC is a logical extension of the work that’s going 

on at ISC. Corporations branch has been providing tremendous 

services to the business community in this province. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we all want to see the ability of corporations branch, 

the work that they do continue, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that the 

business community in Saskatchewan is well served by the 

programs offered by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

[08:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members of the New Democratic Party have 

always been supportive of private sector activity in the province 

as well as public and co-operatives, Mr. Speaker. So to ensure 

that the private, public, and co-operative sectors are able to 

function well and provide benefits to the people of 

Saskatchewan — financial and service-oriented, Mr. Speaker — 

we want to ensure that government’s always able to provide 

services to those sectors in our economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that there will be issues relating to 

transfer. Those issues, whether they be related to employees and 

contracts, Mr. Speaker, or whether they have to do with paper, 

those are issues for which there may be a fair bit of detail, Mr. 

Speaker. Those issues relating to transfer can be dealt with 

through the normal committee process here in the legislature. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, given that this Bill seems on the surface to be 

in order, the minister’s speech provided a very reasonable 

explanation, and our response to the Bill is primarily related to 

questions we may have about it, as opposed to the philosophy 

behind the Bill. Mr. Speaker, agreeing generally with the 

principle of the Bill, we are prepared to see this Bill move 

quickly into committee and we will have a number of questions 

for the minister to ensure that the transfer will be done fairly 

and competently. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move that the Bill, I would 

indicate that we’re prepared to move the Bill to committee. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? The 

question before the Assembly is the question presented by the 

Minister Responsible for Crown Investments that Bill No. 141, 

The Business Statutes Administration Transfer Act be now read 

the second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 141, The 

Business Statutes Administration Transfer Act be referred to the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Bill No. 142 — The Business Statutes Administration 

Transfer Consequential Amendments Act, 2010/Loi de 2010 

portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 

Business Statutes Administration Transfer Act 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise again today to move second reading of The Business 

Statutes Administration Transfer Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2010 that will have an impact on the business community 

in Saskatchewan. The Business Statutes Administration 



5216 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

Transfer Consequential Amendments Act, 2010 is bilingual 

legislation that makes consequential amendments to the 

bilingual legislation affected by The Business Statutes 

Administration Transfer Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the corporations branch is already providing 

excellent service to the business community in our province. It 

is the primary contact point for almost all the businesses in 

Saskatchewan and houses key business information. 

Corporations branch coordinates, promotes, develops, 

implements, and enforces policies and programs that relate to 

the registration and regulation of business corporations, 

non-profit corporations, co-operatives, and other businesses in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The move to transfer corporations branch to ISC will leverage 

ISC’s significant registry expertise, its core competencies and 

infrastructure, and enhance and further evolve service delivery 

to the business community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government values the skills and the 

knowledge that the corporations branch employees bring to 

ISC. I am proud to report that no current corporations branch 

employee will experience job loss as a result of this transfer. 

Both parties are already working together to ensure the 

transition is as seamless and easy as possible for both 

employees and for customers. 

 

ISC core business is registry services, and the corporations 

branch is a natural fit. Through its experience with the land 

titles, land surveys, and vital statistics registries, ISC has gained 

valuable experience in registry modernization, customer 

service, online applications, and document conversion. In 

addition, as mentioned in its recently released 2009 annual 

report, ISC has successfully managed expenses through internal 

efficiencies with a focus on improving processes. 

 

This Bill will reflect the transfer of the corporations branch to 

ISC. It will provide for the appointment and recognizes the title 

of the registrar of co-operatives as the statutory official under 

The Co-operatives Act business statute. It will enshrine in 

legislation that a reference to the director of corporations means 

director of corporations under The Business Corporations Act. 

This allows the use of the term “director of corporations” in 

several consequential amendments in other legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this transfer is also the first step in an exciting 

new initiative that will mean a more convenient and 

cost-effective means to deliver government services to business. 

To be competing and attracting and supporting the growing 

private sector, Saskatchewan must improve its online service to 

business. 

 

Currently businesses are required to deal with several 

government ministries in order to conduct businesses in our 

province. The transfer of the corporations branch to ISC is the 

first step in developing a new online portal that will provide the 

single point of access to most business services provided by 

government. 

 

This initiative will make it much easier to do business in our 

province and streamline processes right across government. 

Ultimately it’ll reduce costs for business and for government. 

Following the transfer of corporations branch to ISC in October 

2010, an online business registry service will be developed and 

implemented in early 2011. The business registry service will 

allow new businesses to complete the steps required to register 

a business using an easy online application. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this is just the beginning. By the end of 2012, 

ISC will begin to expand the services offered beyond 

registration services and will provide business owners with a 

single point of access to most other government services for a 

business. Business owners will self-manage their online profiles 

and work in the online environment to get the necessary permits 

and licences to remit taxes and comply with other government 

requirements. 

 

The transfer of the corporations branch to ISC is crucial to the 

success of the online portal. The corporations branch will serve 

as a foundation to the new online business registration service 

and subsequent business service portal that will make it easier 

to do business in our province. Mr. Speaker, it therefore gives 

me pleasure to move that The Business Statutes Administration 

Transfer Consequential Amendments Act, 2010 be now read a 

second time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Crown Investments has 

moved that Bill No. 142, The Business Statutes Administration 

Transfer Consequential Amendments Act, 2010 be now read the 

second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 

recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise to speak at second reading on Bill No. 142, the 

consequential amendments piece to The Business Statutes 

Administration Transfer Act. Again I want to thank the minister 

for her thorough explanation of the Bill. Mr. Speaker, certainly 

Bill 142 follows Bill 141, not just in number, but of course in 

consequence, Mr. Speaker. So many of the things that I had to 

say a few moments ago on Bill 141 apply equally here on 142. 

 

I just want to repeat, first and foremost, the people of the 

province are very proud of the work that ISC has done, are very 

pleased to see that the corporation has evolved to the point of 

being able to manage more of the information and 

business-related collecting and distribution functions of 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we believe that in principle Bill 142 is acceptable. We’ll 

have similar questions to 142 as we do on 141, relating for the 

transfer, ensuring that we have a fair and competent transfer to 

ensure that individuals and process are indeed treated fairly. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that having been said, I want to indicate to the 

House that the opposition is prepared to see this Bill go to 

committee for those questions to be asked. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

thank the government for bringing this forward and you, Mr. 

Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to speak on Bill 142. 

 

The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister Responsible for Crown 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5217 

Investments that Bill No. 142, The Business Statutes 

Administration Transfer Consequential Amendments Act, 2010 

be now read the second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall the Bill stand 

referred? I recognize the Deputy Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I designate that Bill No. 142, The 

Business Statutes Administration Transfer Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2010 be referred to the Crown and Central 

Agencies committee. 

 

The Speaker: — The Bill stands referred to the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 132 — The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased today to have the opportunity to speak to Bill 132. This 

is An Act to amend The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and to 

make consequential amendments to other Acts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an Act that was introduced recently by the 

Minister of the Environment. Mr. Speaker, it has been 

circulated throughout the province of Saskatchewan. It has been 

subject to a number of questions in the Chamber and, Mr. 

Speaker, it has also been subject of a number of conversations 

inside and outside the legislature, Mr. Speaker. And as a result, 

we in the opposition are finding that there are issues inherent in 

The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act that, Mr. Speaker, are either 

misunderstood by the public or if they are understood, Mr. 

Speaker, certainly the messages coming to government are not 

being heard by the Minister of the Environment and her 

officials. 

 

I say this, Mr. Speaker, for the simple reason that we have a 

number of organizations that the minister has said have been 

thoroughly consulted with, organizations who are now saying 

that meaningful consultation did not occur. Mr. Speaker, as a 

result of that, yesterday in question period the member from 

Regina Walsh Acres, who is the Environment critic for the New 

Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker, asked that the minister 

withdraw the Bill until such time as meaningful consultation 

can occur and, Mr. Speaker, agreements can be reached as to 

how to move forward. 

 

I say there’s some confusion out there, Mr. Speaker, because 

the minister says this is about stewardship and about land 

protection and, Mr. Speaker, we have others who are indicating 

that there’s something more to this. Mr. Speaker, I want to 

express my own bias before I get into the heart of my remarks. 

Mr. Speaker, I accept the fact of stewardship. I do not believe 

this Act is about stewardship. This Act is about legacy and, Mr. 

Speaker, government is there to ensure and protect legacy, Mr. 

Speaker. And this Act seems to be interfering with legacy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I don’t want to see this debate get lost in stewardship. We 

understand that there are individuals across this province, Mr. 

Speaker, who care deeply about habitat land and as a result, Mr. 

Speaker, they are going to be good stewards of the land. I’ll say 

more about this in a couple of minutes. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there’s a role for government. There’s a role 

for government in ensuring that the collective good, the 

collective domain, Mr. Speaker, is protected. That’s what 

legacy is all about. That’s insurance, Mr. Speaker. That is 

certainty. And when we are talking about the things that are 

sharing the Earth with us, whether it’s plants or animals, Mr. 

Speaker, we have a role collectively, not just individually, to 

ensure that there are protections in place, Mr. Speaker, that 

everything we do, as they’ve said in the old tale, everything we 

do should be to ensure that we leave the Earth a better place 

than we found it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I support the argument that we have not been given the Earth to 

do as we want. It is our responsibility to ensure that our children 

inherit a better place than we inherited from our parents. So, 

Mr. Speaker, that is the essence of, I think, what the arguments 

are with regards to this legislation. 

 

[08:30] 

 

Members of the public who have been watching this Act know 

that there have been a number of speeches made. The member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow started debate on this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, some time ago and indicated that there were some 

concerns but we needed to consult further. 

 

The members from Saskatoon Eastview and Saskatoon 

Fairview both spoke on this legislation, Mr. Speaker, and have 

indicated that indeed as a province, Mr. Speaker, we have to 

ensure that our government understands what it is that we, the 

people of Saskatchewan, want to see happen with regards to 

protecting wildlife habitat. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the other day the member from Regina 

Coronation Park gave an impassioned speech that indicated 

some of the individuals who over their careers have contributed 

a great deal, Mr. Speaker, to the legislation, not just in 

Saskatchewan but in Canada and around the world, Mr. 

Speaker, that have provided protection for various species, 

floral and fauna. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this is a very important issue. And while the 

Minister of the Environment would like us to believe it’s simply 

about stewardship, that it is possible to transfer protected lands 



5218 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

to a sole party ownership, Mr. Speaker, away from the Crown 

because those who will own the land will manage it 

appropriately, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to argue because I 

don’t want to debate what the Cattlemen’s Association or the 

Stock Growers Association that the minister quotes, Mr. 

Speaker, because I agree with them that in fact they can be and 

are good stewards of the land that they currently lease, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t have an argument with those who wish to own 

the land that they use for their personal well-being, Mr. 

Speaker, their personal business. 

 

The Crown or the province has in the past indicated they’ve 

been prepared to sell Crown land. In fact they started a program 

just a year and a half ago to sell Crown land in the province. In 

fact they were selling it at a discount, Mr. Speaker, a 10 per 

cent discount, they were so anxious to move some pasture land 

around the province into the hands of those who had leased that 

land for, in some cases, several generations. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this is a different issue. These protected lands 

currently in legislation, these protected lands, Mr. Speaker, are 

identified in legislation. They are now Crown owned, Mr. 

Speaker, and what the government wants to do is be able to sell 

those Crown lands, but put a certification or a designation on 

those lands, Mr. Speaker, an easement — perhaps the legal 

word is better — an easement on those lands to provide what 

the government says is protection. 

 

But what others are saying, Mr. Speaker — and I’ll provide 

some of that evidence in a few minutes — what others are 

saying, quite simply, Mr. Speaker, is that the Crown has an 

obligation to the public as a whole to ensure that for generations 

to come, not just the current generation or their children, but for 

generations to come that this land continues to have a 

legislative protection. And that within that protection, Mr. 

Speaker, there are ways in which certain obligations can be 

placed and, in fact, as we’ve known in the past, designated 

lands, when good arguments can be made for the removal of 

those lands from legislation, those good arguments are made, 

lands can be delisted after public debate, and, Mr. Speaker, 

additional lands can be identified and moved into the system. 

 

We on this side of the House believe very strongly in no net 

loss. No net loss simply means, Mr. Speaker, if lands are 

delisted on one side, a certain number of acres, there’s another 

equal or greater — one would hope greater — number of acres 

that are added to the list, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re not opposed to the recognition that at some point in time 

there may be some change, and with public consultation and 

public debate, Mr. Speaker, that in fact some land could be 

delisted. But it’s got to be done in a way in which the public 

fully understands what’s happening. 

 

In many cases, Mr. Speaker, the public or the owner of a lease 

on a particular land doesn’t know how that land got designated 

in the first place. And in many cases, Mr. Speaker, you have 

families who have, over one or two generations have protected 

lands, and they have willed those lands to the province, Mr. 

Speaker, for habitat protection purposes. The Crown has 

accepted those, has listed those lands. And now, Mr. Speaker, it 

could be two generations later, somebody wants to see those 

lands delisted because they want to own rather than lease a 

particular piece of land. 

 

I have no concerns, as I said, Mr. Speaker, about landownership 

in the province. And I have no issue to take with any person 

raising cattle in the province who wants to use designated lands, 

Mr. Speaker, but I do have a problem that the province wants to 

be able to make decisions that could in fact delist land or 

remove land from designation simply by the stroke of a pen 

behind closed doors in a cabinet office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let’s just talk about that for a second before I 

make some comments about the consultation process. Mr. 

Speaker, there’s two ways in which things happen in 

government. One is a legislative process, and the other is a 

regulatory process. And there are significant differences 

between these two things, Mr. Speaker. Legislation provides 

certainty and public accountability. Regulations allows things to 

be managed efficiently and quickly, Mr. Speaker, but there’s 

less accountability and less transparency, obviously, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So when a government wants to be able to do things quickly, 

without the usual scrutiny, they will usually move something 

from a legislative agenda to a regulatory agenda. Legislation, 

for the public’s benefit, Mr. Speaker, is what we do in this 

Chamber when laws are passed. And those laws require, to go 

into effect, introduction of legislation, second reading, debate in 

principle, a sharing of information. It moves in to a committee 

where questions are asked, media is present — these are all 

open meetings — and then there’s a third reading in specifics, 

Mr. Speaker, after legislation might be amended. And then 

there’s also the process of Royal Assent and proclamation, Mr. 

Speaker, which also puts some public focus on government to 

see that things get done. 

 

The regulatory process, Mr. Speaker, is very simple. Something 

gets brought up at a cabinet table, the minister gets the approval 

from cabinet, and they sign it off. It’s done, Mr. Speaker. A 

decision in cabinet, a regulation can be changed without 

anybody knowing it was on the table, without anybody knowing 

it was coming up, without anybody even knowing that it was 

done until it was done, Mr. Speaker. Very simple. Very 

efficient. So if you want to keep something from the public, you 

put it into regulations. If you want to make sure that the public 

knows what you’re doing, that there’s full transparency and 

accountability, and you want certainty on something as 

important as the designation of habitat lands, Mr. Speaker, you 

keep it in legislation. 

 

And that seems to be part of the argument that we’re hearing 

from those who care about habitat protection, that in fact we 

built a legacy in this province — 3 million acres. I’m told that’s 

twice the size of the province of Prince Edward Island, Mr. 

Speaker. I don’t know that, but I’m told. And if we have that 

amount of land designated by legislation and by legislative 

authority, Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that that protection is 

there with some certainty, Mr. Speaker. Because for 

Saskatchewan it’s not a large amount of land. I think 5 per cent 

of our total land area, Mr. Speaker, not a large amount of land. 

But in terms of the size compared to other parts of the country, 

a land base that’s twice the size of Prince Edward Island is 

something to be proud of. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, we have 

organizations, groups and individuals who are proud of that fact 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5219 

and we have members of this Legislative Chamber who are 

very proud of the fact that we have designated these lands. 

 

So the idea is legacy, Mr. Speaker, and certainty. And to do that 

we need transparency, accountability, we need public 

consultation, and we need public input. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what’s happening on the public input side of 

things? Well the government started on a process of changing 

environmental legislation a while ago. And, Mr. Speaker, they 

began believing that we need to have results-based 

environmental regulatory framework processes in place, Mr. 

Speaker. So they began a consultation process. 

 

I made reference to this the other day, Mr. Speaker, this 

consultation process to sort of move to a larger regulatory 

framework for all the environmental Bills, not just The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act. It almost seems that this was kind of 

added at the end to satisfy the interests of moving some Crown 

land out of Crown land status and into private ownership, Mr. 

Speaker. But when this process to move to a results-based 

environmental regulatory framework, there was a consultation 

process begun, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We go back prior to November of 2008 when this began, Mr. 

Speaker, and there were some concerns being raised even at that 

time. So we’re back more than a year and a half ago, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want to quote from the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation’s 

magazine, The Outdoor Edge. This is the November-December 

2008 issue. And one of the editorials is written by the executive 

director, Mr. Darrell Crabbe. And Mr. Darrell Crabbe puts this 

caution on the table, Mr. Speaker, and this is as the consultation 

process was beginning. Mr. Crabbe writes: 

 

. . . the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation was recently 

invited by the Ministry of Environment to participate in a 

comprehensive review of the Province’s environmental 

legislation with a stated goal of “most effectively 

protecting the environment and managing resources.” 

 

There were just over 20 groups that were consulted. Only 

two of those groups were conservation or environmental 

organizations, with the overwhelming majority being 

made up of industry. The presentation was designed to 

promote a results based system that would streamline the 

regulatory review requirements to accommodate resource 

development and, supposedly, enhance the protection of 

the environment. 

 

Mr. Crabbe goes on: 

 

I don’t think anyone is opposed to the responsible 

development of our province’s resources and the economic 

benefits that will be enjoyed by the residents of 

Saskatchewan. But one only has to consider the 

importance that the environment has had in the last 

Provincial and recent Federal election to understand that 

environmental protection is paramount in the long term, 

sustainable development of our resource rich province. 

 

November-December 2008, Mr. Speaker, as this consultation 

process was beginning, the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation 

sent up a flag that says, watch the protected side of this, Mr. 

Speaker, because the consultation process is dominated by 

sectors other than those who care about conservation and the 

environment. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that process carries on. And further 

discussions are held on this regulatory, the change to a 

regulatory framework. Mr. Speaker, a number of things happen 

and The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is drafted and is 

presented to this House. In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, 

environmental organizations like the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation, Nature Conservancy and Ducks Unlimited were 

starting to realize that this consultation that they had engaged 

in, Mr. Speaker, was not exactly, the results of that consultation 

were not exactly what they were contributing to. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, this is noted by a number of media stories 

that have appeared, comments that have appeared in just the last 

couple of days, Mr. Speaker. And this provides some evidence 

that it appears that the minister does not fully understand why 

there are concerns being raised about the Bill that’s in front of 

us. 

 

[08:45] 

 

Just the other day, Mr. Crabbe, who I just quoted from a year 

and a half ago, just the other day, Mr. Speaker, on April the 

28th, quoted by CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] 

News, Mr. Crabbe says, the properties in question, the wildlife 

lands “. . . are owned by the people of Saskatchewan, and I just 

don’t think most people would want to see them sold off. He 

goes on to say, quoted by CBC News, “It’s a very sad day when 

the dollar plays a bigger role than our future generations.” 

 

In response to that, the member from Regina Walsh Acres says, 

in response to that, “Why are the years of hard work by people 

concerned about wildlife being put in jeopardy by this 

government’s financial mismanagement?” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that argument comes down to the fact that this 

government appears to be more interested in selling some 

properties and receiving some other benefit, Mr. Speaker, 

because they need money. And while the government will argue 

this isn’t about money, the fact of the matter is this government 

has spent the financial legacy of the province, and now they’re 

interfering with the conservation and environmental legacy of 

this province to compensate for it. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, in the media just the other day also, the 

Leader-Post, the Regina Leader-Post, April 28th, a number of 

people including Brent Kennedy from Ducks Unlimited, who 

was introduced in this Chamber a little earlier . . . Mr. Kennedy 

is the manager of provincial operations for Ducks Unlimited. 

He says the government should do more consultation before 

trying to pass the amendments this spring. His preference, Mr. 

Speaker, would be that all of the land remain protected under 

the Act, Mr. Speaker. He also is quoted, he also is quoted as 

saying, “We’re not convinced that they have the means 

[meaning the Saskatchewan Party government, that they have 

the means] to be able to accurately define which lands have 

greater or which lands have lesser ecological value.” 

 



5220 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the fact that Mr. Kennedy would say this to 

the Leader-Post indicates that the consultation process has in 

fact not been meaningful, meaningful in the sense that if full 

consultation had occurred, there would be an understanding 

about the science behind this definition of lands, this change in 

the way in which lands are evaluated. So obviously, Mr. 

Speaker, there has not been a good enough consultation process 

put in front of those who are most concerned, Mr. Speaker, 

about the future of the lands in question. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think this just goes to the heart of this 

question about what should happen to this piece of legislation. 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Walsh Acres yesterday 

in question period asked that the legislation be withdrawn until 

such time as clarity can be reached on this issue. 

 

Last night in one of the committees, the Economy Committee of 

the legislature, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of the Environment 

was there answering questions on other legislation relating to 

changes in the regulatory format. There was some concerns 

raised about some of the language in the legislation. And, Mr. 

Speaker, members of the government became quite concerned 

that members of the opposition were asking questions to find 

clarity in the legal language there. And at one point, Mr. 

Speaker, the member from Thunder Creek, backed up by the 

member from Cannington, indicated that if the public wasn’t 

happy with the language or the Bill or the directions that this 

new process was taking, there’s an election coming and the 

public can simply express their unhappiness during the election. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it just goes to show that the members 

opposite think more highly of themselves than they do about the 

consequences of the legislation that they’re bringing forward. 

They are simply indicating, we’re government; we have the 

majority. We’ll do whatever we want, and if you don’t like it, 

you vote against us in the next election. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is an important piece of legislation. It’s 

about legacy. It’s about the long-term future not this generation 

or the next generation of stewards but, Mr. Speaker, the 

stewards who come later — the grandchildren, the 

great-grandchildren, and the great-great-grandchildren, or the 

corporations that they own who might want to assume the 

leases on these pieces of land. This is long-term legacy 

legislation that we’re talking about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there are concerns being raised by organizations 

representing a very large number of people across the province 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And it’s not good enough to say 

we’re going to pass this legislation. We’re going to make this 

major change. And if you don’t like this, you just get rid of us 

in the next election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we think there are ways in which this government, 

through meaningful consultation with the organizations that 

have expressed some concern, Mr. Speaker, there are ways in 

which, with meaningful consultation, that we can work our way 

through this. Now it’s my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that 

organizations like Ducks Unlimited are in the city of Regina 

today, representatives of Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, 

representatives of the Nature Conservancy are in Regina today, 

Mr. Speaker, and there’s an opportunity for the Minister of the 

Environment and officials from the ministry to sit down and 

review the concerns that exist on this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 

There are ways in which we can ensure that the issues related 

previously by the Cattlemen’s Association and the Stock 

Growers Association can be thrown into this mix, Mr. Speaker, 

and try to understand what it is that the people of Saskatchewan 

want this government to be doing. This is not a simple matter. It 

can’t be done quickly and easily, Mr. Speaker. When you’re 

dealing with legacy issues, it’s not a simple matter. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I simply reiterate the fact that there was a call 

put out that this Bill be withdrawn until meaningful consultation 

can occur. Mr. Speaker, I want to say I support that call. I don’t 

see that there is a critical need to move this Bill through as 

quickly as the minister would like it simply because it’s not a 

matter of just asking questions. It’s a matter of fully 

understanding the long-term implications that are put in front of 

us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not an expert in this field. I do care very 

much about wildlife habitat protection. I have a huge respect for 

those who have gone before me who have created the system of 

protecting wildlife habitat in Saskatchewan, those who were 

stewards of the land in the past, who have dedicated this land 

for future generations for long-term sustainability in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I respect that government has a responsibility to ensure 

there is certainty in this long-term protection, Mr. Speaker. 

Legacy is not something to be taken lightly. And it’s not 

something that can be brushed off, saying somebody else will 

take care of it; we don’t need to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I ask very simply, I ask very simply in my argument today 

that the Minister of the Environment withdraw this Bill, 

conduct meaningful consultations, come back to this House 

with a demonstration that indeed consultation occurred and that 

those who were consulted feel at the end of the day that they 

were listened to and that the government understands the 

argument. That’s all that we ask in a very simple way, Mr. 

Speaker — to ensure that with a stroke of a pen this government 

is not just giving away a legacy that has been hard fought for, 

created under many difficult circumstances, and that the 

majority of those who care about conservation and the 

environment are saying to us, think about it; make sure those 

protections exist, and don’t try to mislead us in any way by 

deflecting what the argument is. 

 

This argument is not about stewardship. It’s about legacy. Let’s 

keep it there, and let’s do the right thing. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 

again it gives me a great deal of pleasure and an honour to be 

able to enter into the debate in this great Assembly on behalf of 

the fine people of Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular Bill, as my colleague has already 

indicated, is I think of interest to everyone in Saskatchewan. 

And I don’t think it matters whether you’re a resident of rural 

Saskatchewan or urban Saskatchewan, whether you’re a farmer 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5221 

or a rancher or a worker in this great province of ours. I think 

we all have a vested interest in the environment, and we have a 

vested interest in the protection of the wildlife habitat that is so 

very important to the very being of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that it doesn’t matter what walk 

of life we may be in. The environment and the protection of our 

wildlife, for not only our immediate usage and enjoyment but 

for that of future generations, is very important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it is an issue that has come about over time 

because of the development of our prairie landscape into an 

agricultural-based landscape. I think you’ve seen that some 

shifting did take place as far as the usage of land and 

availability of land for wildlife. That probably was more 

evident in the parkland forest fringe areas of our province than 

perhaps anywhere else. And having had the privilege of being 

born and raised in that part of the province and having spent 

much of my life in the parkland forest fringe areas, I think I 

have a little bit of knowledge of the situation. 

 

And I think we’ve seen during the development of the 

agricultural land in Saskatchewan here over a period of time, I 

think we’ve seen the desire by farmers to expand their farming 

operations and, as a result, we’ve seen the cultivation of some 

areas and some lands that perhaps were not best suited for 

agricultural production. And as time that has worked itself out, 

and we have seen those cases where land had been plowed, 

broken up, perhaps even drained in some cases so to facilitate 

the production of agricultural goods. But simply because the 

land itself and the area in which it was being developed didn’t 

reflect positively on the production of agricultural grains and 

oilseeds and therefore has been rethought of its value. And 

much of it, in some cases, has gone back to a more natural state 

where it has the ability to fill the role of protecting and 

providing the opportunity for wildlife to be able to have a 

habitat where they can continue to be able to reproduce and be 

able to be a part of our overall natural scene. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that in the parkland area, and I know 

in the area where my farm is and where we spent much of, 

many years of our life, there’s a number of quarters or sections 

of land there that was developed after the Second World War 

primarily with the return of the soldiers or — I should say — 

military people from the various services and that they took up 

the agricultural industry and they in some cases developed some 

of this land that was simply not suitable for agricultural 

production. And it soon fell back into natural state. 

 

And that land has now been set aside under The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act, and it is being utilized. It’s not just 

standing there not being utilized. In some cases, I know that 

some of the good folks up there are grazing that land, using that 

land for running beef cattle on and being able to graze that land. 

And it’s sort of a co-operation between the agencies that look 

after and ensure the protection of our wildlife as well as being 

able to be utilized by the farmers and the ranchers in the area. 

 

Others are using it for hay land. I can think of two or three 

quarters that are used for hay land, that the hay is harvested off 

of it each and every year. And it’s just not only that being done 

by government but by private agencies too. The Rocky 

Mountain Elk Foundation has purchased tracts of land up in our 

area there which is primarily set aside for elk habitat for the 

reproduction and for the growth of the elk herd. 

 

And that land will be utilized by farmers in the area that’s 

leased out for the hay production. Each and every year, the hay 

is harvested off of that land. The farmers in the area get to use 

that hay and get to use that hay to support their livestock 

production. And a regrowth, a fresh growth of good, solid, 

strong grass is there to nurture the elk, the elk population in the 

area. So, Mr. Speaker, there has been a long-time, proven 

ability for the two to work together, the agricultural community 

to be able to work together hand in hand with those who wish to 

enhance the wildlife habitat. And I think that it’s proven that it 

works quite well. 

 

[09:00] 

 

Even myself, Mr. Speaker, in years gone by, although I did not 

lease wildlife land, I did lease, though, land in the forest reserve 

which was leased as a grazing lease. I would run cattle on that 

grazing lease, and I had that area leased to be able to support a 

beef herd. And we would be able to run our cattle there in the 

summertime and to support that grazing ability. But at the same 

time, as a multiple use of the area, there was in the wintertime a 

neighbour of mine who had that same area leased as a trapping 

lease, and he would be able to trap the fur-bearing animals on 

that same area. And in conjunction with that, the department 

was able to ensure that there was no damage done to the area 

and that it was able to support the wildlife that was within that 

area. 

 

So there’s a history of proven ability to be able to work together 

to identify ways and means that we can ensure that that area is 

commercially viable, commercially available to farmers, 

whether it be through grazing or whether it be through hay 

production, but at the same time being able to support a wildlife 

population, and not only support that wildlife population but be 

able to expand it, able to grow that wildlife population. 

 

So there’s no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that we have the history, we 

have the ability to continue to maintain that support. And I 

think that’s very, very important. And I think it’s very 

important that we have the ability to ensure that there are those 

who will oversee the usage of this land to ensure that it’s being 

used properly, but to be ensured that it’s there to be able to 

support a wildlife population, which is really important because 

it’s not only important for us and today’s generation, I think it’s 

important for those into future generations. 

 

We’ve been quite fortunate, I think to — at least I have — to be 

able to spend much of my life enjoying the outdoors and 

enjoying the wildlife that is so prevalent in our province. And I 

want to be sure that we’re able to do the same into the future for 

not only for my children, but for my grandchildren and for the 

youngsters and the future leaders of this great province of ours, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that history will show that the 

ranchers and those who have utilized wildlife protected lands 

are good stewards of the land. They work very co-operatively 

with those who are also interested in ensuring that there is the 

ability for that land to continue to support a wildlife production. 

There’s no doubt that we have a history, we have a history and 

a long and a proud history of being able to provide that 



5222 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

co-operation between livestock producers and those who are 

interested in ensuring that the lands continue to be able to 

support our wildlife population, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this didn’t come about overnight, Mr. Speaker. This is 

something that has been going on for some time. I think it 

started probably soon after the Second World War, after the 

returnees from the military services were expanding their 

farming operations and looking at establishing farming 

operations and expanding them and, in some cases, 

concentrated their efforts in more marginal areas along the 

forest fringe. 

 

And that is basically where I had the opportunity of being born 

and growing up and spending the, you know, first part of my 

life. And it was along the forest fringe of the Porcupine forest 

reserve. In fact my farm was only 12 miles from the forest 

reserve boundaries, so we were right in that forest fringe area. 

And it was soon recognized that that area was . . . There was 

areas that were certainly ideal to the production of cereal grains 

and oilseeds, but there was also areas that the land was less 

productive, more marginal, better reflected the production of 

hay or legumes, and in other areas would best reflect the ability 

to use that land in grazing. 

 

And I’m thinking of some wildlife protected land right now 

that’s just, I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, probably three or four 

miles from where my farm headquarters are. And it’s in the 

edge of, in fact, I guess you’d say it’s in the heart of the Swan 

River Valley. The area of course is in the Swan River hills and 

it’s quite rolly. And it’s not really conducive to the agricultural 

production, so that land has a fair amount of forage on it and it 

has also the ability . . . And it’s been fenced off, Mr. Speaker, 

and it’s been used on occasion by farmers in the area for 

grazing, and it works quite well. I mean, the farmers who have 

been able to lease that land and use it year in and year out in 

their operation, and they have the ability to know that they have 

access to that land year in and year out so they can plan on their 

operation to be able to use that land in a manner would suit their 

purposes. And that is, in this case, a grazing purpose. 

 

And they are able to base their cowherd, build a cowherd based 

on using that land, and have the knowledge that they have the 

access to that land each and every year. And that particular land 

has served quite well for the support, I guess you would say, of 

cowherds in the area and this one in particular. 

 

At the same time, Mr. Speaker, when you have the opportunity 

to go through there — and I have throughout the summer 

months, on occasions, do — there’s a trail through there that is 

open to the public. And I, along with many others will use that 

trail, and really enjoy the time there because we have seen, I 

have seen elk in that area. I have seen numerous white-tailed 

deer. This last summer we seen a bear a couple of times, a black 

bear. And of course there’s always the birds and the waterfowl 

that frequent the area. 

 

So it’s really, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious to anyone, whether 

you’re an expert or not, it’s obvious to anyone that that land is 

being properly and fully utilized by all involved, whether it be 

the farmer who was using that land for grazing and he’s able to 

run his cows on it. I don’t know how many cows that land will 

support, but certainly he does. He’s used it for many years. He’s 

been a good steward of that land. And I know that he does 

because he’s able to maintain a cowherd on that and graze that 

area each and every year, and quite frankly does so with good 

results. You can see that in the fall time when you see the 

calves that come off that pasture land. 

 

At the same time, evidence, simply the visual evidence that I 

have already described, travelling through that area you get to 

see the wildlife that’s there. And the wildlife wouldn’t be there 

if there wasn’t the ability to sustain that wildlife. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I think this is just clear indication that the present 

system works and works well. And it does so in a way that 

ensures, ensures that that support will be there for our wildlife 

community in years to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just further down the road from the land I’ve just 

described is another quarter section of land that has been 

purchased I think about a dozen years ago, or maybe 15 or so, 

under the wildlife protection Act. It has been set aside for 

wildlife habitat. And again it has, probably of the 160 acres I 

would think, it probably has somewhere around 80 to 100 acres 

of open land on there that has been seeded down to alfalfa and 

brome mixture. And over the years that certainly has supported 

the wildlife within that area. 

 

But it also supports a gentleman there who has leased that land 

for hay purposes. And I believe he has leased that land for 

probably just as many years. And each and every year he’s out 

there, he puts the hay up. And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, when 

I last talked to him about it — now it was a few years ago — he 

was quite pleased about the interaction between him and the 

officials that he had to work with and that there was no 

interference on either party to be able to fulfill their role. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there’s really a need to, I think, further explore 

the reasons behind this government’s Bill, on this particular 

Bill, as to what is the real intent of this Bill. Is it really about the 

preservation of land for wildlife, and is it really about 

preservation of the wildlife population of our province? Or is it 

about some other purpose that this government would be 

looking at, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And I would hope that this government would have done some 

consultation on this particular Bill. I see no evidence of that, 

Mr. Speaker. I see no evidence of this government having gone 

out and carried out reasonable consultations. By that, Mr. 

Speaker, I mean by talking to and having communications with 

those people who are on the front lines, who are the most 

effective — not only the wildlife groups across this great 

province of ours but also the individuals who have for years, 

and in some cases maybe even for generation from generation, 

have leased this land and have used this land as a part of their 

farming operation. And I think those are the folks that are on 

the front lines. 

 

And I would like to know, Mr. Speaker — and I believe the 

people of Saskatchewan have a right to know — whether or not 

this government has taken the time to have carried out a 

reasonable consultation process with all of those who are 

affected on the front lines. But as importantly, Mr. Speaker, I 

think the people of Saskatchewan in general should have the 

opportunity to have their input, should have the opportunity to 

have their voice heard on this issue in a meaningful way. 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5223 

Because as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, I do believe that this 

particular issue, an environmental issue — an issue that in 

regards to the protection of wildlife and wildlife habitat, for the 

protection and the sustaining of a wildlife species — needs to 

be of interest to all of us. 

 

And I don’t think it’s isolated just to rural Saskatchewan. I 

don’t think it’s isolated just to urban Saskatchewan, I think, 

right across the piece. I don’t think it’s isolated just to 

sportsmen either, Mr. Speaker. I think that the good folks in this 

province, whether you be from rural Saskatchewan, urban 

Saskatchewan, whether you be a sportsman or simply a person 

who enjoys the opportunity to see wildlife on occasions when 

you’re travelling and enjoys seeing the wildlife in its natural 

habitat, Mr. Speaker, I think everybody should have the right 

and have the opportunity to express their opinions on this issue. 

 

Because what’s at stake here, Mr. Speaker, is — and I think it’s 

a very important process — there has been a process of setting 

aside land under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act for the 

purpose of being able to: (a) that land being able to support a 

wildlife species, a wildlife species in a manner that will ensure 

that that species has the ability to continue to survive and thrive 

in this province, not only for our enjoyment and for those of the 

past, but also for the enjoyment of those into the future, and, 

Mr. Speaker, to do so in a manner that ensures that that land is 

set aside, is utilized to the best of its productive value, whether 

it be through grazing or whether it be through hay production, 

Mr. Speaker. That process has been identified and has been 

developed through experience over time and it has worked very 

well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that we don’t take 

any initiative by the government and simply allow it to flow 

through without having a reasonable consultation with the 

people of this great province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because what’s at stake here is not only the wildlife — we 

always focus on the wildlife, and I suppose that’s because it’s 

called The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act — but there’s more 

to it than just the wildlife, Mr. Speaker, and also the waterfowl, 

or the bird species that we so much enjoy in this great province. 

But there’s also the plant life. There’s the opportunity in a 

natural state for natural plants which otherwise are not allowed 

or don’t have the ability to compete in an agricultural 

atmosphere, certainly have the ability to continue to provide us 

the enjoyment and the beauty of the natural splendour of those 

plants as they grow in a natural habitat in the land that had been 

set aside for wildlife habitat. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there is more to it. There’s more to it than just 

simply wildlife, more to it than just thinking about a moose or a 

deer or an elk. There’s certainly more to it as far as the birds are 

concerned, as far as the plant life is concerned and, Mr. 

Speaker, the ability to utilize that land in a way that is 

productive to our society, productive to our economy, but yet 

provides the ability to support wildlife in a way that will be 

there for future generations to enjoy. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, should be, I suppose, the ultimate goal that 

we want to work towards, being able to ensure that we have a 

wildlife population that already has been very important to us in 

the past, and particularly when earlier on when land was being 

opened up and the province was being settled. In a lot of cases 

it was a matter of survival for a lot of the families out there 

dependent upon having the ability to harvest wild game now 

and again in order to provide the ability to have something on 

the table to eat. 

 

[09:15] 

 

But we have moved along, Mr. Speaker, to where now probably 

the wildlife out there provides a greater enjoyment for 

sportsmen and as a result of that, of course, there’s a commerce 

built around that. There’s a fair amount of commerce spent in 

this province by sportsmen in the fall time. Particularly when 

the season is there to harvest the game, you will see that a lot of 

dollars are spent in harvesting a wild animal. It’s the joy of 

doing it. It’s a sportsman joy of being able to capture and bag 

an animal and to be able to enjoy the ability to have actually 

been able to get out in mother nature and experience some of 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is important that we continue to provide the 

opportunity for wildlife to flourish in this great province of ours 

and to do so at the same time as being able to support an 

industry such as the agricultural industry. And recently we’ve 

seen the livestock industry under a fair amount of pressure, 

economic pressure, in Saskatchewan here as a result of market, 

market turndown. Although I understand there is a bit of relief 

in that area, but not a whole lot, but a bit of relief. 

 

But nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, a lot of ranchers in 

Saskatchewan here and I think it’s fair to say . . . I’m just 

working on memory here, but it was . . . I remember reading a 

few years ago where it was suggested that the bulk of the cow 

herd in Saskatchewan here was contained in the smaller 

operations of 50 to 150 head. And that was largely found along 

the parkland, forest fringe area of this great province. And then 

we have our larger ranchers in southern and south and 

southwest corners of the province. But if my memory serves me 

correct, I was reading an article somewhere back some few 

years ago, which at that time indicated that the bulk of the cattle 

population in this great province was found in that forest fringe 

area running from the Manitoba border right across to the 

Alberta border. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is simply because it’s a transition area in 

the quality of land or the productive ability of the land from an 

agricultural, from an oilseed and cereal grain basis to the forest 

fringe and in between there is land that’s probably ideally suited 

for the production of hay and for the production of pasture land 

and best utilized for that purposes. And certainly it also 

supports the wildlife that we enjoy in this great province of 

ours. 

 

And I think if the wildlife population and the growth in that 

wildlife population is any indication of the past practices . . . 

And they have been working. I can remember when I was a 

youngster, you know, 14, 15 years of age on my father’s farm, 

we very, very, very seldom ever seen an elk in our area. It was 

really a rarity to see an elk. Never saw a moose. It would be a 

real rarity to see an elk at that time. Today now I’m 

considerably older than 15, Mr. Speaker, but today it’s 

commonplace to see elk. We have elk herds in the area. 

 



5224 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, there’s an elk herd, and a large elk herd. I 

saw it last summer, and it had about . . . I counted 27 head in 

that particular herd. And I don’t think that was the entire herd; it 

was sort of a part of it. But that herd certainly comes out of the 

river hills every evening and comes up on to the flatlands and to 

basically much of my land and some of my neighbours’ land 

who have land seeded into alfalfa. And they’ll come up there 

and they’ll graze on the alfalfa in the evenings. And you go out 

there just at sunset; you get the opportunity to see this large 

herd and these large animals, and they are a sight to behold. 

 

It’s commonplace, Mr. Speaker, for us now to see a moose. It’s 

not at all uncommon for a moose to simply pass through, either 

through my farmyard out there or near it. And it’s just, it’s no 

longer an exciting thing to see because we see it on a regular 

basis. That was not available to us 15 years ago. That was not 

available 15 years ago, Mr. Speaker, because simply the 

population wasn’t large enough to be able to have, have the 

need, I guess you would say, for them to move south from the 

forest, from the forest itself into the forest fringe areas. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, obviously, obviously the program has worked. 

We’ve seen and I think the evidence is there that the population 

of the . . . the wildlife population has grown and it’s been 

supported by — what? — a careful management, a good 

management of the wildlife and the wildlife habitat because it 

simply can’t support life unless you have the habitat to support 

that life. And this is basically, the wildlife population has grown 

simply because there has been that habitat’s been set aside, been 

looked after, been providing the support necessary for that 

population of elk, population of moose, and the wildlife 

population across the piece simply to grow. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with my colleague who 

spoke earlier in calling on the government to withdraw this Bill 

until such time as they have been able to carry out meaningful 

consultations with the people of Saskatchewan. Not just with 

individual groups, Mr. Speaker, but giving the opportunity for 

people in this great province of ours to be able to participate in 

that discussion, to be able to have their thoughts known, to be 

able to have their thoughts heard. And I would ask the 

government to withdraw this Bill and start a meaningful 

consultation process; after that process, develop a Bill that 

reflects what it is the people of Saskatchewan want, bring it 

back to this legislature, and we’ll deal with it at that time. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s 

a real pleasure in some ways to have the ability to speak in the 

House about what the government is proposing to do with The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a long history, a 26-year history, of this 

particular piece of legislation that the Sask Party is now 

proposing to amend. And this was a piece of legislation that 

was brought into our province in 1984 by a former 

Conservative cabinet minister in the Devine era, a guy by the 

name of Colin Maxwell, who represented an area of the 

province around Spiritwood where there is a lot of critical 

habitat that has been in, has come under this Bill. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I notice that the member that represents that 

part of the province has indicated in some of his comments that 

he is fully supportive of taking out 3.4 million acres of Crown 

land that presently is protected by this legislation and putting 

that land into, I guess, protection or sale in regulation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, maybe that member, and maybe there are 

some members of the government that have pressure from 

people who are lessees in their constituency that would like to 

be able to buy this land. And as a result of that pressure, the 

government has determined that they are going to, instead of 

protecting in law, in legislation, 3.4 million acres of wildlife 

habitat, they’re going to take that protection out of legislation. 

And by regulation, which you know doesn’t have to come 

before this Assembly, doesn’t have to come before the 

Assembly, it’s just something that the government gets to do if 

they determine that a piece of land that is now protected in 

legislation will be sold. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the experiences that we certainly had 

when the NDP [New Democratic Party] was in government, 

that there were times when the Department of the Environment 

would recommend to the cabinet that certain pieces of habitat 

be taken out of legislation, and we would come before this 

House and there would be a discussion. But when we took land 

out of protection, we also put land back into protection in order 

that there would be zero loss of protected lands. 

 

Now the minister has said in this House that she believes about 

340,000 acres of land that is presently protected will be sold. 

That’s what the minister has said. Now I think one of the things 

that it’s fair to say, and it certainly has been commented today 

in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, is that this particular piece of 

legislation is short-sighted. And it’s short-sighted of 

government to sell protected land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that I read this editorial of 

the Saskatoon StarPhoenix — which is one of the daily 

newspapers in our province — into the record because I think it 

speaks volumes about what this government is presently doing. 

And it says this, and I’m going to quote this editorial. I think it 

needs to be put on the public record. And this editorial says this, 

and I quote: 

 

The provincial government's plan to remove from under 

the protective umbrella of the Wildlife Protection Act 

nearly three million acres [Mr. Speaker, it’s 3.4 million 

acres, so I make an editorial comment there] of Crown 

land smacks of short-term thinking and political 

expediency that's detrimental to all citizens of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And despite [and I’m quoting] Environment Minister 

Nancy Heppner's claim that the move, which she wants to 

make by the end of May and would see about 10 per cent 

of the land sold to ranchers whose families have leased it 

for generations, “isn’t about monetary things,” her 

decision remains puzzling. 

 

Even in a large province that boasts 43 per cent of 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5225 

Canada’s arable land, the removal from wildlife habitat 

protection chunks of land that amounts to twice the size of 

Prince Edward Island, is cause of consternation. 

 

At a time when the entire world is becoming increasingly 

aware of the value of preserving natural habitat for 

wildlife for the sake of future generations as well as our 

own, the government demonstrates a breathtakingly 

short-sighted approach to its duty and obligation to act as a 

responsible steward of the public interest. 

 

There’s no doubt that ranching families who’ve leased 

some of these parcels for decades have proven themselves 

excellent stewards of the land. However, the onus has 

remained with the government to ensure that its lessees 

comply with the habitat act, and the loss of leasing rights 

remained a deterrent to those who might be tempted to 

contravene the law in order to maximize profits. 

 

However, wildlife protection and conservation groups, 

First Nations leaders and others are quite right to be 

concerned that, once private buyers acquire Crown land, 

there are no restrictions on the further resale of the land or 

any guarantees that the habitat will remain protected in the 

long run. 

 

It simply isn’t acceptable that Ms. Heppner seems 

determined to push through changes to three-decade-old 

legislation without properly discussing them with groups 

other than the ranchers who have a stake in protected land. 

 

As Darrell Crabbe, executive director of the Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation aptly notes: “We just think that the 

future generations of Saskatchewan would be better served 

if there was full consultation with everybody and the 

original protection was left in place. 

 

“This is a huge issue for us. We’re talking about millions 

of acres of land that we consider to be a jewel in the crown 

of Saskatchewan.” 

 

For a government that’s heading into an election next year 

in a province whose economy shrank by 6.3 per cent in 

2009 . . . 

 

Which, and an editorial comment from me, takes us back to 

2005. This is where the economy is at presently, 2005 numbers. 

 

. . . and is struggling to keep its spending in line with its 

diminished revenues, any source of revenue — especially 

when it’s tied closely to making some of its rural support 

base happy — might seem attractive. 

 

[09:30] 

 

It’s easy to understand why groups such as Ducks 

Unlimited are concerned about putting in place 

conservation easements before any protected land is sold, 

so that subsequent owners are prevented from draining 

wetlands or breaking it up, and about the mechanisms the 

government is putting in place to assess the value of 

property that Ms. Heppner thinks “no longer has to be 

under wildlife habitat protection.” 

“We’re not convinced [quote] that they have the means to 

be able to accurately define which lands have greater or 

which lands have lesser ecological value,” suggests Brent 

Kennedy, Ducks Unlimited’s manager of provincial 

operations. 

 

Given the steady loss of wetlands in Saskatchewan 

through drainage, with farmers making economically 

rational decisions that are at odds with the needs of 

wildlife, it’s easy to understand . . . where Mr. Kennedy is 

coming. 

 

The call by Ducks Unlimited and other conservation 

groups for the Saskatchewan government to develop a 

wetland policy to conserve and restore wetlands in the 

province has gone unheeded. This even though wetlands 

are crucial to protecting water supplies, reducing effluents 

from washing into lakes and rivers, and recharging 

groundwater supplies. 

 

Instead, the Environment minister is acting to further 

erode the protective legislation already in place. No 

wonder those who take a longer view of the province 

beyond its four-year election cycles are concerned. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, here we have in the province of Saskatchewan 

a former Conservative government, of which one member of 

the legislature was part of, in 1984 that brought in a piece of 

legislation that was considered groundbreaking at the time, 

considered groundbreaking at the time, which was talked about 

from one end of the country to the other, which was talked 

about on the entire continent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, and I understand why that groundbreaking 

piece of legislation came in because in the ’70s and early part of 

the ’80s, millions of acres of natural habitat had been basically 

broken, and it was a real concern for people in the Ministry of 

the Environment. And obviously it was a concern for the former 

Conservative government between 1982 and 1991. 

 

And at that time, over 2 billion acres of natural landscape had 

been cultivated, and there was real concern that we were losing 

some of our natural landscape. And so the minister at the time, 

Colin Maxwell, who represented the forest fringe area of our 

province, decided that he would bring in a piece of legislation 

called The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. And at that 

time about 1.7 million acres of natural habitat was put into 

protection by this particular piece of legislation, and since 1991 

a further 1.7 million acres of natural habitat has been added to 

that legislative protection by various Environment ministers. 

 

But you know, it’s interesting. We have an Environment 

minister, for the first time since 1984, that isn’t talking about 

adding more lands, protecting more of our natural landscape. 

But instead we have an Environment minister that is talking 

about reducing protection of our natural landscape and selling 

over 300,000 acres of our natural landscape to some people. 

Now Mr. Speaker, it’ll be very interesting to see who these 

some people are going to be. And this gets to the point I made 

yesterday on the forest management Act. 

 

I think as legislators that we have a duty to add to the public 

interest, in the public interest. And it seems to me if you look at 



5226 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

these pieces of legislation that the minister calls a suite of 

legislation, when it comes to our environment, it appears to me 

that we are weakening, weakening many pieces of 

environmental legislation in order to provide for some private 

interests. 

 

And I will be interested to see whether or not this “natural 

habitat” that is going to be sold, that the government will 

determine which pieces of land will be sold, whether or not it 

will be available for the entire public or just some people. Will 

it just be some people, or will all people in the province of 

Saskatchewan have an opportunity to buy this land because we 

know that some of this land is presently leased. And so will it 

be for the lessee only, or will others, all of us, have that access 

to this? And will it be a competitive process? Or will it just be 

some people who will be able to buy what is now protected in 

legislation? 

 

Now Mr. Speaker, I think if the government has identified some 

private interest that they want to help, one of the things they 

could have done was taken those pieces of land out of the 

protection of the Act and put other pieces of land into the 

protection of the Act. But that’s not what they’re doing. That’s 

not what they’re doing. What they’re doing is they’re ripping 

up, ripping up the protection that those 3.4 million acres 

presently have under this piece of legislation, The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act, and they’re going to quote, “protect it in 

regulation”. Well, Mr. Speaker, regulation doesn’t come to this 

Assembly. Regulation is done by government. 

 

At the moment, there has to be a debate in this Assembly if they 

want to remove certain pieces of natural habitat. That’s the law 

now. But that’s not what they’re doing. And I think the public is 

starting to catch on that this isn’t necessarily a government that 

is by and for all of the people, but this is a government that has 

some people that they want to ensure do very well. That’s what 

this government’s about. And it’s about private interest. It’s not 

about the public interest. 

 

Now we know that the Wildlife Federation has thousands, tens 

of thousands of members. The Wildlife Federation has more 

members than all the political parties in our province have, Mr. 

Speaker. And people who belong to the Wildlife Federation 

come from all walks of life. They come from all parts of 

Saskatchewan. And you know, they laugh, they laugh . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well you might laugh, but the reality 

is the Wildlife Federation has more members than your party, 

my party, the Liberal Party, the Green Party, the Conservative 

Party, all put together. 

 

And the Wildlife Federation is concerned, the Wildlife 

Federation is concerned about, Mr. Speaker, the Wildlife 

Federation is concerned about this piece of legislation basically 

moving out of legislation into regulation 3.4 million acres of 

land. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the minister says she has consulted with 

people. That’s what the minister says. Well I wonder who those 

people are. Is it certain members of the Sask Party caucus? Is it 

certain lessee holders that want to be able to buy this land? 

Because it sounds to me as though they have not consulted 

adequately, from the letters that we’ve received with the 

Wildlife Federation, Ducks Unlimited, nature conservatory, nor 

First Nations people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the Government of Saskatchewan believes that they know 

best. The Government of Saskatchewan believes that there are 

certain people that should benefit from their pieces of 

legislation. And I guess those certain people are some lessees. 

And the real question will be whether or not this Crown land 

that they will determine will be sold, whether this Crown land 

can be bought by Nature Conservancy. Can it be bought by 

other people that are interested in ensuring that this land is kept 

in its natural state for generations to come? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know, one of the things that has been 

brought to my attention by individuals who have donated their 

land to the Crown, that they are concerned that land that is now 

a Crown asset — they donated it in order to ensure that this land 

would be protected forever — they’re a bit concerned that this 

land will now be available for sale. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Qu’Appelle Valley 

on her feet? 

 

Ms. Ross: — To ask leave to make an introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 

has asked leave for introductions. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to introduce to you and through you a group of students 

— there’s 42 students — from Winston Knoll high school. Now 

this is . . . we’ve got two high schools in my riding, and 

Winston Knoll is, I think, one of the champion high schools in 

Regina, but they also are proudly residing in Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

The teacher today is Tammy Patterson, and accompanying them 

is a chaperone, Scott McKillop. We would ask everyone in the 

House to welcome these fine young students to their Legislative 

Assembly. And I will be meeting with them later on, and so I 

hope we will have some lively discussion from the proceedings 

that they observe today. So please, everyone welcome these fine 

young students here to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — With leave for introduction of guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Kindersley has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from 

Kindersley. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5227 

like to join with the member in welcoming guests from Winston 

Knoll to the legislature here today. I want to single out one 

young gentleman that is a part of the group there, a nephew of 

mine, Nolan Klym, whose family farms just north of the city. 

Nolan’s a great young guy. I would count him as my favourite 

young nephew that’s still in school. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all 

members to join with me in welcoming the delegation here 

today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land 

Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

(continued) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that latest introduction 

could elicit a response but I won’t, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I was saying I’ve been contacted by a number 

of people who have donated land to the province in order to 

protect it for future generations. And I’ll tell you what they’re 

worried about. They’re worried because up until now the 

Ministry of the Environment, government has been about 

protecting Crown land. Government has been not about selling 

it but protecting it for future generations. 

 

And I think what is now causing some consternation for a 

number of families that have donated land to the province or to 

the state, they are now very, very concerned that land that they 

had donated for wildlife refuges will now be available to sale, 

for sale to cities, town, villages, whatever, for dumps. And this 

is a real concern that has particularly been brought to my 

attention around the city of Humboldt, where there is a need to 

move the present landfill site. There is a refuge in that area 

close to the city, and I think it’s fair to say that the original 

people who donated that land to the province are worried that 

that wildlife refuge will be, may become available because it 

looks at though the government is moving away from this 

policy of maintaining Crown lands for future generations. 

They’re concerned that this could, this land could be made 

available for a future location of a dump. And that’s certainly 

not what they had intended when they made arrangements with 

the province to transfer this land to the province. 

 

And in fact they have some pretty specific correspondence 

indicating the obligation of the Crown. And the obligation was, 

of the Crown was, to maintain the property in its natural 

condition forever. That was the obligation of the Crown. And so 

they are worried that the province of Saskatchewan may have 

some other ideas for what in essence was private property, but it 

was transferred to the Crown with a number of conditions. And 

certainly one of the conditions was that this land would remain 

part of a Crown asset forever, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, as I said — and I think it’s important that this be put 

on the record as well — that The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act certainly supports agricultural and petroleum activities. 

Now we know that much of this land is leased to people, 

particularly cattle producers used the lands for grazing and 

haying. And up until now, I think it’s fair to say that The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and the designation of that land, 

in terms of protection, had no effect on the lessees’ ability to 

continue leasing that land or on the conditions and terms of the 

leases. 

 

[09:45] 

 

And in fact we know that those lessees are able to use that land 

as part of their daily operations. There are routine developments 

on that land, like dugouts and fences, and those kinds of 

activities can take place without question. We also know that oil 

and gas companies can explore and drill, but they have to make 

sure that there’s very little damage done to the surface of those 

lands, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, you know, given that there are mechanisms in place to make 

sure the lessees can use that land for grazing and haying, given 

that the lessees can put dugouts and fences on that land, and 

given that the oil and gas industry can have access to those 

lands as long as they don’t disturb the surface, I’m not quite 

sure what the purpose is here. I’m not quite sure, but I suspect 

the purpose, and because the minister seems to have made this 

her reason for this piece of legislation, that she wants to be able 

to sell this land and the Sask Party government wants to be able 

to sell this land to some people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker . . . And the minister talks about the lessees. 

So some people are people who already have the lease. Well it 

seems to me that when you have Crown land and it’s now going 

to be available for sale, and given that it’s owned by the state or 

the province, maybe what should happen, given that that seems 

to be their philosophical bent, is that groups like Ducks 

Unlimited, Nature Conservancy, other people, maybe they 

should have the opportunity to buy that land, that it should go 

to, quote, the highest bidder, not just the person who’s had the 

lease. Because I think that the conditions of the lease were that 

you would lease this land for 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90 years 

and then the terms of the lease get changed. 

 

But the question is, is it in the public interest to have only that 

lessee have access to purchasing that land or should other 

people have access? And these are going to be questions that 

the minister is going to have to answer when this Bill comes 

before the committee. Because we know that when the Minister 

of Agriculture determined that they were going to sell off 

Crown land that presently are leased by ranchers, it was the 

rancher that has the lease that got to purchase it, not others. And 

is that necessarily in the public interest, or is that just certain 

people’s private interests? 

 

And we know for instance that there are some farmers that have 

thousands of acres of Crown land along Lake Diefenbaker — 

beautiful land. Beautiful land. And as we know, resort villages 

and people who want to be along lakes, that is growing, Mr. 

Speaker, as post-war baby boomers are retiring and they’re 

retiring to resort villages or resort areas. So the question is, is 

that habitat that’s presently protected by Crown, by The Wildlife 

Protection Act, is that natural habitat going to be available for 

sale? And is it only going to be sold to the person who has the 

lease at the moment, the thousands of acres of land along Lake 

Diefenbaker? Or will all of us have the opportunity to purchase 



5228 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

this land? That is another question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I know the government is in some financial difficulty. I 

know that because . . . Here’s what’s interesting, you know, we 

just had the gross domestic product by provinces released 

yesterday by Stats Canada. I also note, today they just released 

some more statistics today in terms of income. Looks as though 

income February to February dropped in Saskatchewan. First 

time in a long . . . many, many, many, many years that income 

dropped. 

 

But what’s interesting about Saskatchewan last year, at a time 

when that government decided that we were going to see about 

a 2 per cent increase in our GDP [gross domestic product], in 

fact we saw a loss of 6.3 per cent and over an 8 per cent off of 

GDP, Mr. Speaker. So I know they’ve got problems, economic 

problems. They took $2.3 billion in cash that the former NDP 

government left them. They spend all that money. They’ve got 

over a billion three dollars in added debt to the province, and 

their GDP has fallen. It’s not quite sure what’s going to happen 

this year. 

 

And I know they needed the money, but is this how you go 

about doing it? Is this how you go about doing it? You start 

selling the land. And farmers — I think many of them are 

farmers over there — you know, you don’t sell off your land 

and keep the tractor, Mr. Speaker. I mean these are pieces of 

Crown land that have been preserved into the future. I know 

they’re desperate for money, but I think in terms of the long 

term, it’s wiser to keep this as part of our province’s Crown 

gem. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had an opportunity to go through the 

legislation, and what the public needs to understand is, right 

now 3.4 million acres is protected in legislation. The schedule 

of all of the lands, the descriptions of all of those lands are in 

legislation. But they’re taking a new strategic approach. That’s 

what they say. Their new strategic approach is going to evaluate 

our ecological, social, and economic values when it comes to 

Crown land which will enable the sale of land. And: 

 

This new approach includes assessing the ecological 

attributes of all Crown land with an initial focus on . . . 

The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. This information 

[they tell us is going to] . . . be used to determine which 

lands may be sold, sold with a conservation easement, or 

retained by the Crown. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a problem with this legislation 

because we think if they want to take some land out from under 

the designation, then bring it before the House. Let us know 

which pieces they want to take out. Replace it with others. 

Make sure that when you’re going to sell the land that 

everybody has access to, those competitive bids . . . And it’s 

just not a few private interests, Mr. Speaker. I think that would 

be more, a much more honest approach to how we deal with 

this issue in the legislature and in the public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If what they, if they have some friends or some people they 

know that want to buy the land, take it out from under the 

legislation. Tell us what they plan on doing; make sure it’s open 

to a competitive bid. If their friends have the most money, 

they’ll get the land. That’s how it kind of works, Mr. Speaker. 

But that’s not what they’re doing. They’re going to take all of 

the land out from under the designation. They’re going to 

determine what is environmentally sensitive, what isn’t, and 

then they’re going to determine which pieces of land they’re 

going to put up for sale. And if it’s any indication of how they 

did it last time with the agricultural Crown land, it’ll be the 

leaseholders. And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that’s fair when 

you’re talking about a public asset. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’ll be interesting to see what our 

environment looks like 20 years from now. It’ll be very 

interesting to see. And it will be interesting to see what the 

Environment minister 20 years from now has to say about this 

because I suspect that they will say that you know, in 1984 a 

group of men and women decided that they wanted to protect 

critical habitat in the province of Saskatchewan. And for 26 

years we had 3.4 million acres of land that were protected in 

legislation. And if there were reasons why land should be taken 

out from under that designation, it came before this Assembly, 

the Assembly had the debate, and it was a very public process, 

Mr. Speaker. And when people wanted to take land out from 

being designated, they had to put land back in. So it was 

basically a zero loss. 

 

Now we have a Minister of the Environment and a government 

that for the first time in 26 years, for the first time in 26 years, is 

saying, we don’t want to do it that way any more. We’re going 

to move this land, this 3.4 million acres of critical habitat, out 

from under the legislation. It’s going to be there in regulation 

and we’ll decide or future governments will decide what’s 

critical, what’s not; what’s for sale, what’s not. And we’ll 

decide who gets the land, Mr. Speaker. And I think this is not, 

it’s certainly not fair and it’s certainly not in the public interest. 

And I think it’s all about certain private interests. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve put my comments on the 

record. We’ll have many more questions. We certainly will 

have more questions for that minister. And I think, Mr. Speaker, 

there will be a number of people before the committee to ask 

questions, and I know that the minister’s officials will probably 

be listening to this debate that takes place over the next while. 

 

But I think for my constituents who have donated land to the 

Crown, land that was in their family since the early 1900s that 

was in its natural state. They want to make sure that that land 

will not be sold for development, dumps, or whatever, that that 

land is here forever and protected forever because that wasn’t 

Crown land, that was private land that was turned over to the 

state and . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, people donate 

land. They do. And they don’t expect that land to be sold. They 

don’t expect that land to be sold or parcelled out for private 

development. 

 

So we’ll want to make sure that that question is answered. Are 

those refuges still going to be protected? Or is this part of the 

government’s new policy to sell off, sell off pieces of critical 

habitat that have been protected for the last 26 years, to certain 

vested interests? And with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take my seat 

because I’ve other colleagues that would like to participate in 

this discussion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5229 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

good thing to enter into this debate, and I want to thank the 

former, the previous speakers who’ve engaged in this debate. I 

think they’ve asked some very important questions, and of 

course the fundamental one is, what is the legacy that we want 

to leave for our children, our grandchildren? 

 

I know that the former minister Colin Maxwell spoke 

eloquently yesterday when he talked about the visionary work 

that was done in the ’80s. And quite often on this side we’re not 

complimentary to the Conservative Party, but we have to say 

and our hats have to go off in terms of the work that was done 

about protecting critical lands that supported the ecosystems 

that were at risk. 

 

And the backgrounders say, and I’ll review this more, that at 

one point during the ’70s we saw some 2 million acres of land 

be removed from its natural state. And of course that would 

create a situation where people are saying, whoa, are we doing 

the right thing? And the people of Saskatchewan at that time in 

the ’80s had the vision and the will to do the right thing and 

create legislation that would protect habitat. Because we know 

if you don’t have the habitat, you don’t have the wildlife, you 

actually don’t have a healthy biodiversity. And it’s very much a 

three-dimensional thing. 

 

So I am, in some way, glad to be entering into this debate on 

Bill No. 132, An Act to amend The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act, and I understand it makes consequential amendments to 

other Acts. And so we’ll go through this discussion today. And 

I was pleased to see that there are members from different 

organizations are coming forward. I see that Ducks Unlimited 

folks were here earlier today, and we’ll see more probably come 

throughout. 

 

[10:00] 

 

But this is, this is a significant piece of legislation. It really does 

represent a paradigm shift for how we perceive and how we 

protect the environment in all its complexities in this province. 

And we see this minister bringing forward many pieces of 

legislation that we have some real deep concerns about. And of 

course in opposition we’ll see this legislation come to pass, and 

it’s unfortunate that we will, but this is one that we feel really in 

many ways represent how this government has lost its way and 

has lost its trust and its moral compass in terms of how it comes 

to understand the environment. 

 

And in fact you know, overnight we saw a great rain. I was just 

thinking about how wonderful that was for the people of 

Saskatchewan, particularly in rural Saskatchewan. We all enjoy 

a very good rain because it means that it’s replenishing the 

natural state and we can have a great summer ahead. And 

whether you’re in agriculture . . . It’s very good for the farmers, 

it’s very good for the ranchers, but it’s also very good for the 

natural habitat, replenishing the wetlands, the things that make 

our province so unique and special. 

 

Whether it’s the 100,000 lakes or the wetlands that have really 

put us on the map in terms of North America, in fact the world, 

about how we’ve come to appreciate and come to protect our 

natural environment, in fact, Mr. Speaker, we have been 

recognized internationally. I know that a few short years ago we 

did receive an international award, the Blue Heron award, and I 

know the folks from several NGOs [non-governmental 

organization] were with us when we received that award 

recognizing the good work that’s been done in terms of 

protecting the natural habitat in this province. 

 

But this morning I do have to say, and I know my colleague 

from Saskatoon Nutana referenced this, but I was glad to see 

the editorial in The StarPhoenix. And I don’t know if the 

minister’s had a chance to review the editorial — a very 

significant one, and I think this is one that will go down in the 

history books as pointing to a concern that we all have in this 

province. The member from Nutana said, what will this 

province look like in some 20, 30, 40 years from now after this 

piece of legislation was passed? We are looking now since ’84, 

some 25, 27 years later. And we saw the fruits of that piece of 

legislation that was passed in ’84 that we now have some 3 

million acres of land protected, 3.4 million acres of land 

protected through The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. And 

we’re reversing that, unfortunately. 

 

I’d like to take a moment and quote from this editorial because I 

believe it has a lot to say and a lot that we should be reflecting 

upon today as we move forward. The title of the editorial, 

“Short-sighted of gov’t to sell protected land,” and it came out 

today, the 29th of April 2010. And I quote: 

 

The provincial government’s plan to remove from under 

the protective umbrella of the Wildlife Protection Act 

nearly three million acres of Crown land smacks of 

short-term thinking and political expediency that’s 

detrimental to all citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

And despite Environment Minister Nancy Heppner’s 

claim that the move, which she wants to make by the end 

of May and would see about 10 per cent of the land sold to 

ranchers whose families have leased it for generations, [in 

quotes, her quotes] “isn’t about monetary things,” her 

decision remains puzzling. 

 

And clearly we do all have to think about what is driving this 

forward. Why are you fixing something that isn’t broken? Now 

nobody can disagree and I know many, many of the stock 

growers are fantastic stewards. That is not the argument before 

us today. The argument before us is, why is this necessary? Is it 

just about ownership and what does that mean? And maybe we 

need to hear more from the minister about why is it that the 

ownership is key. 

 

Now last night in committee, she went on about how this is not 

about deregulation. Well if there’s ever an example of 

deregulation, here is an example. Now she will argue that it’s 

not. And I will go into her comments that she’s made in her 

second reading and I’ve got to tell you, Mr. Speaker, there’s 

some real deep, deep concerns about some of the comments she 

made in her second reading about that. It is puzzling, clearly 

puzzling. 

 

It’s not about the money, she says. I have some real, real 

concerns about that. It goes on to say, and I quote: 

 

Even in a large province that boasts 43 per cent of 

Canada’s arable land, the removal from wildlife habitat 



5230 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

protection chunks of land that amounts to twice the size of 

Prince Edward Island, is cause for consternation. 

 

At a time when the entire world is becoming increasingly 

aware of the value of preserving natural habitat for 

wildlife for the sake of future generations as well as our 

own, the government demonstrates a breathtakingly 

short-sighted approach to its duty and obligation to act as a 

responsible steward of the public interest. 

 

Now there’s an interesting word. Couple of things in there. And 

last night we had a good debate about what the public interest is 

and now I’ll talk more about this, because this piece of 

legislation is tied to a piece of legislation that went through 

committee last night, the conservation easements. 

 

But we talked about, what does it mean about the public 

interest, especially, especially when she’s removing so much of 

the work out of the public sphere that we’ve come to know as 

the Saskatchewan legislature. And we hear people being 

introduced in the House, where they say, welcome to your 

legislature or their legislature, really emphasizing that it’s the 

people’s legislature. But somehow this government by the same 

token is saying that, but moving it back this way because 

they’re moving it behind closed doors. So the public interest 

they’re looking after, they’re looking after in their own special 

way, behind closed doors. 

 

So clearly we have to talk about what does this mean, public 

interest. And we’ll talk more about that, but we have some real 

deep concerns about this government that wraps itself in this 

flag about being transparent and accountable and looking at the 

public interest, and they’re doing exactly the opposite, exactly 

the opposite. I think they have a lot of nerve and they will be 

taken to account when they go back to their communities about 

this particular Bill because people do have some concerns about 

how truly accountable and transparent is this government. How 

truly is it, especially when they talk about the public interest. 

 

And I do have to say, Mr. Speaker, this is only even more ironic 

and it’s painfully sad how ironic that they’re doing this in the 

International Year of Biodiversity. I understand in September 

that they’re going to make a big deal, a big deal in September 

about biodiversity. Because even though they’re a year behind 

in terms of their biodiversity action plan, and they’re going to 

launch something probably to stakeholders behind some closed 

doors, not anything that the public will be invited to. I bet the 

public won’t be invited to this, about biodiversity. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m amazed at this. I’m amazed at the 

nerve of this minister, who can step forward and say, trust us; 

we’re doing the right thing. 

 

But this goes on. This goes on and it says, “There’s no doubt,” 

and I quote: 

 

There’s no doubt that the ranching families who’ve leased 

some of these parcels for decades have proven themselves 

excellent stewards of the land. However, the onus has 

remained with the government to ensure that its lessees 

comply with the habitat act, and the loss of leasing rights 

remained a deterrent to those who might be tempted to 

contravene the law in order to maximize profits. 

You know, I think that’s worth reflecting on a minute too. As 

well we talk about, so what’s happening in the Great Sand 

Hills? What’s happening out there? We have worked and 

there’s a great working relationship with the Great Sand Hills 

Planning Commission. That work has seemed to have stalled on 

this minister’s desk. And the ranchers out there are wondering 

what’s happening with that. We need to see more action. And 

so she seems to have some that she’s working with and others 

that it’s just plain stalled on. 

 

It goes on, and this probably is the most telling of all. But I 

mean we could read the whole thing and I don’t plan on reading 

the whole thing. I know many others will want to talk about 

this. But it goes on: 

 

However, wildlife protection and conservation groups, 

First Nations leaders and others are quite right to be 

concerned that, once private buyers acquire Crown land, 

there are no restrictions on further resale of the land or any 

guarantees that the habitat will remain protected in the 

long run. 

 

It simply isn’t acceptable that Ms. Heppner seems 

determined to push through changes to three-decade-old 

legislation without properly discussing them with groups 

other than the ranchers who have a stake in protected land. 

 

As Darrell Crabbe, executive director of the Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation aptly notes: [and this is a quote] “We 

just think that the future generations of Saskatchewan 

would be better served if there was full consultation with 

everybody and the . . . [full] protection was left in place. 

 

“This is a huge issue for us. We’re talking about millions 

of acres of land that we consider to be a jewel in the crown 

of Saskatchewan.” 

 

And how true is that? On the end of the quote, “. . . a jewel in 

the crown of Saskatchewan.” He couldn’t have said it better. 

And here we are. We’re putting it up, some might say, in the 

pawn shop. 

 

I have some real deep concerns about this, that there should 

have been full consultation and in fact and I’ll review the 

minister’s second reading speech where she talks about how 

there was consultation. But some of these folks are saying that 

there wasn’t. There wasn’t full consultation. So here we have 

the executive director for Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation 

going on record, going on record saying that there wasn’t and 

there should have been, that there should have been. 

 

And it goes on, but, you know, the end of the article really does 

say, I think, an important quote to reflect on, and I quote: 

 

Instead, the Environment minister is acting to further 

erode the protective legislation already in place. No 

wonder those who take a longer view of the province 

beyond its four-year election cycles are concerned. 

 

And truly they are concerned. They are concerned and they 

have a lot to be concerned about because we are seeing, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, a paradigm shift that we are all worried about, 

we are all deeply concerned about. 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5231 

Now the government did win the last election and they do have 

the right to do this, but I don’t think they campaigned . . . And I 

see the members clapping at their desks. I don’t think they 

campaigned on the elimination or the erosion of this Bill. Now 

maybe I’m wrong. Maybe that’s what they were talking about 

in rural Saskatchewan, that they were going to do this, but it 

sure wasn’t in any public documents. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about the minister’s 

second reading speech and this was on March 8th, 2010, and so 

I’ll be quoting from Hansard. And it was quite an interesting 

speech, very short. So I’m sure it’s because even what she did 

say there is questions about, but she goes on and says, right off 

the bat: 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our government 

recognizes the need to ensure that areas of ecological 

value are protected. This Act will allow the government to 

protect sensitive land more efficiently, more effectively, 

and more sustainably than ever before. 

 

I think the key word there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is more. This 

government seems to be operating more means less here, not 

less means more, but more means less. There’s going to be less 

land protected. Now maybe that land may be protected more 

efficiently and effectively. I have a big question about the 

sustainable part, but there is going to be less land. 

 

This is a government that does not see it as a priority, moving 

more land into protection. And I’d like to hear the minister talk 

about that. What is their goal? How much more land will be 

moved into protection? Is there any land being moved into this 

kind of protection now? This year? Next year? What are their 

plans for the next 10 years? I bet the answer is, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, zero. I bet that’s what the answer is. 

 

And if they’re not moving more land in and they’re taking land 

out, I think that’s less land being protected. Now they may talk 

about this shiny new thing that they’ve got going, this RBR 

[results-based regulation], but I think they’ve got a problem 

here because less land is being protected. That’s the long and 

the short of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that’s a concern for 

everyone in this province. And that’s why you see such things 

as this editorial coming forward in this paper. Less land will be 

protected and that’s a real problem. 

 

She goes on and talks about, and I quote, “We will also be able 

to tell which land is the most sensitive and needs stronger 

protection.” 

 

[10:15] 

 

Now I’m curious about what her definition of stronger means. 

What does stronger means? It looks like, to me, this is actually 

weakening the protection. She’s moving many of the things that 

we typically do in this House into regulations where only she 

will know what’s happening. Maybe the cabinet might know, 

but it sounds like only she will know, and we have some real 

concerns about that. 

 

So how is this actually strengthening protection? This is really 

weakening protection. And we have some concerns. And 

there’s two, two concerns as I said. The concern about moving 

things into regulations — and this is a real emphasis. You see 

this more and more, that this government, this minister, has 

bought into things being done at the minister’s level. And so 

how does this strengthen? This is a concern. Moving it to 

regulations, that can be done, and there’s no public scrutiny, no 

public scrutiny. She loves to throw the word around, public 

interest, but there is no public scrutiny at all. 

 

But the other one that’s really, if she really did want to talk 

about strengthening the Act and protecting the land in a 

stronger way, is she could have brought the no net loss policy 

into the legislation. And in fact, I’m not sure if the minister is 

aware of what that is. But the idea is, if you’re taking land out, 

that you determine that in fact actually there is land that would 

be more appropriate to put into the inventory of protected land. 

You’re putting land in; then maybe you can take some land out. 

So there’s no net loss. At the end of the day, we don’t see less 

land being protected. 

 

We are really worried that that policy now is history. That’s 

history. It’s part of Colin Maxwell’s legacy and many 

Environment ministers since who ensured that that happened. 

But is the no net loss policy history? That’s what we want to 

know. Is this minister killing that policy? We don’t hear about 

it. It would have been a great signal that hey, she is actually 

sincere about this idea of strengthening the protection for 

sensitive lands and sensitive environments. But we don’t get 

that sense because here is a key element that she is killing, I 

believe that she is and that it’s done, and it’s history now. 

 

Now if I’m wrong, I’d like to see this come forward, perhaps as 

an amendment, when we talk about this Bill in committee. But 

my hunch is that that won’t happen. That won’t happen because 

it probably is history, and that really worries us. 

 

So she goes on. And this is from her second reading speech. 

She goes on: 

 

This has been developed in consultation with a wide 

variety of stakeholders such as the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation, the Nature Conservancy of Canada, Nature 

Saskatchewan, Ducks Unlimited Canada, The Federation 

of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Saskatchewan 

Cattlemen’s Association, and the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you heard me read the editorial from 

The StarPhoenix. I quoted extensively. We had Darrell Crabbe, 

the executive director from the Wildlife Federation, say we 

need full consultation. How does this square? How does this 

square? How does this minister stand up and say to the House 

in her second reading speech that they’ve had consultation and 

yet we have someone like Darrell Crabbe saying something like 

that? 

 

And I actually, I have a letter as well that I want to read into the 

record here. But we have some real concerns when this kind of 

thing can happen. In fact I’ll take a moment here, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, to read. This is April 27th, 2010, and it’s to — and I 

quote — Mr. Lingenfelter, Ms. Morin, and Ms. Higgins. And 

I’ll quote: 

 

We write concerning the government’s statement that 



5232 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

conservation stakeholder organizations were consulted 

about Crown land sale program, in particular the sale of 

land designated under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

Both the ministers of Agriculture and Food and 

Environment have publicly stated WHPA lands will not be 

sold. We can assure you that no meaningful consultation 

regarding the sale of Crown lands has occurred with 

Nature Saskatchewan. 

 

On occasion we were told some details of the land sale 

program, but this is not consultation. Nature Saskatchewan 

was never asked for an opinion about the sale of Crown 

lands. The Crown lands stakeholder forum, which did 

provide an opportunity for discussion about the 

management of future lands, was abolished by the 

Minister of Agriculture. 

 

We request you to urge the government to delay the 

passing of the amendments to The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, which would see these lands removed from 

the Act and placed under regulation where they could be 

sold at the discretion of the minister. The government has 

not properly consulted with the public on this very 

important issue which has the potential to cause significant 

consequence to biodiversity in Saskatchewan. We look for 

your assistance in stopping the passage of this legislation. 

 

Sincerely, 

 

Gary Seib, Acting General Manager, Nature Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what a letter, what a letter, what a letter. I 

don’t know how the Minister of Environment and the Minister 

of Agriculture can square that with their statement in their 

second reading speech. How can they square that when they 

have somebody willing to put it in writing that they were not 

consulted? We have two groups, two groups. Do we need to get 

all the groups in here to say whoa, whoa, maybe we should 

rethink this. Maybe we should rethink this. Is this the best step 

forward? I have some real concerns. 

 

And I just have to say that how ironic that the Minister of 

Agriculture abolished the Crown lands stakeholder forum. 

Unbelievable. On one hand, you say you’re consulting. And 

then on the other . . . or before you do that, you abolish the very 

forum that you might talk about it in. Unbelievable, 

unbelievable. So I have some real concerns. We have some real 

concerns, and we must address this. 

 

And this government and this Premier wonders why people are 

wondering more and more about the trust factor, the faith factor 

in this government. You know, you have The StarPhoenix 

writing editorials. You have organizations writing letters as 

soon as they hear things that are happening like this. Really 

there is time to do the right thing. And I think, you know, if the 

minister wants to consider this, we’d be, I’d be very happy to 

support this. Maybe take it back and let’s rethink this. Let’s 

rethink this. We have some real concerns. 

 

So the consultation piece is huge, is huge. Then she goes on. 

Then she goes on. Then she goes on: “Most importantly this 

Act will streamline management and enhance the protection of 

ecologically valuable land. The changes will allow the Crown 

to sell land with permanent easements attached.” 

 

So the question is, how permanent is this? How permanent is 

this? The StarPhoenix raises this as a legitimate question. These 

are easements on the title, but once the land is sold, it is sold. It 

is no longer Crown land. Now the minister can say, well I have 

some input in this, and I can control that because I can say who 

can remove easements and who cannot. And that is true. That is 

true. 

 

But last night as we discovered . . . and I will want to take a 

minute and talk about the piece of legislation that went through 

committee. But section 11.42, in section (3)(a): 

 

The minister shall review an application made pursuant to 

subsection (1) and may: 

(a) if the minister is satisfied that it is in the public 

interest to do so, approve the application . . . 

 

So she can. She can approve it. Now the question before us and 

the question last night that wasn’t answered very well is, what 

is the public interest? And who gets to talk about the public 

interest? Well we can’t here even though we’re elected by the 

public. We’re elected by the public, but we can’t talk about it 

because it’s not in this sphere. It’s not to be talked about in 

here. It’s about to be talked about in her office, in her office. 

That’s not a public forum. That’s not a public forum at all. So I 

don’t know how she squares that, how she squares that. 

 

But the worst thing, the worst thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 

and I don’t know if you were watching TV last night when we 

talked about this. To continue on with section 11.42 is section 

(10), section (10): “The minister’s decision to approve or reject 

an application pursuant to this section is final and conclusive 

and no proceedings by or before the minister may be restrained 

by injunction, prohibition or other proceedings or . . . 

removable . . . or otherwise by any court.” So she has final say. 

She gets to decide what the public interest is, and that’s the final 

word and that’s it. That is it. 

 

 But we had quite a discussion about that, and I think that is 

shameful. That is shameful because this is . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well let’s hope. I’m looking forward to that 

letter, but I don’t think it changes this. It clarifies it, but this is 

what was passed last night. Am I correct? It was passed . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . All right, okay. Well it was with 

division. I saw that, but division still means it was passed. I 

believe it was passed in committee last night. And I’m glad that 

happened. I’m glad that happened because clearly there were 

some questions that needed to be asked but you know . . . And 

they can shake their heads. They can shake their heads. But it 

doesn’t change a thing, does it, Mr. Speaker? Doesn’t change a 

thing, does it? 

 

We have an interpretation, but it doesn’t change what’s in the 

Act, does it? It does not. And so we have a minister here who 

can decide what’s in the public interest. And the key thing, it’s 

not being decided in this legislature, in the people’s legislature 

or what they like to refer to as their legislature. And we’ve 

heard the folks over there say, their legislature many times, but 

people should know many of the things that we’ve talked about 

in this legislature are being removed into the minister’s office, 

being taken to the minister’s office and so we have some real 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5233 

concerns. 

 

Now the other thing the minister likes to talk about and we 

talked about this last night was that the fines for contravention, 

so I quote, “Our government believes that land users are great 

stewards of the land and have a vested interest in its ongoing 

environmental protection. To ensure that they do so, [the] fines 

for contraventions of easements will increase from $2,000 to 

$100,000 for individuals and from $50,000 to $500,000 for 

corporations.” 

 

Well that does sound impressive. That sounds really impressive. 

But the key words that are not in her speech is that they cannot 

be more than that. They can be less than that. They can be $5. 

They can be $100. They can be 20 bucks, but they can’t be 

more than $100,000 or $500,000. So we have some real 

concerns because this is what they call in the industry a little bit 

of greenwash, a little bit of greenwash. When you’re coming 

under attack, you want to make it look as green as possible. 

And what does she do? She puts in some big numbers. She puts 

in some big numbers and then forgets about the words in front 

of it that say, not more than, not more than. 

 

Well I think a lot of people in Saskatchewan who might be 

looking at it saying, how can I get around these regulations, are 

going, wow. That’s good. I know what the maximums are. I 

don’t know what the minimums are. I don’t know what the 

minimum fine is. We don’t know. We don’t know, and that’s a 

problem. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is unfortunate. It is unfortunate that 

we take a look back at the legacy that was left from the ’80s by 

the critical wildlife protection Act in the ’80s that came 

forward, and we saw that during the ’70s some 2 million acres 

of land, 2 million acres of land were lost due to agricultural 

expansion. Many things were changing in . . . actually it was 

between 1976 and 1981 that these things were happening, over 

a short period of five years, over 2 million acres of land. So it 

created the impetus for this kind of work to be done. And so we 

saw the reason for this to happen, and I think it is a real shame, 

a real shame that this kind of thing was happening. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I have . . . and we know 

that we’ve seen and I hope, I hope that this minister has and is 

willing to put on record, now she has indicated in media that 

this is not the tip of the iceberg, that lands such as the Great 

Sand Hills that are protected or the RAN [representative area 

network], some of the RAN areas, some of the areas are not to 

. . . that will not be affected by this. 

 

But I’ll tell you where the concern comes from, and it comes 

from her own notes that talk about . . . The explanatory notes 

for Bill 132, section 3(a), in the explanation when it talks about 

the schedule, and I will quote from the notes here, I quote: 

 

This new approach includes assessing the ecological 

attributes of all Crown land with an initial focus on land in 

The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act (WHPA). This 

information will be used to determine which lands may be 

sold, sold with a conservation easement or retained by the 

Crown. 

 

[10:30] 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s some key pieces, some key 

phrases in here. I want to draw your attention, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to this phrase, “initial focus” in all Crown 

lands. So what this note says, “This new approach includes 

assessing the ecological attributes of all Crown land . . . ” so we 

can assume that that means all lands that are owned by the 

Crown in Saskatchewan with an initial focus on the land in the 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

So what they’re saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I get the word 

“initial” right, it’s their first look. It’s their first go. The first go 

is at the WHPA lands. What is the next step? Now it doesn’t 

say in here what the next step is, but it does imply that there are 

next steps. If I understand the word “initial” right, what is the 

next step? 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have some concerns about, does 

this mean the Great Sand Hills are at risk? Does it mean Dore 

Lake is at risk? Now Dore Lake may not, because it’s in the 

North. But the Great Sand Hills are in the South. And some of 

the other lands that were protected right along the Parkland 

area, are they at risk? Because this government is taking a look 

at all Crown lands. And I’m saying that because this is what this 

note says. I’m not making up the word “all” Crown lands. I’m 

reading it from this document, which is their document. So I 

think we have a reason to be concerned about this. 

 

So, with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do think that this is 

short-sighted. I agree with The StarPhoenix on this that this 

government who wants to sell the protected lands, some 10 per 

cent right off the get-go, I have some real concerns about that. 

 

But I think that this government could do better, should be 

doing better at this time when we want to make sure our lands 

are protected, that when we look around the world and we see 

biodiversity at risk . . . And we see this year being a very 

special year. This is not the year to actually move backwards. 

And I want to take a moment to quote from Home Place, Stan 

Rowe. I did yesterday, just a great writer from the University of 

Saskatchewan. And I want to quote from page 25 when he talks 

about the first 100 years: 

 

The opening of the 21st century, new millennium, is an 

inspiration to change our ways in Western Canada. Even 

now soils are drifting, valley bottoms are being broken, 

wet lands are still being drained, aspen bluffs levelled, 

patches of native prairie land plowed. Hopeful signs are 

the many recent conservation preservation programs in 

response to popular demand supported by both 

non-government and government agencies. After years of 

inaction, they all sound so good. 

 

Let us, however, remember as we support them, that 

without parallel changes in how we think and feel about 

the land, these and all such conservation preservation 

programs will prove to be only stopgap measures, finger in 

the dyke exercises, glimmers of hope, but not the new day 

dawning. 

 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we can have a new 

day dawning in terms of biodiversity in Saskatchewan. But this 

piece of legislation is significantly flawed, and I would ask the 

minister to withdraw it. I’ll take my seat now and cede to the 



5234 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

next speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

proud to rise and join in the debate and thank my colleague 

from Saskatoon for his kind comments and his very astute 

comments in relation to Bill No. 132. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s important for the people of 

Saskatchewan to know, and the people that may be listening to 

this presentation, and the whole notion that they’re sitting there 

wondering, well what’s the importance of the Bill. And that’s 

one of the reasons why people should certainly pay attention to 

what this government is doing because there are a lot of back 

door deals that they have been undertaking the last number of 

years. 

 

And this is one example, Mr. Speaker, of how they have now 

provided, through this Bill, three different ways in which they 

could delist and in essence sell some of the land that had been 

set aside for many, many years in relation to trying to provide 

habitat protection for many of our wildlife species and animals 

that Saskatchewan has. 

 

So to encapsulate what the Bill is about, this current Minister of 

the Environment has now provided three different opportunities 

to take away critical wildlife habitat lands and then sell those 

lands to anybody that she so wishes. Now what people in 

Saskatchewan are concerned about is there’s many groups out 

there that want to make sure that Saskatchewan continues 

remaining a very solid province when it comes to having a 

healthy ecosystem. And as part of that healthy ecosystem, 

there’s got to be habitat protection for wildlife, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And what we’re seeing is that this government has undertaken a 

process to sell some of that habitat land that had been set aside 

over centuries and a number of years to make sure that 

Saskatchewan has that legacy. Now these guys are coming 

along, and they’re providing an opportunity for the minister and 

themselves and their friends to now purchase that wildlife 

habitat land. And my message to them is, what the heck are you 

guys doing here? What are you guys doing here by opening up 

this particular file? Who are you going to sell this land to, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

So people in Saskatchewan ought to know this: that the 

Saskatchewan Party — the Sask Party, that minister, and that 

Premier — are now opening up the doors to wildlife habitat 

lands that have been protected for years, Mr. Speaker. We have 

often . . . it says right here that 1976 and 1981 we lost almost 2 

million acres of natural landscape. And now these folks are 

coming back and they’re going to be selling more, Mr. Speaker. 

And no matter how you cut it, when you open up the door to the 

sales of land — and this Bill has provided three avenues to do 

that — your intent is to sell that land. 

 

And again the people across the country and the people across 

Saskatchewan in particular are saying, what the heck are you 

doing here with this Bill? You ought not to do these kind of 

things because that’s not what people of Saskatchewan elected 

you for. 

So not only, Mr. Speaker, are we seeing that this minister will 

have the authority to sell land, but that authority will be done 

specifically and through only her office, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I hear members across the way, Mr. Speaker, chattering 

from their chair. Why didn’t they chatter in caucus when this 

Bill came forward? Because, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t know 

what they were doing. They sat on their hands while people like 

the Minister of the Environment and their so-called leader got 

up and put this Bill forward because they have friends that 

they’ve got to satisfy, Mr. Speaker, and they’re going to do that 

at the expense of all of us, Mr. Speaker. And this wildlife 

habitat protection Act is exactly what we in the opposition are 

telling people is going to be the net result of some of the 

mismanagement of that Premier, of that minister, and that party 

across the way. 

 

So I’ll say it again for the third time: what the heck are you 

doing with an Act of this sort and allowing that to continue? 

Shame on you. Shame on you folks for doing that and allowing 

that to happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what’s going to happen is that, as we sit here and we 

watch, we watch what they do, the people of Saskatchewan are 

getting madder and madder and madder by the day. And this is 

further evidence of this particular Bill that they do not know 

what they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. They don’t know what they’re 

doing. And the net result is, they’re going to sell anything and 

everything under the sun in Saskatchewan to their particular 

friends. They’re going to sell everything and anything under the 

sun to try and get money to cover up their fiscal incompetence, 

Mr. Speaker. And this Bill is one more evidence, one more 

piece of evidence that we in the opposition are saying to the 

people of Saskatchewan should prove our case. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Wildlife Federation, which is a very 

strong federation throughout Saskatchewan, and no doubt there 

are some people within the federation that support the Sask 

Party, but I can tell you this right now: as a result of this Bill, as 

a result of this Bill and some of the lands . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the Assembly to come to 

order. I’m having a little trouble hearing the speaker that has the 

floor. I recognize the member. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and as a result of 

their decision to open up three avenues of sale of this wildlife 

habitat lands, what they’re doing is they’re starting to piss off 

the people within the Wildlife Federation. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member to . . . We’ve 

always had a tradition of language. I would ask him to 

withdraw that one word. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that one word and 

I’d like to replace it with, they’re getting a lot of people 

extremely angry, Mr. Speaker, as a result of this particular Bill. 

And this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is quite frankly going to spell the 

death knell of the Saskatchewan Party, the Sask Party. Because 

what they have done is they have turned their backs on some of 

the people that supported them and some of the people that 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5235 

trusted them, not just on financial management, Mr. Speaker, 

but even on things as important as protecting the jewel of 

Saskatchewan, which was really quite frankly The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act that we in Saskatchewan with many 

solid partners — First Nations, Métis people, with the outfitters, 

with the Wildlife Federation . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — There are a couple of members that 

want to carry on a conversation that don’t have the floor. I 

would ask members to take their conversation behind the bar. 

Recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and what they have 

done is they’ve turned their backs on the people that have 

fought for many years to put the critical wildlife habitat Act in 

place. They wanted this habitat protected, and this party has 

turned their backs on this and no, we’ve got political 

commitments to our friends to sell some of that land and we are 

going to sell it. We’re hell-bent on selling some of that land 

and, Mr. Speaker, they will sell that land. 

 

And the people throughout northern and southern, eastern, 

western, and central Saskatchewan are saying one thing: when 

it comes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, when it comes 

to protecting our wildlife and the habitat they live in, we want a 

minister with leadership. We don’t need a real estate agent, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

That’s the message they have for this government, this minister, 

and this Premier. And I’ll say it again, that the people 

throughout Saskatchewan, they want a minister that can provide 

leadership, a Premier that can provide leadership, not real estate 

agents that are saying all Saskatchewan lands are now for sale. 

They’re for sale because we are so broke that we managed the 

economy and the resources and the finances of this province 

that we have no choice but to have wall-to-wall sale of 

everything we have of value in Saskatchewan, and that includes 

the Crowns and now it includes critical wildlife habitat 

protection areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So again I’ll point out to the people, as a result of their fiscal 

incompetence, they are now having a wall-to-wall sale of our 

Crowns, a wall-to-wall sale of our lands, a wall-to-wall sale of 

any asset that is of value to the people of Saskatchewan. And 

shame on them, and shame on them for doing this, Mr. Speaker, 

because they know and we know that the people that have 

supported them in the past are now very angry. 

 

They are now very angry, and this is one more piece, one more 

nail in the coffin of the Sask Party government when it comes 

to 2011 because they have turned their backs on the people that 

supported them on this front. They have betrayed that trust. 

And, Mr. Speaker, as an opposition, we’re saying to people, yes 

it’s important that you be angry about this. But there’s two 

things you ought to do. You ought to join us to fight back and 

fight back hard and get rid of these guys in 2011. 

 

And the second point you can do is, obviously, not support 

these guys any more. Some people out there within certain areas 

of Saskatchewan may not vote for the NDP, but I tell them, I 

tell them you will now teach them a lesson, a lesson. Don’t 

come out in 2011. Protest and don’t come out and vote for them 

— if you choose not to vote for our party — when it comes to 

issues of this sort because they have betrayed your trust. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, I want 

to speak for some of the backbench over there, Mr. Speaker, 

because the backbench I know are upset. They are upset on 

some of these fronts and they know this is going to hurt them. 

And I want to say to the Premier and to the Minister of the 

Environment, the so-called leadership of the Executive Council 

of the Sask Party, what are you doing with this Act? What are 

you doing? You are creating a major problem for the backbench 

of the Sask Party, and the NDP are enjoying every second of 

that, Mr. Speaker. We’re enjoying every second. And it’s 

another gift from this government that has lost their way and 

quite frankly do not know what they’re doing. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, today now the Premier is making an 

announcement . . . or tomorrow at 12:30, on this new TILMA 

[Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility Agreement] or new 

West partnership. All that is intended to do is to try and change 

the channel. And when you look at this action, we’re going to 

continue hammering home their points on fiscal 

mismanagement, their points on selling off our lands, Mr. 

Speaker, and now they’re trying to change the channel on this 

new West partnership which is once again going to open the 

doors to Saskatchewan to sell more of our resources. And we’re 

going to transmit control of what we had in our province to 

Alberta or to BC [British Columbia] because I don’t have 

confidence that this Premier or this Sask Party government can 

stand up for Saskatchewan people because of evidence that has 

been attached to this Bill, Mr. Speaker. They have not done 

their homework and they can’t provide leadership and they have 

betrayed the trust of people that took the opportunity to give 

them the chance to be government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that if people out there 

think that this is only a small mistake, the answer to it is, no. 

We have seen how they’ve gone to war with labour. We have 

seen how they have not addressed the rural Saskatchewan 

health issues. They have not addressed that in one, one bit. 

They have mismanaged the finances of our province, Mr. 

Speaker. They have turned their back on students. They have 

betrayed the trust with the municipality. The list goes on and on 

and on, Mr. Speaker. The list goes on and on as to what they’ve 

done. 

 

And now they’re telling the Wildlife Federation, they’re telling 

the rural people, they’re telling the people that gave their land to 

The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act — they donated their land 

— they’re now telling them, well that land now is for sale. That 

land is for sale now. And who is going to speak for these 

people? And you know the worst thing in the world, Mr. 

Speaker? And this is what’s really bad. What’s really bad is 

many of these people that they have now betrayed with Acts 

such as this, they are now going to . . . They’ve turned their 

back on those people. They have betrayed that trust. 

 

Why did they have anything to do with selling wildlife habitat 

lands? That is wrong, wrong, wrong, Mr. Speaker. That is 

wrong, wrong, wrong. And what are they doing? What are they 

doing? Mr. Speaker, I tell the people that are listening to this, 

they don’t know what they’re doing. You gave them the 



5236 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

opportunity, and they betrayed that trust and they turned their 

backs on you as a result of some of these Acts. And come 2011, 

your opportunity to turn your back on them is by doing two 

things. 

 

If you don’t, and if you can’t bring yourself to vote for the 

NDP, then don’t vote for them. Stay home and protest and tell 

them that, what you’ve done to our province, you’re going to 

have a long-lasting effect whether it’s a new West partnership 

or whether it’s a Bill like this or how you’ve mismanaged our 

economy and how you’ve destroyed our savings account and 

now you’re killing off our Crowns. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have had enough of 

this show. We’ve had enough. Now this Act, Mr. Speaker, once 

again shows that these guys do not know what they’re doing. 

And as I said before, we need two things to happen over there. 

We want a minister that can provide leadership and not be a real 

estate agent. And we want the backbench to finally develop a 

backbone to speak up for their people, to speak up and tell their 

so-called leadership in the front, you’re wrong, wrong, wrong. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if that backbench does not have a backbone, 

then the opposition is going to stand up and we’re going to fight 

for the people of Saskatchewan. We’re going to stand up for the 

people that believe in this. We’re going to stand up for the 

people that have donated their lands. We’re going to stand up 

for the many people that want to see the jewel of Saskatchewan 

protected, and that’s our wildlife habitat lands Act. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these guys have sold out. They have sold 

out, and the backbench ought to be ashamed because they have 

been led down the garden path one more time. And this has 

been the last 20 Bills or so that they brought forward, they’ve 

been led down the garden path. And I say to them, shame on 

them. They should stand up and they should speak for the 

people that voted for them, and they’re sitting on their hands. 

You know why they’re sitting on their hands? Because they 

don’t know what they’re doing. And they have not been 

developed. They have not been strengthened. They have not 

been shown how they can become a strong government because 

none of them know how to do it. 

 

And now the opposition, the opposition is going to stand up. 

And every time one of these, the backbenchers go sit down with 

a Wildlife Federation member, they’re going to look those guys 

in the eye and say, oh no, no. That’s not true, and we’re not 

going to do that. Well, Mr. Speaker, I tell every Wildlife 

Federation member out there, read the Bill, read the Bill. It 

gives them three avenues in which they could delist and sell that 

land. 

 

And the reason why they want to delist and sell that land is two 

reasons we have. Number one is they’ve got friends that they 

have to look after, Mr. Speaker. They’ve got friends in other 

places — not in Saskatchewan — that they have to look after. 

And the second reason they want to sell is because they don’t 

have the money. They need money, and that’s why I say to 

people, we’re going to see a wall-to-wall sale of everything we 

value in Saskatchewan, whether it is our health system, whether 

it’s our Crowns. And now they’re after the crown jewel in many 

conservation group, which is of course The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, where in the world, where in the world do 

you sell something that’s been given to you as a gift? There’s a 

lot of families historically, a lot of families that have donated 

land, a lot of people in rural Saskatchewan and many people 

even in urban Saskatchewan where they have come along and 

they said, because we value the conservation of Saskatchewan, 

because we like Saskatchewan, because it’s got such an 

environmental solid potential, we want to donate our land. We 

want to donate our land to the wildlife habitat so people know 

that we have this land available. 

 

And what these guys have done is they’ve yanked the rug out, 

out of the many generations of people — not just today but 

before — that have thought that this land would be protected 

forever, that this land would be protected for the animals, that 

this land would be certainly part of the natural system of 

Saskatchewan. That was their intent, that was their belief, that 

was their desire, and they did that by donating the land which 

has an extreme value. 

 

Now what happens? Now these guys are coming along and 

they’re selling that land. They’re selling that land. So not only 

are you going to get the Wildlife Federation members upset, but 

now you’re going to have the many families and the many 

people before them that had thought at one time that that land 

would be protected forever, Mr. Speaker, that they thought this 

land would be protected forever. 

 

So I’m telling the people right across the board from Yorkton to 

Meadow Lake to Lloydminster and throughout the entire 

province that that backbench and that government has no 

leadership and is weak-kneed when it comes to standing up to 

the big corporate interests that are telling people that they want 

to protect this land. They are now bowing and giving the big 

corporate interest ownership of that land that does not belong to 

them, Mr. Speaker. That land does not belong to them, and 

they’re selling that land right from under the people’s feet. 

 

And be darned if the opposition’s going to sit here and say, 

okay, that’s fine, Mr. Speaker. We are sitting here because 

we’re going to stand up to these guys. We’re going to stand up. 

We’re going to fight for those families that gave that land. 

We’re going to stand up and fight for the many groups and the 

organizations like the Wildlife Federation that fought to put this 

Act in place. We’re going to stand up for the historical effort of 

many, many groups, many, many groups that fought for this 

wildlife habitat protection Act. And many groups, the history of 

all those groups, we’re going to stand up for them. We’re going 

to tell the Sask Party that they’re wrong, wrong, wrong, and 

they’re going to pay a price for that, Mr. Speaker. They are 

going to pay a price for that. 

 

And as I mentioned at the outset, that backbench ought to stand 

up and have a backbone and tell their so-called leadership in the 

front, including the Premier, it’s time you wake up. This Act is 

bad. Get rid of it, and get rid of that minister, Mr. Speaker, 

otherwise the people will get rid of the Sask Party government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I predict that’s going to have a significant impact in 2011 

and from our perspective, Mr. Speaker, we just hope, we just 

hope that they don’t they create enough damage to our 

province, enough damage to our province, and enough damage 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5237 

to the wildlife protection Act, that it’s difficult for us to turn 

back, and turn all of this back in 2011. 

 

To every backbench member in that Sask Party opposition, I 

say to them, shame on you. Shame on you for sitting down and 

not speaking up and shame on you for not taking the time to 

learn the file and shame on you for transferring your leadership 

ability, your leadership as the duly elected MLA [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly], to stand up and speak for what you 

think is right. You’ve sat on that. You sat on your hands. And 

the people of Saskatchewan in your ridings and your 

constituencies are going to say, we didn’t elect you to become 

part of a plan that takes away all this stuff. Why aren’t you 

speaking up for your people, Sask Party backbench? Why aren’t 

you fighting back? Why aren’t you taking a vote in caucus? 

 

Because I’m assuming that you all have a vote in caucus. So if 

15 or 18 of you don’t want this Act to go forward and the 

provisions to go forward, speak up. Speak up and fight back. 

You know, that’s the most effective place you can do and be in 

the backbench, is don’t let the Executive Council dictate things 

to you. And then you go back home and you have to explain 

this to the people that elect you. Well I’m sorry, I can’t provide 

that leadership on the wildlife habitat Act because my Premier 

and my Minister of Energy and Mines and my Minister of 

Environment say I can’t. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s time for that backbench to develop a 

backbone, and start fighting for the people that sent you here in 

the first place instead of simply following their Premier and 

your so-called leader down the garden path, Mr. Speaker. They 

should be ashamed. They should be fighting back because this 

Act does nothing except open up three avenues, three avenues, 

to sell wildlife habitat protection lands. And those three 

avenues, Mr. Speaker, are something that people in 

Saskatchewan are saying should never have been put in place, 

never should have been put in place. 

 

And there’s some things that the people of Saskatchewan 

strongly believe in, Mr. Speaker. They have their politics, they 

have their religion, and they also have their land. Now what’s 

happening, Mr. Speaker, is there’s a lot of confusion now from 

many people in their corner. And I tell the people in the 

backbench over there, you ought to go home and you ought to 

look at the people that you’re impacting. And you’re going to 

say to yourself, what am I doing to my own voters? What am I 

doing to my own voters? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this opposition is not going to smile at their 

misfortune for the lack of leadership. We’re not going to smile 

at that misfortune because we know, because we know that the 

smile may not last long because of the damage that could be 

created. Because when we assume government in 2011 and we 

see what the damage that they have done, Mr. Speaker, is it too 

late to turn it back? Is it too late to turn it back? 

 

And that’s why you see as an opposition, we say my goodness, 

we’re sitting here. We asked them at the start, please don’t mess 

things up. That’s what we asked them. Don’t mess things up. 

And what did they do? The economy went into freefall for the 

last two years. They’re finally starting to recover a bit. The 

finances are gone to hell, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I go back to my earlier point. Now The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, which is a Crown jewel, well they’re not 

stopping there, Mr. Speaker. They want to sell that land too, 

Mr. Speaker. They want to sell it and they’re going to sell it 

because they’re so broke. They’re so broke and, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s the problem we have with this government is that they’re 

doing things that don’t make any sense. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, again I’ll point out to the people, as a result of 

this Bill, as a result of this Bill some of that backbench over 

there that doesn’t have the backbone to speak up, they’re going 

to pay a price. If it doesn’t come from the Wildlife Federation 

people, it’s going to come from the conservation groups. It’s 

going to come from the families that donated land. It’s going to 

come from people that want to protect the wildlife in 

Saskatchewan. It’s going to come from the environmental 

movement. It’s going to come from many, many sources, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

They made a mistake here. They made a mistake here and we 

advocate all along, this is a big mistake, but we said they’d 

make 10, 15 big mistakes. So the people are saying to the . . . 

We’re telling the people of Saskatchewan, you don’t have to 

tolerate these guys. You don’t have to tolerate these guys. You 

give them the opportunity, you give them the opportunity, and 

now they’ve squandered the finances, the financial outlook of 

Saskatchewan. The economy just barely survived under their 

leadership. And now, Mr. Speaker, the final nail in the coffin to 

rural Saskatchewan. We can’t find you doctors; we can’t help in 

some of these things, but now we’re going to give away your 

wildlife habitat lands. And shame on them. Shame on them, Mr. 

Speaker — shame, shame, shame. 

 

And as I pointed out, the people of Saskatchewan expected 

leadership, they expected vision, they expected a change of how 

people are being treated. And, Mr. Speaker, they got none of 

those from this government. None of those things whatsoever. 

So again, as I pointed out to the people of Saskatchewan — and 

I’ll say it loud and clear for the many people that are quite 

frankly really angry at this, Mr. Speaker — we needed a 

minister, not a real estate agent, when it comes to things like the 

wildlife habitat protection lands. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I would encourage the opposition to 

continue bringing forward petitions, these letters of concern, 

and to bring groups here. Because together we can fight back. 

Because if that backbench doesn’t have a backbone to stand up 

to the so-called leadership of that party, then we will support 

them. We will stand up for them and we will advocate for them 

and we will fight for them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I like that whole notion of people coming to the legislature 

to change the government or certainly to get them to change 

their mind. And if they continue doing things like this, in their 

arrogance — in their arrogance — then the people of 

Saskatchewan will do two things in 2011. Those that want to 

see a new vision for Saskatchewan, they will vote for this party, 

our party and our leader. And for those that are mad at these 

people and can’t bring themselves to vote for us will stay home 

and they will protest that way, Mr. Speaker. And that is 

something that the people of the backbench ought to be warned 

of. 

 



5238 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

[11:00] 

 

We are warning them today. You guys stand up for your people. 

You stand up for things like this sort. And when they try and do 

things like this, you should stand up and speak up and fight 

back. And if you don’t stand up and speak up and fight back for 

people that send you here, then you ought not to be here. That’s 

my point. They ought not to be here. It’s time for them to send a 

fighter here to fight what is right, as opposed to a bunch of 

followers, a bunch of backbenchers that don’t have the 

backbone to tell this minister and this Premier wildlife habitat 

lands are non-touchable. They’re untouchable, Mr. Speaker. 

Leave it. Leave it as it is because you have no right to do that. 

We have no right as a government to do that. Why don’t you 

say things like that in your caucus or to the media? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is it. This is it for them. If they don’t 

sign up and speak up and fight back, then the opposition or the 

government, the backbench group will be getting a message. 

They will be getting a message, Mr. Speaker, and that message 

in 2011 is going to be clear. It’s going to be resounding, and it’s 

going to be against them. 

 

So once again, Mr. Speaker, I tell the people of Saskatchewan, 

be very careful. Be very careful of what these guys are doing 

because this Bill, in relation to allowing wildlife habitat lands to 

be sold — to be sold — is but a start of their agenda. And it’s a 

dark agenda, Mr. Speaker. It is a very bad agenda. And I say, 

and I’ve said that, let the name Sask Party live in infamy from 

this day forward when it comes to managing our economy, 

developing our economy, managing our finances, developing 

our finances, and now taking away the crown jewel that many 

people worked hard over the years to build, and that was of 

course The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Once again they’ve failed miserably. Once again the backbench 

has sat on their hands. And once again, this Executive Council, 

this minister, and this Premier have failed miserably on this 

front, as they’ve failed miserably on many, many other fronts, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 

get into Bill 132 and to give some input, I guess, and some 

concerns that are being brought forward by individuals from the 

northern communities, from the South, from different 

organizations, groups. It’s very clear; they’re very unhappy. 

The duty to consult and . . . Who have they talked to when they 

want to bring in a piece of legislation that will address The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, to amend it and to look at that? 

 

Some of my colleagues have expressed great concern and are 

really trying to give a warning and an opportunity to the 

government to have a serious look, to have a serious look and 

reconsider this piece of legislation. And I think, you know, the 

member from Athabasca has said it very well. The 

backbenchers have an opportunity, and hopefully they will 

come forward and do what they can and ask their leadership, 

their Premier, the minister to reconsider, to pull this piece of 

legislation back before the damage is done. But I guess it’s up 

to those individual members over there on the other side if they 

want to — to the members opposite — if they want to go ahead 

and proceed with this. 

 

Even though they’re being given good advice, to speak for the 

people that they represent, whether they are . . . how this will 

impact them. Have they talked? Have we gone out and made 

sure the due diligence is done with community members, with 

organizations, with First Nations, with Métis, with the trappers, 

with the fishermen, with people that use the land? Let’s make 

sure that they have been consulted. How will this impact them? 

What changes are going to impact them? Or did they just go 

and talk to a few people that want this? And you know, this is 

good; we want this. Like what is the reason for this? Make it 

very clear. 

 

The obligation, the onus is on the government: make it very 

clear. Supreme Court of Canada, again we keep talking about 

that, made it very clear. First Nations and Métis have a right to 

be consulted. Were they consulted? And I keep saying this, not 

consulted in that way. These guys keep insulting rather than 

consulting, and that is wrong, wrong, wrong. They expect more. 

They want true communication. They want to have their voice 

heard, and it has to happen. 

 

And I don’t know, at the end of the day, if some of the 

legislation that’s being passed here is going to be challenged, 

and maybe it’s time that it get challenged. They’ve got a ruling, 

First Nations and Métis. Supreme Court of Canada made it very 

clear. Didn’t say, you may if you wish to, you know, if you 

want to. It made it very clear. The obligation is on the Crown to 

consult and accommodate — very clear — First Nations and 

Métis. 

 

Now every time this government seems to go off and wanting to 

change something, they don’t consult. Oh they say, oh yes, yes, 

we’ve consulted. Oh yes, we’ve gone out. And I’ve seen some 

of the members say that, and they do it in their joking way. I 

find it appalling. It is not a laughing matter. People back home 

and people in this province take the stuff that’s going on in this 

House and, I guess, Acts that are being changed very serious. 

And I think someday, someday they will send the message very 

clear. 

 

And those that want to laugh and think it’s funny, you know, 

they can answer to the people out there that will be either voting 

. . . And the member from Athabasca made it very clear, very 

clear. He gave some options for the backbenchers, and we’ll see 

what they do with that. You know, it isn’t that they weren’t 

made aware of. They were consulted by the member from 

Athabasca. He gave them that information. I find that very 

interesting. I hope they use that information. 

 

But having said that, Mr. Speaker, you look at legislation that’s 

going to make impact and change. There is a change. There is 

an obligation to make sure people are consulted, that people are 

shared that information, that they see the whole plan, that 

there’s nothing wrong with sharing with individuals, 

organizations, First Nations, Métis groups, any other 

organization that feels like it should have some input. If you 

invite them and you bring them to the table, it’s very clear if 

they know. 

 

But when you bring legislation like this and you say, oh 

everybody is happy with it, everybody wants it . . . You know I 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5239 

just find it very interesting to watch what’s going on. And more 

and more people are saying, how is it that this stuff is being 

passed? But I can reassure the people back home and the people 

of the province that the official opposition is holding that 

government accountable and will. 

 

And as you see, approach the official opposition. You can 

approach the MLAs on this side, and you can bring your 

concerns forward. We’ll bring them here. We’ll ask the 

questions. And that’s happening. People are approaching us. 

They’re making phone calls to our office. They’re in touch with 

the official opposition because they’re not happy. 

 

And just see. It’s a trust thing. And the trust is here, Mr. 

Speaker, very clearly. People elect a government, and they trust 

that they will do the right things. They will consult. They will 

share pieces of legislation that are coming forward. They will 

ask for the residents’ input, concerns if there are any, on pieces 

of legislation that are coming forward. It’s a process, and I think 

the people expect that of their government. 

 

Yes, in 2007 the people made it very clear. You know what? 

We’re going to elect the Sask Party. We put the trust . . . and 

they trusted them, and they did. And they’re there. They are on 

the other side. They are the government. But let’s be very clear 

on that. We’re hearing a lot of people that are not so happy any 

more. The trust issue, they said, you know, we put trust into this 

government and we voted. But I’ve had people come up to me 

and saying, I will not be voting for these members again, 

whoever they’re representing. I will not be renewing my 

membership. That’s interesting to watch. Their own members, 

their own members are pulling away. So if you see that kind of 

stuff going on out there, the backbenchers should sit up and 

take notice of that. And if they don’t want to, well that’s fine. 

 

But any time we have legislation that’s going to impact our 

province — provincial-wide legislation — I hope that the 

government does its due diligence to the people out there, and 

they talk to the different organizations. And there are many 

different organizations, you know. My colleagues have 

expressed it very well. There are so many of them that should 

be consulted and should get input into the legislation, but 

they’re not. And you could spin it the way you want, but I’ll be 

honest, the Sask Party, the government, likes to spin it —- spin, 

spin, spin. Oh it’s good for you; it’s just great. 

 

Well I think people are starting to wake up, and the spin isn’t 

working anymore. And you know, you know, I want to go on to 

talk a little bit, Mr. Speaker, about . . . you know, it’s very 

interesting to watch. I guess individuals take this on very 

personal . . . on the official opposition as well as government. 

We you know . . . Certain Bills come forward. Some of us are 

more cautious with it. Some of us are supporting it, and we 

have our different opinions and we get to debate that. And I 

think that’s very important. But there’s an opportunity to have 

the debate and to join in the debate. And when you really feel 

like you want to give your input and the people that you 

represent have views, you share that. That’s very important, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s very important. 

 

People just want to feel like they’re having an opportunity to be 

heard to have their input and, when legislation impacts them in 

anyway, that the invitation was there, an invitation to come 

forward and voice their concerns. That’s all people want. 

They’re not asking for anything more or don’t expect anything 

less, Mr. Speaker. They just want to feel like they had the 

opportunity by having — whether it’s town hall meetings, 

whether an invitation — an opportunity to bring concerns 

forward. They just want to feel like they’re getting an 

opportunity, and that’s what we should be doing. 

 

When we bring in legislation, we should make it very clear if it 

affects people, it affects, you know, I guess the whole province 

in this situation. This one has the capacity of affecting a lot and 

probably just about every neck of the province, every area. So 

when I say that, Mr. Speaker, I think the obligation again is on 

the government. It shouldn’t be on the residents. The 

government should reach out to make sure as many people get 

to have input, be consulted — not insulted. I make it very clear 

because that’s gone on enough under that government. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, you’re having different issues, and you 

know, you’re watching different individuals. You know it’s 

interesting, the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook, very 

interested. He really gets excited about it. And I talked about 

this earlier. He really . . . pushing us and he’s yelling from his 

chair; this is good legislation. He’s pushing. You can just tell. 

There’s something in it. He really wants to push it. Here’s 

something in his voice and the way he’s talking and he’s 

speaking and the Speaker asked, I can barely hear. So I mean, 

there’s some reason he’s really pushing. 

 

I talked about the different members. Members opposite are 

excited about certain Bills come forward, but he’s really excited 

about it. He’s pushing this, and it’s good, and you really see the 

excitement. I don’t know what it is. I’m trying to find it, but 

maybe he’ll share that with me at some point or maybe he’ll 

share with it his voters and his constituents, what it is. And he 

can explain that. 

 

But at this point, you know, Mr. Speaker, everything else we’re 

seeing going on and the legislation and Bills that are coming 

forward, it’s very concerning that individuals are not getting an 

opportunity, organizations are not getting an opportunity to 

express how this will impact them. 

 

We look at the trappers. Trappers are truly the stewards of the 

land, whether they’re northern trappers, whether they’re 

southern trappers. But I want to talk about trappers for a minute, 

how this will impact them. I’m very concerned that they were 

not consulted, and they were not given an opportunity to give 

their input with this. Would this legislation, would this 

legislation affect them in any way? Is it good? Is it bad? How 

will it . . . Is there anything we can do better that would give 

you an opportunity? So to the minister, to the government: have 

you talked to the trappers? There’s many of them in this 

province. 

 

The trapping industry has done a lot of good things and creates 

a lot of wealth for this province. You know at the end of the day 

when you go and talk to the trappers . . . and they want to feel 

like they’re being heard, and they have a right to be heard. They 

are stewards of the land. They know a lot about the wildlife. 

They are a truly amazing tool. The government can use them. 

They are. They monitor what’s going on in a lot of the 

traditional lands. And when they’re on their traplines, they have 



5240 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

a lot of input and a lot of knowledge, experience, and they can 

tell when things are truly happening, when there’s changes 

going on. But the government has to go out and approach them. 

The government has to make an invitation to them to bring their 

concerns forward. 

 

When legislation . . . This shouldn’t be rammed down 

anybody’s throat. When you start ramming stuff down people’s 

throat like that and legislation like this Bill 132, you have to 

ask, why? Why? 

 

There again goes back to the trust thing. People trust that the 

government will do the right things. But it’s very clear that 

people’s trust . . . And the people are losing their patience with 

this government, the Premier and the Sask Party government 

under their Premier and his leadership. The people are just 

about very clear, from what I’m getting, from the people I talk 

to, are very concerned. And they’ve had enough. 

 

They’re tired of the government turning their back on them, 

saying one thing, doing another. That’s very clear. Oh no, we 

did that. And then you find out nobody knows what’s going on. 

So it’s very concerning to me when we see a Bill like 132, and 

they claim, Mr. Speaker, that people have been consulted. Oh 

yes, we’ve gone out to them. Why are those people not . . . why 

are we hearing a different message then, if that’s happened? 

 

[11:15] 

 

And I ask, were all these organizations, were they truly 

consulted? Did they get called to meetings? Were they invited 

to the table to have input into Bill 132? Very clearly, under the 

Sask Party leadership, people are very concerned, Mr. Speaker. 

And there’s alarm bells going off all over. People are very 

concerned that this legislation and others that are being brought 

forward are nothing but somebody pushing their idea on what 

they want and what they think is best. And they don’t want to 

talk to anybody. They just want to push, push, push. This is 

good for you. Well people in this province have had enough of 

that. They don’t have to hear the push, push, push. And you 

know, you can go off and say, oh this deal’s good for them and 

spin it the way you want. 

 

And I have to admit, I have been here a very short period of 

time, Mr. Speaker, and I have seen, I give credit to some of the 

government MLAs. And I’ll give credit this way: they can spin 

things the way they want. And they’re good at it. I’ve witnessed 

it; I’ve watched it. It’s a tool. It’s amazing. I’ll learn, Mr. 

Speaker. There’s ways of doing things. 

 

And some of them . . . [inaudible] . . . but I have to admit, I like 

the official opposition. And some of our members truly counter 

some of the spins. And the people are seeing it, and the people 

will make up their minds exactly which way it’s spinning. And 

you know, we all have a job to do here. There’s two sides. But 

let’s be very clear. The people out there have to have two sides, 

but right now they’re getting only one view, and it’s the 

government’s view: here’s what’s good for you. 

 

And now they’re starting to get a different view. And this 

official opposition will give them that opportunity to know that 

there is a second view. It isn’t all cut and dried one way because 

this is what’s good for you. So the Sask Party government 

needs to make its mind up. It better involve the people, or it will 

get its message. 

 

And those members can laugh and think it’s funny, which they 

like to do. They think it’s funny when you say stuff like that. 

The people will speak. I believe that. There’s hope out there. 

The people have hope. I’ve watched people, and they’re very 

clear. They have hope. They hope the government will do the 

right thing. And I hope that the government will do the right 

thing and the members and the backbenchers will do the right 

thing. And they’ll start speaking up for the people of this 

province and the push, push, push. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, let me make it very clear: at some point they 

may laugh and they may think it’s funny, but when you start 

turning your back on the people of our province, and you take 

our finances and you make a mess of them, and the people put 

their trust in you, and they truly trust you and you don’t deliver, 

they will send you a message. That’s very clear. And I’m sure 

that message is going to come very clear. I want to make it very 

clear, Mr. Speaker, that that message will come. 

 

This is an opportunity for the official opposition to debate, to 

give input for stuff we’ve heard from our community members. 

But I was talking about trappers, how this will impact them. I 

think it’s very clear — the government has an obligation to talk 

with not only the trappers, fishermen . . . There’s so many other 

organizations out there that should have a right to have their 

say, some input. And it is the government’s obligation. 

 

Like I’ve said earlier, Mr. Speaker, the Supreme Court of 

Canada has made some rulings that are very clear. Didn’t say, 

may. Didn’t say, well if you want to. Didn’t say, if on a good 

day you feel like it. It made it very clear. And I think the 

government needs to take that Supreme Court of Canada 

decision seriously. I think it needs to act on it. 

 

So we’ve seen some of the stuff that’s gone on under the Sask 

Party government, Bills that have come forward with no one 

having any input. That just shows a pattern, Mr. Speaker, of 

what the Sask Party government is willing to do. They pass 

legislation. They don’t talk to anybody. They don’t consult 

people that are impacted. They just ram it down — this is 

what’s good for you. They play the bully tactics. And they’ve 

done that. 

 

And they will argue and they’ll try to spin why we’re here, the 

hours we’re here. I don’t think the people and the media and 

everybody else out there are going to buy it. I don’t think so, 

Mr. Speaker. I think it’s going to get out there very clear. They 

can try to spin it the way they want. It’s not going to work. I 

think the people will make it very clear. 

 

The legislation that comes here, when we make it very clear that 

the organizations, First Nations organizations, Métis, all 

different organizations in our beautiful province have a right. 

They want good legislation, they want the law that’s going to 

give the government or organizations the tools that they need to 

make sure we’re doing what’s best. And that’s for environment, 

and wildlife protection is huge. A lot of people, First Nations, if 

you look at the way their treaty rights to hunt, fish, gather food 

for sustenance, it’s very clear they have that right; the Métis as 

well. 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5241 

So as we go through this, Mr. Speaker, we see some of the 

challenges that are going to be there, that they were not 

consulted. And you better make sure you consult all groups and 

organizations that this legislation will impact, whether that’s 

one resident, five residents, five people that belong to an 

organization. You better make sure you’ve done all you can 

because those individuals will come back and make it very 

clear. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, you know there are many challenges out 

there and in the North and the Cumberland constituency. You 

know the trappers make it very clear they are the stewards of 

the land. They know that land. They live there, and they want to 

feel like they have their input. And they want to make sure that 

the government that makes legislation or makes changes to 

rules or regulations that will impact them, that they are 

consulted, not insulted. We’ve had enough of that. It has to 

change, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We cannot continue to disrespect the people out there the way 

this government makes it very clear. If you don’t like it, they 

ram it down. The bully tactics . . . And we’ve seen some of the 

stuff that they’re willing to do, the government is willing to do. 

Whether people bring forward concerns to critics and about the 

departments, well they go on a manhunt. And they will go 

looking after these individuals, trying to find who released that 

information. And I find that very hard, very appalling. 

 

But that just shows, Mr. Speaker . . . And I’m using 

comparisons to stuff that are going on right now. And that is so 

unfortunate that people have to be scared, and they shouldn’t 

ever be scared of their government. If there are concerns, they 

should be able to bring them forth. So if anyone has concern 

with Bill 132, they should be able to come forward here and not 

feel like there’s going to be any, any measure on behalf of the 

government towards them in any negative way. That should not 

happen. It should be very clear. People should speak and be 

able to speak and get their message, their input, their views on 

this Bill or on any Bill or anything the government is doing 

that’s impacting individuals. People should have the right to 

come forward. 

 

But we still see some of the Bills that have already passed with 

this government and going forward and ones that are being 

considered. It’s right through Bill 5, Bill 6, 43. We see these 

Bills coming forward. It’s very concerning. The people are 

coming forward. The movement is happening. There are people 

speaking out more, and more joining. Every day more people 

unhappy. 

 

So Bill 132, the wildlife protection, is very clear. But I think the 

onus was on the government to make sure that they reach out to 

all people that would be impacted on legislation. But it’s very 

clear and it’s starting to be very clear; I don’t think that has 

happened at all. And by the people that are coming forward, it’s 

very concerning. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to get a chance to talk about some 

of the organizations that are impacted by this. And I think I’ve 

got an opportunity to talk for northern people in Cumberland — 

the commercial fishermen’s views, the trappers, whether they’re 

in the North, the South, they’ve got a message. The leadership, 

organizations very clearly have to have that opportunity — 

individuals — to speak their mind, to give input, and to make 

sure that they hold the government accountable. And this 

official opposition will do that. With our leader and our 20 

members, we will make sure we hold the government 

accountable. 

 

At this time, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to share a few thoughts 

from people back home and some of the concern. And I wanted 

to make it very clear, I said there are individuals who want to 

push this legislation. There are individuals who want to make 

sure the debate happens. That’s the process. And at the end of 

the day, the government has the obligation and it will make a 

decision. But sometimes I think the decision is not an informed 

one because they haven’t talked to all the people out there — 

stakeholders — and that’s the unfortunate thing. 

 

But I think some day the people will say, you did not make an 

informed decision. And some of those people may stay home, 

like the member from Athabasca said, and not vote. They are 

protesting. Or they may vote for the NDP because we will meet 

with them, we will talk. We’ll make sure that their feelings, 

their input, and their views how legislation will impact them is 

heard. 

 

I could say that. But at this time, Mr. Speaker, I know my 

colleagues would like to get in on the debate, and I’m going to 

let them get in on debate. I think it’s time to hear some different 

views. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 

rise and talk about The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and the 

amendments that are being proposed at this stage. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to start with a little bit of a description of why 

this legislation and the other pieces of legislation that we have 

here in Saskatchewan are important for this province. 

 

Many times when we travel out of Saskatchewan to other 

places, we end up having to explain what our province is like. 

And one of the ways that I describe our province is that it’s a 

green space on Earth where we as citizens of Saskatchewan are 

stewards of that green space for the Earth. And the reason that I 

say that is that, much as our land here has been altered by 

human activity, and in some ways maybe the most altered land 

on Earth, we also have large areas that are preserved in close to 

their natural state. And these areas are seen as an asset not of 

Saskatchewan, not of Canada, but an asset of the whole world. 

And so we as stewards have a job to make sure we take care of 

that asset. 

 

And so I guess what I would say is when we have legislation 

like this particular Bill coming forward today which threatens 

some of the protections that we have slowly and surely put into 

our province, then we have to look at it very carefully because 

we’re not doing this just for the local residents in one area of 

the province or just for the people of Saskatchewan. We’re 

actually doing this for all of the citizens on our planet. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, the history of this legislation I think is 

quite interesting. And it officially starts in this Chamber, I think 

in 1984, when Mr. Colin Maxwell ended up bringing support 



5242 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

for this in his role as the minister at that stage. But I would say, 

Mr. Speaker, that he was able to build on a long history of many 

people in our province who have been concerned about the 

habitat, about the biodiversity, about how our province 

preserves natural spaces. And he was able to bring forward a 

piece of legislation which has had a very good effect. 

 

And what did that legislation do? I think at that time he was 

able to go and designate somewhere around 1.7, 1.8 million 

acres that would go into habitat. This was Crown land that was 

owned by the province in the southern part of the province . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’d just ask the member from Regina 

Lakeview, we’ve just been informed that we’re having some 

problems with the mike directly on your desk. Just wondering if 

you would speak into the mike of your colleague’s, Saskatoon 

Nutana. That would be greatly appreciated for audio. Thank 

you. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I knew that normally 

people in this House listened very carefully when I talk and 

there were a lot of people who weren’t listening. So that’s a 

good explanation and I appreciate the Speaker clarifying that 

for me. 

 

But I guess what my point here is that this particular legislation 

comes out of a long tradition in Saskatchewan of people who 

are concerned about our habitat and concerned about wildlife, 

and many of those factors came together in the 1980s that 

allowed for this legislation to go forward. Now what we also 

know is that in the late 1990s when my friend, Mr. Lorne Scott, 

was the minister, he was able to I think almost double the 

number of acres that are in this particular wildlife . . . under the 

protection of this particular legislation. And so we’re talking 

about substantially more acres of land. 

 

But once again, what is the purpose of this? Well the purpose 

obviously is to provide an extra layer of protection to the land. 

And we have to always remember it’s the land in the southern 

part of Saskatchewan which is the traditional agriculture land. 

In a few minutes I’ll get to some of the issues around that 

boundary between southern Saskatchewan and the mixed 

forests and then moving into the northern forests, and there are 

a number of issues that arise in that particular area. 

 

But what we have in southern Saskatchewan is, as I said earlier, 

some of the most altered landscape on earth. And it’s directly a 

result of our ancestors, grandparents, great-grandparents who 

were enticed or lured to come to Saskatchewan because of the 

land and the ability to create farms, and I also say because of 

the Crow rate in 1898 which was a guarantee in a way that 

people would have a method of getting their products from this 

land to market. Well that huge influx of people in the first part 

of the 20th century did dramatically alter the land. And we all 

know when we go out to the communities that we’re from, we 

know the virtual geography, I often call it. We can drive along 

10 miles and not see anything. But if you’re from that area you 

can tell a story about every quarter and every family that lived 

on that quarter because it’s been told to you by parents or 

grandparents. 

 

So we have this land and it’s been dramatically altered. What 

happened in the ’80s and in the ’90s and even now as we add 

more land to this particular protection is that there was a 

recognition that perhaps we didn’t preserve enough of this 

southern Saskatchewan habitat — starting kind of at the forest 

fringe area — for wildlife and for wildlife habitat. And that’s 

what the consternation is about changing this and trying to do 

something in this particular legislation. 

 

So let’s look at the legislation. I think, you know, it’s actually 

fairly simple because it’s amendment legislation. But what’s 

being added here is both the term “wildlife habitat” and 

“ecological lands.” And I think that’s a recognition that things 

have changed in how we describe these lands. 

 

But I think what’s raising the concern for everybody is that 

there appears to be a method of loosening the control on this 

land and freeing up land in ways that will not have the public 

scrutiny that it should. There’s also a section in here which is 

the new substituted section 6(4) and 6(5) which allow for the 

granting or transferring of all these lands to a Crown 

corporation or to some other agency. And part of the concern 

here is that as long as these lands remain in the title of the 

province, there ends up being a sense of more of the long-term 

control of the use of the land. 

 

Now when you look at it, there’s not too much more in this 

particular legislation, other than obviously expanding the 

regulatory powers, but the net effect is to move the control or 

the use of this land from the legislature, which was clearly the 

intent of Mr. Maxwell in the ’80s and clearly the intent of Mr. 

Scott and all of the previous and subsequent Environment 

ministers, to make sure that this land was protected by this 

place, this legislature. 

 

And one of the reasons that this becomes so crucial or so 

difficult in our province directly relates to another issue which 

has been part of the discussion over many decades, and it’s 

being dealt with in some other parts of Canada but not here, and 

that relates to the whole issue of land use and land use planning. 

 

In Saskatchewan the method of land use planning or zoning or 

however you might want to describe that, the ways we have of 

controlling that are through this legislature and through things 

like The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. How we in fact control 

development in northern Saskatchewan is done through 

effectively the ownership by the Crown or ownership by the 

Crown in the right of Saskatchewan of all of that land in the 

North. 

 

In southern Saskatchewan there’s a lot less land that is owned 

by the Crown, but what the effect of legislation like this is, is to 

provide a bit of a zoning or land use scheme as well because we 

do not have broader land use legislation like one might have in 

an individual municipality. And so in many ways this kind of 

legislation is difficult for everybody who’s concerned about 

wildlife or wildlife habitat and ecological land because there 

doesn’t seem, appear to be a backstop or a place where some of 

the issues around preserving land in a particular area are dealt 

with or how land use issues are dealt with. 

 

Now what we, what we have in this whole area is also a 

question about trust in what government might or might not do 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5243 

with land. 

 

And I guess I want to tell a little bit about my own family 

history as it relates to land. And it bears on this because it 

relates to some of the kinds of concerns that the public are 

raising. In the ’60s when the Gardiner dam was built and Lake 

Diefenbaker then was created behind the dam, my family farm, 

my mother’s farm was in the Saskatchewan Valley. So when I 

was young, up to about the age of 12, I spent all my summers 

on the sand beaches of the South Saskatchewan River just about 

5 or 6 miles south of Outlook. 

 

In that time period when the dam was completed and then the 

water was starting to rise behind the dam, the government came 

along and purchased land in the valley below the dam to replace 

all of the community pastures that had been flooded or were 

going to be flooded by new Lake Diefenbaker. So we had our 

family farm — approximately two, two and a half sections of 

land along the river — along with my mother’s sister. There 

were two sisters. They owned this land. And the land was 

purchased by the government and a big community pasture was 

created, which was a positive thing for all the people in that 

immediate area. But also it was a place for cattle that had been 

oh, 10, 20, 30 miles south to be pastured in a community 

pasture. 

 

Now in our family we weren’t totally at ease with this because 

it meant quite a disruption to our normal summer routine, which 

was doing some of the farming and enjoying the recreational 

aspects of living along the river. But we accepted that. 

 

Now what happened though was about 20 years later, in the 

’80s, all of a sudden we heard that the land that had been in our 

family was sold by the provincial government to somebody to 

build a hog barn and a whole big operation. There was no 

consideration in that structure, because of the way the obviously 

the documentation had gone, of coming back to our family and 

saying, well would you like it back now that we don’t want to 

use it as a community pasture? 

 

Well a certain level of trust around how decisions are made by 

the government, you know, is reflected in sort of how I 

approach some of these issues because I understand now, when 

we go out to that area and we see the area that was part of our 

family and we thought was going to be into a long-term kind of 

a situation with the provincial government, and it’s not that way 

any more. And it brings home the kinds of questions and issues 

that are raised around this, but also the issues that were raised 

with me when I was the minister of the Environment about, 

well how long is the protection that’s available when lands are 

in The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act? And I think that goes to 

the heart of what this is about. 

 

People in the province have understood that certain lands have 

been designated, and they’ve been designated with a fair degree 

of accuracy. We actually heard last night that even using all of 

the existing data from many, many decades in the Department 

of Environment and predecessor departments, that when they 

assess the land that’s under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, 

it looks like easily in excess of 90 per cent — there’s no issue 

that it should be there. 

 

So what happens with this particular legislation is it appears to 

open up the whole thing in a way that’s unnecessary? So why, 

why is this happening? Now when I was first elected in 1995, 

we had very many discussions about the expansion of the 

wildlife habitat lands. 

 

And I know that the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook is one 

of the strongest proponents of the changes that we see here, and 

I would have to say that the predecessor member from that area 

also had some very strong views about wildlife habitat 

protection. And I know I’ve visited up in that area, and actually 

I’m not sure if I lived quite in that constituency when I was 

born, my first residence was in Medstead, which is pretty close 

to where the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook lives himself. 

 

[11:45] 

 

The discussions that were taking place in the ’90s around how 

we would expand the numbers of acres of wildlife habitat 

protection under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act related to 

this use of this land by many of the local ranchers and farmers. 

And so one of the issues comes down to, well if I own it, I can 

kind of do it the way I want to do it without worrying about 

some of the other broader values, the broader issues that are 

there. Whereas if I have this land, and I have a lease that’s 

governed by The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, then there’s a 

substantial change in how I can use that. And I think that is 

really the fundamental question. 

 

And it’s those people in the forest fringe that are most affected 

because they have more acres that are Crown owned and in this 

legislation than some other parts of our community. Now I’ve 

worked with lots of ranchers. I’ve had my own cattle over the 

years. I have some land that’s been used that way. I can’t say 

that I’m a rancher, but I know and I understand and have 

cousins and uncles and many who are involved in the particular 

business. 

 

And I guess that what this legislation’s purpose was — and the 

reason that it came out of a member from up in that northwest 

part of Saskatchewan, Mr. Maxwell — was that there needed to 

be some kind of a balance between protection of habitat, which 

has all of its own values, and then the use by some of the local 

people in their cattle operations primarily. And I guess, after 

almost 30 years, I would say a rather good balance was struck 

in that particular legislation that we have. 

 

Now we have a proposal by the government to unbalance that 

particular situation without knowing what the new balance is 

going to be. And I think it’s that uncertainty and that lack of 

trust in a way in the present administration that becomes the 

issue of why it shows up in the newspapers. So we have an 

editorial in The StarPhoenix this morning that is very direct 

about the government’s activities, the Premier’s activities in 

changing this legislation. And it says, hold on you guys; take 

some more time on this. Think it through. Understand what it is 

that you are doing because this is part of our legacy. This is part 

of who we are as a province. 

 

And we’ve had clearly strong articles in other newspapers, in 

the Leader-Post that also say, okay, it doesn’t look like the 

consultation on this particular legislation has been particularly 

robust. Slow down. Take some time, if it takes another year or 

two just to get a better balance. 



5244 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

Or my proposal would be, if it takes another few years to go 

down the track they have in Alberta and look at broader land 

use planning which then allows for more of these values to be 

part of every piece of land, no matter who owns it, then maybe 

we need to do that. But to unhinge or unbalance some of the 

things that have happened over the last almost 30 years with 

this particular legislation without a clear plan of where we’re 

going is wrong. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this kind of sounds to me similar to what 

I’ve said previously about the government and letting the public 

know what their plan is. Part of the difficulty we have in this 

legislature is that we don’t seem to have a clear idea of where 

we’re going. And that shows up in the budgeting. That shows 

up in the legislation. It shows up in kind of how this legislature 

is organized. And so, Mr. Speaker, my sense is that this 

particular legislation hasn’t had the thorough vetting in the 

community and amongst the various groups that are involved. 

 

Now what we know is that these ideas have been out there, but 

we’re going to change this. And clearly many of the groups that 

are now coming forward . . . And I’m sure we’ll see lots of 

them around here this week and next week because they didn’t 

totally understand what kinds of dramatic changes appear to be 

proposed here. Now part of the problem there is the lack of 

communication as to what the next steps are, what effect this is 

going to have, what is going to happen. Now if in fact what is 

being proposed is moving the whole thing over to the 

perspective of some of the people who come from the forest 

fringe without thinking about the whole broader aspect, then 

that causes quite a number of issues. And that’s where the 

discussion and consultation needs to take place. 

 

Now we have some fairly clear statements from the Nature 

Saskatchewan, from Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, other 

groups like this who say consultation has not been the way it 

should be for legislation like this. 

 

I guess when that happens, it’s always a possibility for the 

government to step back and take another look. Now I 

understand that last week I got up and spoke about a Bill that 

has now been pulled because of the things that I identified when 

I read some very detailed letters in from the optometrists and 

the opticians that the homework hadn’t been done by the 

minister and by the officials in the department, and that Bill was 

not ready to come forward. Mr. Speaker, I think there are 

similar problems with this particular Bill in light of the fact that 

so many people are getting increasingly upset when they 

understand what appears to be the intent of this. 

 

And once again as I say, when you don’t have a plan or you 

don’t lay out what you’re going to do, you create a situation 

where people will be upset. I think that’s happening here, and 

it’s happening for a good reason because I don’t think there 

necessarily is a plan other than to maybe respond to some 

people in certain small areas of the whole province. 

 

And so once again I go back to my original comments about our 

role as Saskatchewan citizens, as stewards of a green space for 

the earth because every time we end up jeopardizing some of 

these things or doing things in ways that are going to cause 

difficulties for the ultimate purpose of habitat protection, we 

then also are causing difficulties around the perception of how 

we operate. 

 

Now I know and I know that our party strongly believes that a 

strong economy is the basis of a strong society. It allows you to 

build your educational system. It allows you to have a health 

system. It allows you to provide for those members in the 

community. But it also allows for us to protect the values and 

the habitat that we know will be of huge value as the years go 

on. And so when the message comes, oh well you’re somehow 

against economic activity, that’s exactly the opposite of what 

we are. And I think it shows in how the management of the 

province is done when the New Democrats are in charge. And I 

think, you know, obvious example always that everybody talks 

about is the oil revenue structures and how basically those have 

not been touched, and I don’t think they will be touched by the 

present government. 

 

Now another curious part of this particular legislation — and it 

struck me earlier this week — was that we strongly criticize the 

government, the Sask Party government, when they take up the 

accounting practices and some of the other management 

practices that get us into huge debt, when they take those 

practices from the Devine government of the 1980s. 

 

But what’s really curious is that two things in the last month 

that have been actually really proud moments for the Devine 

government are being dismantled, changed, destroyed by this 

government. And one of them is this wildlife habitat protection 

Act, which is being damaged in a way that we don’t know. This 

was clearly I think a proud legacy of the Devine government 

and especially Mr. Colin Maxwell. But the second one is the 

proud legacy of Mr. Gary Lane and Premier Devine, and that’s 

SCN [Saskatchewan Communications Network], the television 

station. And we hear this morning that Manitoba has been 

envious of our having our own educational television station for 

decades, and so now they’re trying hard to get something which 

we seem to be on a track to destroy. 

 

So here we have a government, Sask Party government, with 

strong roots in the Devine Conservatives who pick up all of 

their bad habits and then throw away the good stuff that they 

do. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not very helpful for the people of 

Saskatchewan. So the things that people like about the ’80s are 

being destroyed. Some of the things that we don’t like about the 

’80s are coming back as more than just spectres in the 

background and ghosts. They’re coming back as the core of the 

government’s financial policy. And we’re all going to pay for 

that. We took a long time to pay for the last mess. We’re going 

to pay for this next one over the next couple of decades. And 

that’s, that’s sad. 

 

But when we’re talking about wildlife habitat, we’re not talking 

about 10 years or 20 years. We’re talking about centuries, 

hundreds of years that we’re messing around with. And, Mr. 

Speaker, when you’re going to do that kind of amendment or 

change to legislation which has those very long legacy issues, 

then you better have spent the time consulting with the groups 

that are concerned, consulting with everybody, making sure that 

you have a plan in place to deal with the important values and 

concerns that people have. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t see that in this particular legislation, and 

it’s kind of been lying there on the order paper for a while. But 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5245 

it’s starting to come up, and people are starting to say . . . in the 

coffee shops, getting calls from aunts and mothers and others 

saying, what are they doing to the wildlife habitat that we have 

in this province? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the goal always is to make change but make 

change for the better and make change with a plan. Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t think that we have that in this legislation. And 

I’m very sad . . . 

 

The Speaker: — According to order, this Assembly will recess 

until 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 13:30.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5213 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 Ruling on a Point of Order 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5213 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 141— The Business Statutes Administration Transfer Act 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5213 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5215 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5215 

 Bill No. 142 — The Business Statutes Administration Transfer Consequential Amendments Act, 2010 

 Loi de 2010 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Business Statutes Administration Transfer Act 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5215 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5216 

  Harrison (referral to committee) ........................................................................................................................................... 5217 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5217 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5220 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5224 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5229 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5234 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5238 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5241 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5214 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5214 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5226 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5226 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


