




















































Hansard: November 08, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 7B  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 2010, 7 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5903 

 November 8, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Gantefoer, seconded by Mr. 

Wyant, and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved 

by Mr. Broten.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — This House is now in session. I 

recognize the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I was in the midst of talking about oil fields 

near Kerrobert and the lack of facilities, and talking with people 

in the community of Kerrobert, Mr. Speaker, where they were 

at that time, this summer, health care workers who had been 

without a contract for two and a half years, were getting quite 

well versed in what essential services legislation meant to them 

and to every other health care provider in the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, entering into the . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and going into the Kerrobert facility, they had all their plans. 

The architect had drawn out all the plans. They were on the 

wall. People were quite proud of this coming. They were 

talking about fundraising. I think I was talking about 

fundraising that all of these workers who live in the different 

communities, the amount of time that they spend with their 

families fundraising for their facilities because they know how 

important it is to their communities. Often the lifeblood of the 

community is built around the health care centre. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they told us the stories about how 

they were fundraising. And then we told them about Saskatoon 

and the Amicus deal. And as I was saying, that now the Amicus 

deal is in the Throne Speech and it’s one of the models, but the 

people in Kerrobert never heard about it. They never heard 

about it. And so as I was saying before, I am glad it’s in here 

now because now I can go and show them and say, this is what 

we were saying about . . . They’re now using that model, and 

you were just not on their list of getting built. 

 

And as I further went on to say that it was also a difficulty for 

the Minister of Finance, who doesn’t look all that well these 

days when money is mentioned because he understands the 

mess that the government has got itself in. And with all the 

needs of the province, with all the 13 on the list, 13 facilities 

that need to be built, and Kerrobert, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is one 

of them. And people need a facility there. And there is not 

much happening. There’s not much happening. 

 

So these people stood around and talked about . . . We talked 

about them for quite some time about the amount of fundraising 

they had done, how they worked for their communities, how 

important that was. And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, each one of 

these people would come back and they would talk about 

changes to The Trade Union Act. They talked about changes, 

about how the employer could talk directly to them. There was 

questions raised all across the province about a letter from the 

Minister of Health that went out encouraging people to vote on 

a contract, yet at the same time in this very Assembly or in this 

very Chamber, the minister would stand up on a daily basis and 

say the government does not get involved in negotiations, does 

not get involved. So over, over time people were feeling, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the workers and all people associated with 

health care were beginning to feel betrayed — betrayed, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So there was one further letter that also came out. It was a letter 

regarding overtime, sick leave, and WCB [Workers’ 

Compensation Board] where the government was instructing 

employers to do cutbacks. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in many 

of the places that we went where there were cutbacks, and of 

course the facilities did not have the proper lifting, the ceiling 

tracks that were not up there, and as we all know when we go 

into those facilities, no doubt we’ve all been in there to see the 

lack of that and the injuries that result. 

 

And then with the government cutting back, obviously the 

workload was not getting any lighter because there were 

waiting lists for people to get in. And so this was not exactly 

greeted with a lot of appeal, the letter that was . . . Because in 

fact when you are now working short and then being told you 

have to cut back on sick leave and you have to watch your 

WCB, when if you’re understaffed at the same time, has 

seemed kind of ludicrous the government would take this 

position. 

 

But again the Minister of Finance has gotten himself into a bit 

of hot water, probably more than hot water when you don’t 

have money and here we are cutting sort of a thousand cuts out 

in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on, but I would like to also 

move on to some other comments. And the comments, I think, 

on something else that’s important in our province, and that is 

potash. 

 

And I do want to start . . . There has been some discussion 

about positions, and I just want to perhaps read in again into the 

record, it was from our leader’s speech on last Thursday where 

one of the first paragraphs he said was: 

 

So today is a day to celebrate, and we’ll all try to take 

credit. And good for the member from Swift Current. And 

we’ll take what credit we can take. That’s how politics 

works. But it’s a day to celebrate. But it’s also a day to 

review and reflect on the way we go forward with all the 

resources of the province, not only here, but right across 

Canada because I think that is going to be one of the 

fundamental issues that people in Canada vote on when 

they go to the polls in a few months here in Canada and 

for sure here in the province of Saskatchewan in the next 

election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also went on to talk about what happens in 

Norway and Brazil, and gave following examples like countries 

of Norway and Brazil who don’t hesitate to say that they need 



5904 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

to maximize royalties, taxations, and they have no restrictions 

on companies coming in. And then explained that when you go 

to Norway there’s a long process of how you get into the 

offshore oil. You have to prove your human rights record is 

impeccable, and if it isn’t, you can’t come in. And that’s why 

many companies, you know, and that’s why many companies 

don’t drill for oil in Norway. In fact they ask them on their 

labour record, do you support unions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

now some people will argue, some people will argue perhaps 

that this has forced business away from Norway, and in fact the 

opposite is true. The opposite is true. And what does Norway 

get? Norway gets a percentage, a percentage in the oil 

companies when they come to drill there. And that’s important, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s important to know that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other thing that was raised is the 

amount of share options which . . . We’ve heard that the CEO 

[chief executive officer] of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, that he has over $500 million in share options in 

the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Now it would strike 

me that if you have that much money, perhaps a little bit of that 

money could stay in Saskatchewan. It could stay in 

Saskatchewan. So there’s a lot to me . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

it’s an important issue. And there’s a lot of questions, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that in fact have not been answered. 

 

But I think we must remember, because what the people of 

Saskatchewan told us is that they remember, that the people 

own the potash in this province, and we own, Mr. Speaker, we 

own the potash in the ground. And neither the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan nor BHP Billiton own that potash, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the corporation, the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, thanked the people after it 

received the no from the federal government in fending off the 

hostile takeover bid. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the key point 

would be now, the key point would be now is what is our 

Premier doing, and how is he going to maximize the revenues 

from potash, How is he going to maximize these revenues for 

potash for the citizens of this province? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we own the potash. We own the potash, 

and the people of Saskatchewan own the potash. And our 

question is — and I hear this on the doorstep from my 

constituents — is that when I went out to find out what people 

were thinking about this, they told me, don’t sell. Don’t sell this 

resource. They said, don’t sell this resource. 

 

And they, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not sure they knew that the 

CEO of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan lives in 

Chicago or that he has particularly $500 million in share 

options. Mr. Speaker, that is important that people should 

understand that. They should understand what is happening 

here. But one of the things that they know is that they have a 

valuable resource, and they want to have a say in that resource, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a year or so ago, potash workers were on strike in 

this province to try and achieve a fair collective agreement, a 

fair collective agreement for themselves and their families. And 

they went on strike, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They went on strike 

and they had to sacrifice their pay, and their families suffered to 

achieve a fair collective agreement. And the question I would 

ask is from a company which can afford to pay a CEO the 

amount of $500 billion — or $500 million; pardon me, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker — in share options, surely there should be 

some money for potash workers. Potash workers, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that in fact live in this province. Live in this province, 

raise their families, and work here. 

 

And perhaps one of the other things, one of the other things that 

the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan management has is 

they extend benefits after they retire to the management. And 

the question would be: would the Premier be negotiating that as 

part of the deal? Would he be negotiating that as part of the deal 

for these workers who live and raise their families here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

And I guess my question to the Premier would be is: what has 

he done so far and what is he going to do? He’s known about 

this deal since mid-August. Who has he approached and who 

has he talked to? And I guess the questions that people would 

like to know is, they would like to know will there be a 

sovereign fund like the people of Norway have. I mean where 

you have a few, several million people there and billions of 

dollars in a sovereign fund. Will that be what the Premier is 

thinking of doing for Saskatchewan? And they want to know 

how he’ll manage that fund. I mean these are questions that we 

need to know. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the key part here is that the people 

understand that they own the potash resource, and they want a 

say in how that potash resource is handled and what return they 

should get. And they tell me that time after time. When I talk to 

them, they tell me loud and clear that . . . They said, don’t sell. 

Don’t sell the potash. Don’t sell it, they said to me. Don’t sell 

the potash. And now they’re telling me that it’s a valuable 

resource, and they want a say in what happens to it. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the key, the key things to remember 

here: we have over 53 per cent of the world’s reserves of 

potash, and it’s a multi-year supply — a multi-year supply, if 

not hundreds of years, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So why not have the Premier negotiate a deal for us? Negotiate 

a deal for the people of Saskatchewan and say, here’s what 

we’ve done. We’ve done for you what the government in 

Norway has done for their people. We’ve set up a fund. We’ve 

negotiated a deal, and that fund will be used for all those things 

that I spoke about before — for all those things. 

 

How about that children’s hospital that keeps being 

reannounced? How about reducing the shortage of doctors in 

rural Saskatchewan? How about no waits for health care 

services? How about not cuts for health care services, whether 

they be ambulance or labs or all the other things that we’ve 

talked about? How about better care for our senior citizens so 

we don’t have to talk about Saskatoon getting a deal out of 

Amicus that the people did not get otherwise? 

 

We shouldn’t be talking about cutting services. We should be 

talking about setting up a fund for the people of Saskatchewan 

so that they get their share for themselves and their families into 

the future from this valuable resource. We have a resource that 

the world wants and it’s right here in Saskatchewan. We came 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5905 

on the centre stage, became centre-stage players in the world. 

 

So just think of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all the things that we 

could use this money for. So again, my question: when will the 

Premier be negotiating this fair deal for Saskatchewan? When 

will he get on with it? Because if we wait, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

I’m afraid that this money will start flowing to Chicago, that all 

this money will flow out of the province to Chicago, right by us 

and our children and our future children and our grandchildren. 

It will go straight to Chicago. 

 

And when will he tell us how he plans to manage the fund that 

he will set up, what it will be used for? I think we need to see a 

plan. We need to see a vision because that is what is lacking 

and, as I mentioned earlier, even the Robert Frost poem won’t 

save that Throne Speech because there is no vision in it. There’s 

nothing that says, here’s what we’re going to do. There’s 

reannouncements there, and we all know that the Minister of 

Finance has money problems. We all know the government has 

money problems. 

 

So we’ve known about this since mid-August. We’ve known 

that this is happening. We think it’s only fair that the Premier 

come forward now, particularly that the Assembly’s sitting, 

particularly that we have a 30-day window, and tell the people 

of Saskatchewan that, here is the position. 

 

We’ve heard from the opposition that they’re meeting, that 

they’ve got discussions going on, but what about a plan? What 

about a plan of how we’re going to take this valuable resource 

and own a percentage of it? How about that? When are we 

going to hear from the Premier that? Because that’s what the 

people are saying. This is a valuable resource and we want, we 

want to own a part of that. We want a say in that resource, in 

what happens. Because it just hasn’t been happening, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. On closer examination, that’s not what’s been 

happening here. 

 

So people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, trust that their government will 

get them the best deal. However unless perhaps the Premier has 

a problem . . . Because as we all know, he was the part of the 

crew that sold off the original Potash Corporation, the Crown 

Potash Corporation — sold it off. And we all know about that 

deal. 

 

Now since becoming a hero of saving companies against hostile 

takeover bids, we would hope that he would see and take the 

next step and listen to the people of Saskatchewan who are 

clearly saying, we own this resource, we want a part ownership 

of this resource, and we want to see what deal you are getting 

for us. Be it, as I said, those benefits for the retired potash 

workers or . . . and a fair deal so that we can build the seniors 

homes across this province. 

 

[19:15] 

 

We need to know where this is going. And particularly, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we need to know from this Premier when this 

will happen — a clear plan, a clear vision. Get up and take a 

bold step and do the right thing here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

That’s what should be done. 

 

Further in this Throne Speech, there was the whole issue of the 

photo ID [identification], the photo ID. We’ve had the issue of 

this party, the government, meddling in the Chief Electoral 

system, which we have . . . that has not come through for us. 

They now appear to be meddling again in democracy, and in 

fact with this some people have said that this will actually hurt 

voter turnout. And it is the most vulnerable — usually — 

people in our society that would be impacted by the ID. 

 

I want to read a news article from the Winnipeg Free Press, 

October 19, 2010. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this was because 

earlier, or last year, I presented a Bill in the Assembly here, a 

Bill that would allow . . . The Blind Voters Act would allow 

people who are blind to allow them to vote and be allowed to 

vote so when they would go in, they wouldn’t have to take 

somebody else in there. So perhaps instead of trying to reduce 

voter turnout, what they should do is have a look at this. So this 

is from the Winnipeg Free Press, October 19, 2010, and this is 

about: 

 

The upcoming federal byelection in Winnipeg North will 

be the nation’s testing ground for an automated-talking 

voting device that helps the blind and disabled vote 

without pencil and paper ballot. 

 

A Parliamentary committee approved the device Monday, 

with approval from the Senate expected shortly. 

 

The use of the technology will be a first for any Canadian 

federal election, although some cities already use it in 

municipal elections. 

 

The electronic assistive voting device is aimed at getting 

more to vote in federal elections, Elections Canada 

spokeswoman Maureen Keenan said. 

 

“We are always looking for ways to increase the 

accessibility of the vote,” she said. The push for the 

device comes after disappointing voter turnout in 

provincial and federal elections [Mr. Deputy Speaker]. 

Only 58.8 per cent of registered electors voted in the last 

federal election. It’s designed to help people with a visual 

impairment or who are illiterate mark their ballot by 

following step-by-step voice instructions delivered via 

headphones. 

 

[Mr. Deputy Speaker], CNIB president and CEO John 

Rafferty said the organization looks forward to the 

roll-out of the technology nationwide. “The ability to cast 

a ballot independently and confidentially is a cornerstone 

of modern democracy,” Rafferty said. “Proven 

technologies that make the voting process accessible must 

be introduced now to empower Canadians who are blind, 

partially sighted or otherwise print-disabled to exercise 

their democratic rights on election day.” 

 

Now perhaps what the government should do is take a page out 

of that, and instead of trying to reduce voter turnout they 

should, in fact what they should be doing is increasing, looking 

at ways to increase voter turnout. Increase that voter turnout 

because that’s what’s important for all of us. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to turn a bit into, particularly 

into a topic that’s very near and dear to me, and that is 



5906 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

occupational health and safety in my critic area. And I guess 

after the summer and going out and seeing our health care 

facilities, is it any wonder that health care is the leading in 

injuries in the province, as the employer in the province of 

Saskatchewan? And again, what is the government’s reaction to 

that, other than to send out a letter and say in fact that you 

should reduce overtime, sick leave, and your WCB? To the 

people there, this is in fact an insult, an insult to them. 

 

In some cases, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve had people hired to 

monitor sick leave — actually taking money, creating a position 

to monitor sick leave or taking some other people off to do this 

so that this would be handled. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there 

is a way, if somebody is abusing sick leave . . . And I’m not 

here standing and saying that that does not happen. If there is 

somebody, then there are procedures to deal with that issue. 

You deal with that issue there. 

 

I think this is in fact the government’s way of looking to blame 

somebody, to blame somebody to take the heat off of the 

financial mess that they’ve created in the health care system by 

not funding it properly, by not funding the system properly and 

creating this mess. And all across the whole piece as you go, 

you can hear the amount of deficits in each of the health regions 

that are there. And now the crunch will be coming because they 

have to handle those deficits. And what will they be doing? 

 

This will be very interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when that 

happens because of course, as we know, that government is 

short of money because they’ve mismanaged the funds that they 

were left. And that’s the sad, sad truth. The other sad truth is 

that . . . I often talk about this when I talk to people about the 

Premier talking about, while he was in the opposition, the red 

tape and regulations foisted on the business community by the 

NDP [New Democratic Party] through Workers’ Comp have in 

fact driven jobs out of the province. 

 

Now I’ve had the opportunity to attend a funeral or funerals, 

and attended to some of the mines in the potash industry where 

we’ve had workers killed over this past year. And I guess the 

actions from the occupational health and safety, and I would say 

that we’re in a bit of a disaster there, no matter what people say. 

 

Now I’m not saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that people 

intentionally don’t care. But you know, if there’s things that are 

happening when you say that there are 53 miners killed in 53 

years in the potash industry, you would think that that is 

something maybe that should be looked at. 

 

You and I come here. We’ve been here years. We don’t expect 

that one of us will be killed. Surely the numbers here are less, 

and I don’t imagine that that is the same. But we have to pull up 

our socks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have to do something, and 

the government cannot simply look the other way when this 

happens. 

 

And now we’re looking forward because we have a new 

minister in charge. We would hope that he would take it 

seriously, take all of this seriously. Life and death is a serious 

issue. Life and death for those families is a serious issue. And 

they look at this and they wonder what it is that is going on 

here. What is it that’s going on in terms of the death of these 

miners? The miners were here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this 

legislature, talking about this. And it’s an unfortunate situation 

in Esterhazy and the more recent death of what we have 

happening here. 

 

And you know, what is the plan? What are we doing? What are 

we doing about this? The other day, yesterday I think it was, in 

Cory, somebody fell off a scaffold. Again in the Cory mine one 

of the contractors working at the mine, one of the workers fell. 

Another injury. I understand he’ll be being released from 

hospital, so thank goodness for that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

that all, you wouldn’t say turned out well, but perhaps . . . 

because I don’t know all the details yet. 

 

But the idea that the government’s response to this would be a 

letter about overtime, sick leave, and WCB and creating 

efficiencies doesn’t cut it. It doesn’t cut it at that level, and 

people are concerned. The Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan, or the potash workers’ council that were here 

and brought their issue forward, it’s an important issue, and a 

good many months have passed. And we see we’re not certain 

where the action is on this. Where’s the action on this? And the 

miners are concerned. And they want to know what will be 

done and are waiting for the new minister to do something, to 

do something. Or do we wait until there’s another death? 

 

Now I want to end by talking about the new minister and the 

Labour portfolio. The new minister came out, the member from 

Saskatoon Southeast came out to a CBO [community-based 

organization] conference last Friday. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

think the workers quite enjoyed that. They quite enjoyed it. 

 

What a breath of fresh air it was compared to the person before, 

the member before who was, who was there and in fact was . . . 

I must say there wasn’t a lot of respect for the things. A lack of 

total understanding — never showed up. I think it was years 

here when people came and he never introduced anybody in the 

House. He just basically hid under his desk. And so I think that 

they thought this was a breath of fresh air. 

 

We hear, understand he met with, the new minister met with 

Larry Hubich, president of the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation 

of Labour], some other folks there. They had a good discussion. 

And again that was, you know, that seemed to be a positive 

step. And I guess what I would say, I was with them on last 

Friday and I look forward to many more meetings of being 

there and seeing him there participating. I know people asked 

questions. You know, I might be a bit biased and say he didn’t 

answer that well, but I think was received that he was there. 

And everybody acknowledged that. So again I tell them I look 

forward . . . 

 

Now I hope he doesn’t get cut off like I saw in the Chief 

Electoral Officer issue where he seemed to come up with a 

good decision with the rest of the committee, then went back to 

his own caucus and they kind of grabbed him and said no, you 

know, you shouldn’t have done that. That’s not the right thing 

to do. So I look forward to working in this area and seeing him 

at many functions that are held, and I’m sure many people are. 

 

So I think overall, as I started out, I would end that I don’t think 

that even Robert Frost can save this Throne Speech. It just 

simply doesn’t pass. And I would be, will be voting against that 

and for the amendment. Thank you. 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5907 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to enter into the debate on the Throne Speech that 

was delivered just a short few days ago. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

always a pleasure to be able to take my place here on the floor 

of the Legislative Assembly and speak on behalf of the people 

of Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I talk about the content of the Throne 

Speech, I do have a few remarks that I do want to make. First of 

all, Mr. Speaker, I want to join with I think every member of 

the House who has welcomed our newest Member of the 

Legislative Assembly, the new member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. Mr. Speaker, I know, I think I can speak perhaps for 

the member of the excitement of entering this House during a 

by-election. Members will know that’s how I came to find 

myself in this place. And so, Mr. Speaker, I just want to wish 

the member a very long, and I know it to be a very successful 

time, in this Legislative Assembly. And I look forward to 

getting to know him better, Mr. Speaker. And so I want to 

welcome him to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to I think like most members, thank a 

number of people. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to also, I think, 

follow on what some other members . . . And I think it was a 

good reminder for all of us. I think the member from Estevan 

and the member from Regina Rosemont noted in their speeches 

that Remembrance Day is upon us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think this is a time of year for, in our family, to think 

about a couple of special individuals in our family, Mr. 

Speaker. My Great-Uncle Tuck, who is my grandfather on my 

mother’s side, Grandpa Tracey’s brother, who has passed now. 

He was a veteran of World War II. And also, Mr. Speaker, my 

great-uncle, Fred Duncan, who really was more like a 

grandfather for us when we were growing up. My father’s . . . 

my dad’s dad passed away when my dad was a young boy, and 

so his brother Fred looked after the farm. And, Mr. Speaker, he 

passed away a number of years ago but he was one that, you 

know, we always liked to visit, especially this time of year. And 

later in life, he lived in the Mainprize Manor in Midale, and so 

we’d go down on Remembrance Day. 

 

Uncle Fred, Mr. Speaker, like so many other veterans, never 

spoke a lot about his experience in World War II. I had the 

opportunity in high school to visit France, and part of our time 

there is we visited the beaches of Normandy. And so, Mr. 

Speaker, one of the memories of Uncle Fred that will stick with 

me for my entire life is, when coming back and visiting Uncle 

Fred with my dad and showing him some of the pictures that I 

took of the area, the Normandy beaches and the main Canadian 

cemetery at Beny-sur-Mer. And about partway through, Uncle 

Fred couldn’t look at the pictures any longer. He was so 

overwhelmed with emotion — and from a man who didn’t 

really talk much about his experience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Uncle Fred survived Dieppe, the raid of Dieppe, 

and he also survived D-Day landing in Normandy in 1944, and 

returned to Canada and continued farming, Mr. Speaker. And so 

this is the time of year that I most often think of them. 

 

[19:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting . . . Mr. Speaker, I do want to add a 

few other thank yous. First of all, to my constituency assistant, 

Marcie, who has been working for the Member of the 

Legislative Assembly for Weyburn-Big Muddy for 11 years 

now, Mr. Speaker. And I’m sure other members have 

constituency assistants that have worked various lengths of 

time. I’m certainly very well served and the people of 

Weyburn-Big Muddy are well served by Marcie and her over a 

decade working in that office. 

 

People have come to know that she’s the first contact when you 

call the office. And she does such a capable job especially, Mr. 

Speaker, with my duties of being a member of the cabinet and 

not always being in the office like I once was. So she does a 

fantastic job. 

 

We have another lady that has come on board to work in the 

office on part-time work, Mr. Speaker. And Sheila is doing a 

great job, and she has just come into the role very ably, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want to thank the staff that works here in the Legislative 

Building for me, Kelly, Krista, Drew, and Cam, Mr. Speaker. 

And they do such a wonderful job for me. It was a big 

adjustment for me to become Minister Responsible for the 

Environment and other portfolios, and so it’s a relief to know 

that there’s people there like that can provide assistance. 

 

And I want to thank also the ministry staff, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

served very capably by women and men in the Ministry of 

Environment, and also in Saskatchewan Watershed Authority, 

SaskWater, and SaskEnergy. And I’ve had the opportunity over 

the last few months to visit some of the staff here in Regina and 

also in Moose Jaw at Watershed Authority and SaskWater. And 

it’s a great opportunity to meet the people that ensure that the 

business of government, outside of this business, is conducted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to of course thank the people of 

Weyburn-Big Muddy for giving me the opportunity. This is the 

last Throne Speech before the next election. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to have the endorsement of the members of the 

Saskatchewan Party in the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency 

for the next election and I look forward to hopefully returning 

to this House once the election is concluded. And it has, 

regardless, Mr. Speaker, it has been for the last four years an 

incredible honour and a privilege and a humbling experience to 

know that for this set amount of time I am one of 58 people that 

can stand on this floor and say my piece on behalf of them, and 

so I thank them for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, of course I couldn’t . . . Frankly, Mr. Speaker, I 

probably couldn’t come home if I didn’t thank my family, Mr. 

Speaker, and I’m not going to forget that. And I want to thank 

the House Leader for his reminder. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been a . . . I am supported by not only my 

immediate family, but my extended family. It’s been a very 

exciting few months in our family, Mr. Speaker. My sister, the 

youngest in our family, was married just over Thanksgiving and 

so that was a happy occasion, Mr. Speaker. Her and her 

husband live in the Lloydminster area and the member from 



5908 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

Lloydminster knows that he has some support from our family 

in his constituency, and I think a campaign worker if we’re able 

make that work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And my parents are certainly very supportive of me being here, 

Mr. Speaker. They always . . . They knew from a very early age 

that I had an interest in this place, Mr. Speaker, and they were 

always the first to encourage me. And my brother as well, Mr. 

Speaker, who, like many people, Mr. Speaker, moved to 

Alberta a number of years ago and has found himself residing in 

Alberta; however, being back in Saskatchewan because in his 

industry, Mr. Speaker, frankly this is where the work is. And so 

it’s good to have him back. We’re hoping he can convince his 

Alberta family, Mr. Speaker, to pick up their roots and move to 

Saskatchewan. We’re certainly doing our best to encourage that, 

Mr. Speaker. And so I want to thank him for his support. 

 

And of course, Mr. Speaker, last but certainly not least, I want 

to thank my wife Amanda who has been my biggest supporter 

in not only this endeavour but everything that I’ve done. We 

have been married, Mr. Speaker, for 11 years, and it’s gone by 

extremely quickly, Mr. Speaker. But we are, I think, just each 

other’s biggest supporters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of the members will know that my wife is a 

musician. And frankly, Mr. Speaker, if I can say, she’s very 

talented. She is a very accomplished singer and songwriter, Mr. 

Speaker. She’s a very prolific songwriter. She has written 

dozens and dozens of original pieces of work, Mr. Speaker, and 

is now embarking on a point in her career where more people, 

frankly, are listening to her and are having the opportunity to do 

so. She’s had a very busy summer with engagements at the 

Gateway Festival and Craven this summer, Mr. Speaker. And I 

know there’s a trip to the United States that’s just around the 

corner, and I’m looking forward for her to have that 

opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, any time I think of her and think of the incredible 

talent that she is, there’s a phrase that comes to mind, Mr. 

Speaker. And I would like to quote it, and it is, “She wasn’t 

where she had been. She wasn’t where she was going, but she 

was on her way.” And, Mr. Speaker, she certainly is on her 

way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this has, as I think I said in earlier parts of my 

comments, that this has been a very busy summer, obviously, 

with the changes in responsibilities. And one of the areas that 

being responsible for, Sask Watershed Authority, obviously 

with all the rain that we’ve been receiving all across the 

province, that has taken a lot of time to understand all the issues 

and all of the challenges that are out there, Mr. Speaker. I read 

just not long ago a line about water that went . . . goes 

something like, there’s nothing that transforms a place like 

water. And I think we’re certainly finding that out in many, 

many areas of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through the summer, I think like any or all MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], we get a chance to get 

out and around our constituency. Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a 

little bit about the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency. I do want 

to, with the . . . Mr. Speaker, I think with the permission of my 

good friend and my colleague from Estevan, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to talk a little bit about her constituency, mainly, Mr. 

Speaker, because my hometown, the village that I grew up in, is 

actually just on the other side of the boundary between 

Weyburn-Big Muddy and Estevan. And, Mr. Speaker, that is, I 

think members will know — I’ve talked about it before — I’m 

talking about the centre of the universe, Halbrite, 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Halbrite is a . . . 

 

[Applause] 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well we’ve got one fan at least. Mr. 

Speaker, one of the things that on the way back and forth from 

our farm, Mr. Speaker, in the Midale area, Halbrite is one of the 

routes that you can travel to get there. And over the course of a 

couple of trips, I took the opportunity to just stop in Halbrite 

and have a look around. 

 

This is the first time, Mr. Speaker, in probably over the last two 

or three years, with my folks no longer living in Halbrite and 

my Grandpa, my Grandpa Tracey, Bob Tracey, moving to 

Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, this is the first time since the days of 

my great-grandfather where nobody in our family has lived in 

Halbrite. So there is not always the opportunity to get back to 

Halbrite like there once was. And so I think though why I am 

bringing this up, Mr. Speaker, I think what we are seeing in 

Halbrite, which is a community of about 100 people, maybe 90 

people, what we are seeing there is I think reflective of what 

we’re seeing in a lot of places in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I couldn’t get over the number of new houses that have been 

built. And when you are talking about less than 100 people, it’s 

not, you know, there’s not a lot of houses to begin with. But it 

seemed like every single empty lot that we used to play football 

on or baseball on, Mr. Speaker, there’s now a house. And I 

think that’s, that’s certainly indicative of the strength that we 

are seeing in the economy in the province, the optimism that we 

are seeing. 

 

I had an individual come up to me that’s very, very much in the 

know about the local economy and about in particular the oil 

industry, who stopped me on the street on Friday just to let me 

know that the number of employees and number of people that 

he’s hearing that have moved from Alberta over the last number 

of years and now are working in our province, the number of 

them that have expressed to him that they have really no 

intention of ever going back. Once the Alberta government gets 

things squared away with their royalties that they’ve been 

changing that have had an positive impact for this province, Mr. 

Speaker, that many have relocated here and their plan is to stay. 

And I think that’s great news. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s been a very, very busy and a very exciting 

summer for the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy. We’ve 

had a number of centennial anniversaries in a number of our 

RMs [rural municipality]. The RM of Brokenshell celebrated 

their 100th anniversary over the summer. This weekend I’ll be 

in Ogema for the 100th anniversary of the RM of Key West, 

celebrating that important milestone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Coronach not long ago, Coronach celebrated 

over the past 30 years of course the Poplar River’s power plant 

has been operating and coal has been excavated out of the 

ground and used to operate that power plant, produce electricity 

for the province of Saskatchewan. And this summer they 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5909 

celebrated the 100 millionth metric ton of coal, and so there was 

a significant celebration in Coronach over the summer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that in Weyburn the . . . I’m very 

fortunate to, we’re very fortunate to call Weyburn our home. 

It’s a very civic-minded community where people are always 

interested in the issues of the day, and that’s why we have a 

very busy office, I think, in our constituency. 

 

It’s a very beautiful community, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 

Amanda and I took the opportunity to go for a bike ride around 

Tatagwa, the park, the Red Coat Trail system that surrounds the 

city of Weyburn. We’re almost to the point, Mr. Speaker, where 

the entire . . . it’s a walkway, a path, almost circles the entire 

community. There’s just one leg left to do and I know that the 

parks committee is working hard to do that. And it was a 

beautiful afternoon I think as everybody in the province 

probably experienced, and so it was a great opportunity for us 

to get out and enjoy the outdoors and enjoy just how beautiful a 

city that we live in, Mr. Speaker, and to see the amount of 

growth that we’re experiencing in our community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, like many communities, the United Way had their 

major fundraiser just not that long ago and I want to 

congratulate the United Way, Mr. Speaker, for raising over 

$155,000 during their 33-hour live telethon. Mr. Speaker, the 

entire board of the United Way worked so hard on this. This 

year the president, C.J. Mainil, who is one of the most dynamic 

people that we have in our community, Mr. Speaker, she was 

the chairperson and just did a tremendous job. Their goal was 

127,000 and they exceeded their goal while still on the air. And 

I know that that money will be put to very good use. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, in our community we’re seeing a lot of 

growth. The number of building permits issued this year 

compared to last year is higher this year and in fact the dollar 

amount is almost twice as much for this year so far, Mr. 

Speaker. And really good news for our community. 

 

When you talk about challenges around housing, certainly 

we’re seeing that in our community, Mr. Speaker. One of the 

positives though, Mr. Speaker, is that frankly we are seeing 

people that are seeing the values of their homes appreciate. For 

a long time, the value of a home in Weyburn really didn’t 

change all that much, good if you’re trying to get into the 

market, Mr. Speaker. But perhaps if you’re retiring and looking 

to downsize, Mr. Speaker, that always . . . frankly, it wasn’t a 

great thing for that individual in that family. 

 

[19:45] 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, what we are seeing is, this year alone, lot 

sales in the community, in the city of Weyburn, are 10 times 

what they were last year. And we know, Mr. Speaker, that that 

means that houses are going to be built. We have some 

apartments that are going up which is good news, Mr. Speaker. 

And so a great job, Mr. Speaker, to the city for seeing that 

growth and managing that growth. 

 

You look around Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. We have the RM 

development of Evanson Park just on the south end of the city. 

Mr. Speaker, that is I think fully subscribed which was basically 

barren land not that many years ago near the landfill and now 

has shops that are being built and are being operated out of, Mr. 

Speaker. We see residential developments increasing, and we’re 

really seeing that across the constituency. 

 

And I’ll talk a little bit about the importance of the oil industry 

in our constituency, Mr. Speaker. But one of the important 

things or I think one of the good signs that we’re seeing is, as 

the Bakken development oil play is being pursued, the 

boundaries of it are being pushed further out west. And so now 

we’re seeing activity pick up in areas like Minton and Ceylon 

and all the way down to Bengough, Mr. Speaker, and so that’s a 

positive development. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I talk about the constituency and the 

city of Weyburn, I do want to for the record note, Mr. Speaker, 

how proud we are of one of our hometown heroes, that being 

Graham DeLaet, Mr. Speaker. And I just want to, for the 

record, put on that this is a young man that grew up in 

Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, was born in the Weyburn Hospital. He 

was a good athlete growing up — a few years younger than I, 

but I knew his name as he was growing up — Mr. Speaker, a 

very good golfer, went on to a scholarship in the United States 

to golf and, Mr. Speaker, just in the last couple of weeks 

officially was notified or basically . . . Because of the schedule 

that’s left, Graham is going to be able to keep his PGA 

[Professional Golfers’ Association] tour card next year. And, 

Mr. Speaker, nearly $1 million on the money list, the highest 

Canadian, more money earned this year than Mike Weir and 

Stephen Ames and anybody else, Mr. Speaker — and so 

congratulations to Graham. 

 

Graham has already indicated — Mr. Speaker, Graham is very 

much a community-minded young man, Mr. Speaker — even 

though he and his wife make their home in the United States 

because obviously for travel reasons and for those reasons, Mr. 

Speaker, Graham’s already announced that he’s going to come 

back to Weyburn in the summer and host a tournament to raise 

monies for a new hospital in Weyburn. So congratulations to 

him. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in talking about the Throne Speech, first of all 

agriculture is an important part of the economy in the 

Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency. I think that we can never 

discount the fact that agriculture continues to play an important 

role. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think frankly for this government and the 

Agriculture minister that we’ve had in this province for the last 

three years . . . I think there was a tendency over the last 16 

years before this government that if you were the Agriculture 

minister that was kind of the kiss of death politically, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there wasn’t a lot of success when it 

came to re-election of Agriculture ministers. Lots were 

defeated, Mr. Speaker. Some moved to Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 

But I think this Agriculture minister, one of the finest 

Agriculture ministers we’ve had in a long, long time, Mr. 

Speaker, has done a tremendous job. 

 

When you look at the fact that, Mr. Speaker, the Agriculture 

budget in this province is estimated to be the highest that it’s 

ever been in this province, 360 million for excess moisture 

program . . . Mr. Speaker, the work done by the member for 

Rosetown-Elrose, the Highways minister a few years before, 



5910 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

has led us to the largest education tax reduction in 

Saskatchewan history. That is good news for the rural 

communities, good news for farm families across this province, 

Mr. Speaker. A province-wide water program, Mr. Speaker, that 

started out as a response to things that were happening in the 

Southwest. The response was great, Mr. Speaker, but I think 

obviously the members of this government and the Agriculture 

minister realize that this was a good program for all our farm 

families that wanted to access it, Mr. Speaker. Support for cattle 

and hog producers that were going through some difficult times 

over the last couple of years — the list goes on and on and on, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have to say, Mr. Speaker, I was at our chamber of commerce 

in Weyburn, a business community but knows the importance 

of agriculture in our community, and every year they host an 

appreciation for our farmers. Every year they give away the 

Golden Sheaf Award to one producer in our area, Mr. Speaker. 

And I have to say, based on the work of this Agriculture 

minister and this government, Mr. Speaker, this event that was 

held just in the last week, it was a pretty happy crowd, Mr. 

Speaker. They realize the work that this Ag minister has done 

on their behalf and, Mr. Speaker, proves that this government 

and this party certainly have not forgot where we have come 

from, Mr. Speaker, and we will keep working hard for the 

people of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know I offered congratulations to some people at 

the beginning of my speech, but while I mention the farmer 

appreciation night, I do want to pass on congratulations to Keith 

Kaufmann who was this year’s recipient of the Golden Sheaf 

Award, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Kaufmann has a ranching operation in 

the Radville area, Mr. Speaker. He’s also one of the founders 

and currently the president of Border Line Feeders which is a 

very important agricultural company in our constituency, Mr. 

Speaker. Border Line Feeders just recently won the Community 

Involvement Award at the ABEX [Achievement in Business 

Excellence] Awards, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Kaufmann has served 

for many years on his local RM council. He’s been very 

involved in his regional park, in his Lions Club, 4-H Club, Mr. 

Speaker — a very deserving recipient. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the article in the Weyburn This Week talks 

about, Mr. Kaufmann believes in being a steward of the land. 

He farms. His farm contains 37 quarters of native prairie land, 

Mr. Speaker. He diligently reports all of his ground owls to 

Nature Saskatchewan and has been awarded for improving 

piping plover habitat, and he works with Ducks Unlimited, Mr. 

Speaker. And so again congratulations to Mr. Kaufmann on this 

very, very deserving recognition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to, I do also want to talk about some of the 

areas that I think are areas that certainly I have some 

responsibility in, in terms of the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 

And I do want to correct . . . I think there was a comment 

perhaps from the member from Coronation Park, and I think it 

was an omission, but I don’t think there was any malice towards 

it. 

 

But on talking about the Sask rate decrease that we’re seeing, 

SaskEnergy rate decrease that we’re seeing in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, the member compared it to Manitoba and their rate 

decrease. But I believe he was comparing the overall 

system-wide rate decrease in Manitoba to the residential 

decrease in Saskatchewan. And I just want to clarify that, Mr. 

Speaker. The system-wide decrease in Saskatchewan is nearly 

13 per cent. When you look at the residential, it’s 7 per cent. In 

Manitoba the system-wide is about 12 per cent, Mr. Speaker, 

and only a 5 per cent decrease residential. So, Mr. Speaker, I 

just want to make sure that people that are watching at home 

aren’t confused by the information that was put forward by the 

member opposite, that we’re dealing with apples to apples when 

we’re looking at the comparison in rates, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But that is good news. It will help people during this winter 

heating season, Mr. Speaker, as we can lower the rates going 

into the time of year when people use a lot of natural gas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do also want to say that I am so pleased that we 

are going to be working on important areas to the environment 

like the Great Sand Hills, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to be 

working as the Ministry of Environment with the stakeholders 

in the area, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to be working with the 

affected RMs in the area, Mr. Speaker, and with the planning 

commission that has been doing some work for many years, Mr. 

Speaker. The same with important areas like our northern 

boreal forest lakes, Mr. Speaker. We know that there is 

development interest in parts of northwest Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. Now some of that work may be, may be being put on 

hold a little bit, Mr. Speaker. But we know that we need to have 

a responsible and a sustainable development plan in case some 

of that work does happen that could have an impact on some of 

our pristine areas in northern Saskatchewan. So that’s an area 

that we will be moving on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also talked about the recycling program. I’ve had the 

opportunity to talk to municipal leaders across the province, 

people that are involved with stewardship organizations, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’re working to bring forward a province-wide 

program in the near future. And so, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased 

that Environment can contribute in a positive fashion to the 

Throne Speech. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I do want to, I do want to highlight two other 

areas. One is the fact that this government is pursuing the 

STARS [shock trauma air rescue service] program. Mr. 

Speaker, I think that this is a positive development when you 

look at some of the challenges in this province in terms of 

development — specifically development, Mr. Speaker — 

when you have oil and gas operations spread out in different 

parts of the province, you have forestry in the northern part and 

mining operations, certainly very much which could be, in some 

ways, dangerous jobs, Mr. Speaker. But we want to make sure 

that people are safe on the work site, Mr. Speaker. And I 

commend the Minister for Labour on the things that he’s doing, 

Mr. Speaker. But I think, Mr. Speaker, that this is a very 

positive development. It’s something that people in rural 

Saskatchewan certainly see the value of. 

 

I want to commend a company that has a very large presence in 

our constituency. Crescent Point Energy have stated that they 

will be committing $5 million over the next four years to the 

STARS program. And that shows . . . And that’s just the first, 

Mr. Speaker. And that’s just the first of these types of 

announcements that I think we’re going to be seeing a lot of, 

Mr. Speaker. Over the last 30 years or so, the STARS [Shock 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5911 

Trauma Air Rescue Society] program in Alberta has been 

funded in a large part by the private sector. And we’re going to 

see, I think, that same type of involvement in this province. And 

so I want to congratulate the member from Melfort in all of the 

work that he’s done on advancing this file within our 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the last section of the Throne Speech that I do 

want to talk about, Mr. Speaker, an area that I have I guess a 

little bit of knowledge of and one that is still close to mind, 

although not related or responsible for, and that’s the areas that 

relate to Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport in the Throne 

Speech, Mr. Speaker. And I do want to say, just to preface these 

comments, how privileged I was to serve as the minister over 

the last year and to work with the people of TPCS [Tourism, 

Parks, Culture and Sport] and all of the stakeholder groups. It 

was certainly a very, very exciting time for the ministry and for 

that important sector of our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so I’m very pleased to see that the ministry and that Sask 

Sport will be working hand in hand to develop a program for 

high performance athletes, Mr. Speaker. I had the opportunity 

to meet with Olympians from Saskatchewan because there were 

training sites set up there out of the province, Mr. Speaker. And 

one of the issues was always raised . . . was the fact that the 

Alberta government — if you’re training in Calgary at the 

winter Olympic training centres in Calgary — the Alberta 

government funds Saskatchewan athletes. And yet the province 

really, when they reach that elite stage, funding through other 

programs was not always there. And so, Mr. Speaker, the 

Premier, I think rightly, noted the fact that maybe we should be 

helping out our athletes. They come from Saskatchewan. They 

have to leave the province to train at such a high level. And so, 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to see that the minister is going to be 

moving forward on that initiative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to meet — obviously 

with the involvement with the Olympics — with a number of 

Olympians. Mr. Speaker, I do want to say for the record, I want 

to congratulate and wish well, well wishes to Colleen Sostorics 

from Kennedy, Saskatchewan. A mainstay in the women’s 

hockey program for a number of years, Mr. Speaker, over a 

number of international games and the Olympics, Colleen has 

decided to retire, Mr. Speaker. She’s going to be a big loss for 

the hockey team, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had the opportunity to meet 

and visit with Colleen on a couple of occasions, and so I just 

want to congratulate her and wish her all the best, Mr. Speaker. 

But it’s people like Colleen that give us a lot of pride in our 

Olympians. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I do want to congratulate . . . The Premier’s 

Awards were just handed out for service in the public sector, 

Mr. Speaker. When the announcement came out some time ago, 

and I saw on the list was the team that was brought together to 

work on our Olympic pavilion. And they were one of the 

groups that were honoured, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[20:00] 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I do want to say that it was . . . of all the 

very interesting files that I had the opportunity to work on, 

certainly the Olympic pavilion and the work that went into that 

took a great deal of time. But, Mr. Speaker, first of all I think it 

was well worth it when you look at the reputation of the 

province was enhanced by our participation. And, Mr. Speaker, 

I think that this award is very deserving. 

 

It was a privilege to work with the likes of people from the 

ministries, Mr. Speaker, because I know TPCS was just one 

piece of that enterprise, was also a part of that. Agriculture, Mr. 

Speaker, people from the Office of the Provincial Secretary. 

Jeremy Morgan, the former CEO of the Arts Board was 

instrumental in the cultural side of the pavilion.  

 

And people, Mr. Speaker, outside of the civil service that were 

brought in to work on this — people like Dr. Don Clark, Mr. 

Speaker, who was just a tremendous privilege to work with, 

who I think affectionately became known as uncle Don to most 

of us that worked really close with him. Don and his wife, Ann, 

just were fantastic to work with and really were instrumental; 

Dr. Clark was instrumental in the success of the pavilion. 

 

People like Trent Fraser, and Nancy Hubenig, Joan McCusker, 

Candace Phelps, Ian Cook — Sask Sport past president Ian 

Cook — Dale Holmes were just so instrumental in making sure 

that this was the success that it was. And so, Mr. Speaker, I just 

want to offer my congratulations to the Olympic pavilion team 

for their recognition. Very deservedly so, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to just close. I think I want to — I think 

like everybody — talk about potash, Mr. Speaker, and just say, 

like so many other members, how pleased and how proud I am 

of our Premier and the national attention that he has brought to 

this province, not just on the potash issue, but well before that, 

Mr. Speaker. When he can go to places like Toronto and 

Washington and New York and tell the Saskatchewan story in a 

way that I think obviously attracts people to the province in 

terms of wanting to relocate here, to find work here, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it’s always interesting. 

 

Probably the basic, one of the basic indicators of competence of 

a government is a very simple question: are more people trying 

to get out of the province or are more people trying to get into 

the province, Mr. Speaker? And I think in relation to the 

experiences of past NDP governments, we’re certainly very 

successful on that front when you see the record level of 

population in this province. Mr. Speaker, the highest level of 

population in our province’s history; growth, year over year, 

like we haven’t seen in 50 or 60 years. 

 

And so I want to just, for the record, say for as short or as long 

as my time is in elected politics, Mr. Speaker, I know that I’ll 

look back on this particular debate with a great deal of pride in 

knowing that just to be part of this team — not just the Premier 

but the women and men of the caucus and of the cabinet, Mr. 

Speaker — so it’s been an absolute pleasure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members will know, as I conclude my remarks 

that I’m a student of history. I enjoy history. I like looking back 

at the history of this building. I think it’s important. I think it 

matters. I think what we say on the record has significance 

down the road, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think it can’t be argued that last Wednesday was a very 

historic day, Mr. Speaker. I think when all sides can agree that 

we would recess to watch the announcement of the federal 



5912 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

minister. Being back with about a dozen or so of my colleagues 

and waiting patiently for the federal minister to step in front of 

the microphones, Mr. Speaker. And then many of us rushed 

down to the radio room to listen to the Premier address the 

nation and talk to the media. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, we returned back here. And it was 

interesting because the member from Saskatoon Nutana was 

talking prior to the House recessing. And one of the things that 

she, I think, was admonishing this side of the House is she was 

claiming that we were taking the low road when it came to 

debate in this House, Mr. Speaker. And so the House came back 

into session, the member from Nutana continued her speech. 

 

And the Premier came in after all of his media, Mr. Speaker. 

And on a very historic day, where I believe, very appropriate 

that the Premier put on the record his remarks, Mr. Speaker, his 

thoughts on such a historic day. And, Mr. Speaker, he asked for 

leave to make a personal statement. And what happened, Mr. 

Speaker? Well the members opposite — not all of them — not 

all of them because there were a few, Mr. Speaker, I heard a 

few say yes. But it took at least one member to say no. And one 

member said no, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so the shame of all of this, the shame of all this in the 

historic record of this building when the Premier probably 

should have had an avenue to comment on this very historic 

decision, Mr. Speaker, and to thank the people of Saskatchewan 

and the people of Canada that rallied to this province’s defence, 

Mr. Speaker. What is on the record from the Premier? On the 

record is, with leave to make a personal statement, Mr. Speaker. 

And the answer is no. And I think that is a shame, Mr. Speaker, 

and I think that is a disgrace, Mr. Speaker, that that would have 

happened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, maybe that was good news because the 

Leader of the Opposition was in Ottawa, maybe you know 

plotting electoral strategy. Because one of the things I 

remembered, Mr. Speaker, is when I came back into this House 

with all my colleagues — and supposedly we’re all on the same 

side as the members opposite, and we all voted in favour of the 

motion — and you look across the way, and it looked like 

somebody died, Mr. Speaker. On a great day for this province, 

and they looked dejected and disappointed. And it was very 

telling, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it’s probably a good thing that the Premier didn’t speak 

until the next day because, of course, who speaks after the 

Premier? Well, the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. And 

that’s probably a good thing because he’s . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Well the member from Qu’Appelle Valley is 

right. He spoke and he spoke and he spoke, Mr. Speaker. He 

talked about raising royalties. He talked about nationalizing 

parts of important industries in this province, Mr. Speaker, and 

including the oil industry. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it made me think of another important debate 

in this House. It made me think of Bill 42 in 1973. And I think 

I’ve probably talked about this maybe once or twice in this 

House, Mr. Speaker. But I think that’s an important, an 

important piece of Saskatchewan history, Mr. Speaker — Bill 

42, 1973. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have a Bill in front of me that was 

introduced in the House by the Agriculture minister. It’s Bill 

148. It’s The Animal Protection Act, and it’s probably a very 

important piece of legislation. I think it is. But, Mr. Speaker, 

notwithstanding the important work in this Bill, I’m not sure 35 

years from now people will know, when they hear the words 

Bill 148 back in 2010, they probably won’t know that this is it. 

 

But I guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, that people in my 

constituency, all you need to do is say the words — if they had 

any interest or any involvement in the oil industry back in the 

’70s — all you have to do is say the words Bill 42 in 1973, and 

they exactly know what I’m talking about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, my grandfather who has worked in the oil 

industry is retired now, but he’s worked in the oil industry in 

this province and in Alberta and in other provinces his entire 

life. He’s been to the Legislative Assembly building twice in his 

life, Mr. Speaker. The second was when I was sworn in as a 

member in September of 2006. The first, Mr. Speaker, the first 

time he was ever here was when Bill 42 in 1973 was introduced 

by the NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There was a rally outside of oil workers, Mr. Speaker, that 

knew of the consequences of a Bill like this, Mr. Speaker, the 

same things that the members opposite and the Leader of the 

Opposition — the so-called junior oil executive from Alberta, 

Mr. Speaker — the same things that he is talking about now, 

Mr. Speaker. So the more things change and the more time goes 

on, the more the NDP stays the same. It’s good to know, Mr. 

Speaker, that the Leader of the Opposition’s 10-year experiment 

with capitalism is now apparently over, by his own words, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, so when the members opposite, when the 

members opposite talk in I think a very flippant way about, well 

we’ll just raise royalties. We’ll just maximize taxation, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what the Leader of the Opposition said. That 

has a very, very, very, Mr. Speaker, a very serious effect on 

investment into places like Estevan and places like Weyburn 

and places like Lloydminster and places like Alida. And as 

more development happens across this province, it’s going to 

affect more places, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I know that the members opposite, they’re 

going to talk more about this, Mr. Speaker, about how we just 

raise royalties. We become more like Norway, which, Mr. 

Speaker, if you look at the Leader of the Opposition, to go into 

Norway to drill for oil, you have to prove that your human 

rights record is impeccable. Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure there’s a 

problem. I haven’t heard of a problem with the companies that 

are investing in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. Do the members 

opposite believe that there’s a problem with the human rights 

records of companies like Sonova and Crescent Point and 

Aldon Oils, Mr. Speaker? And Encana, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I’m not sure what the members opposite are trying to get at, but 

I think that that’s just fine. The more they want to go down that 

road, Mr. Speaker, that’s a debate that we’ll have in places like 

Estevan and Alida and Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And on that note, I think I have more than exceeded my time. 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s been a great privilege and a pleasure to 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5913 

speak. I will be voting against the amendment and voting for 

the motion put forward by the member from Melfort. Thank 

you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 

honoured and pleased tonight to stand and make a few 

comments regarding the fine constituency of 

Rosthern-Shellbrook and to talk about how this Throne Speech 

impacts on the people living within that constituency. 

 

But before I get into my comments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want 

to pass on some thank yous. And as every member has, I’m no 

exception. Mr. Speaker, I want to thank first of all my two CAs 

[constituency assistant] in my office back home in Spiritwood: 

Jody Henderson, who’s been there for over seven years, almost 

eight, has been with me for a long time; also Patty Heisler’s 

been there for four years, coming on five. And both those two 

ladies do an awesome job in covering for me and doing the 

work that I can’t do when I’m not there. As many members 

have said, your CAs are the first people that make contact with 

your constituents — whether it be on the phone or whether it be 

in person. And I’ve got two, I think, two of the best ladies in the 

business looking after my constituency. 

 

The next ones I want to thank, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is 

my family. My wife, Sheila. She’s been with me all through 

every one of the years I’ve been in the legislature and that is 

coming 12 years. And without the work she does for me and the 

support she gives me, I could not do this job. Right now, 

because I’m down here because the legislature is sitting, there’s 

still farm work to do, cattle to look after. And my wife’s at 

home doing that right now. And so I say thank you. 

 

I also want to thank my three sons, Newton, Deny, and Micky, 

and their families for supporting me in my endeavours to be a 

politician. Many people don’t realize the amount of hours a 

politician has to work. It’s not an 8-to-5 job, I can assure you. 

And the phone doesn’t ring just at those hours. It rings after 

hours or any hour, even on Saturdays and Sundays. So I want to 

thank my boys and my wife for putting up with the things I 

have to do when I can’t be there for them. 

 

I also want to thank my three grandchildren, Shalyn, Courtney, 

and Brooke, who a lot of times are the reason why I’m here. I 

want to leave leading this constituency in a better place for kids 

like them, or other kids within my constituency. And that’s 

why, when things get tough, all I’ve got to do is think of my 

grandchildren. And they give me the inspiration to go forward 

and keep doing what I’m doing. 

 

I also would like to thank my mother, my mother of 82, who 

has been with me and supports me 100 per cent. And there’s 

lots of times I couldn’t do this job without her support. Some 

people say she’s a hard-nosed politician, and that’s kind of 

putting it bluntly, but sometimes she’s like that. But that’s what 

I need to keep my thinking on the straight line and continue to 

work for the people of the Rosthern-Shellbrook constituency. 

 

I want to tell a little story about my mother. And of course she 

doesn’t get this channel so she can’t hear me speak, and I won’t 

send a copy of it to her. But not that long ago my mom was 

telling me that my brother Robert was out doing things in the 

area, and so she was left at home, and the dogs started barking. 

And so she went out a couple of times and told the dogs to quit 

barking, to shut up. And they just kept on barking, and the hair 

was standing up on their back. So my mother of 82, who’s in a 

walker — she’s had some health problems; she was in a walker 

— she decided she was going to take her walker and walk out to 

the yard to see what the dogs were kicking up a fuss about. 

 

[20:15] 

 

So she went out. She got out to the yard and she’s looking 

around, and underneath the big bale wagon in the yard, there 

was some animal underneath it. It was a big black animal. So 

her first thought was, the reason the dogs are barking, it’s a 

bear. So what does my mother do? She walks back to the house 

and she grabs a big rifle. She comes all the way out with her 

walker. She gets out there and she’s looking at this thing, and 

then she thought well maybe it’s not a bear; maybe it’s a wolf. 

 

Anyway, the animal slinked out from underneath the bale 

wagon and took off, and she couldn’t get a shot at it. So I said 

to mother, I said, that was a real good thing, Mother, because if 

you would have fired that rifle at that animal, whatever it was, 

that thing would have kicked so bad you’d have landed on your 

butt. You maybe would have broke something, your hip or 

whatever. And she said, well that may have happened, but she 

says, I guarantee one thing: I may not have hit him, but I sure 

scared the heck out of him, anyway. But that’s my mother. 

She’s there to protect her property. 

 

I also now want to welcome to the legislature the newest 

member of our caucus, the member from Saskatoon Northwest. 

The member worked hard in a by-election to achieve that goal 

and he’s here with us, and I know he will enjoy himself and do 

a fine job representing the citizens of Saskatoon Northwest. 

 

One of the things I want to mention, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about 

a by-election — especially this by-election because it was in 

Saskatoon — but a by-election, it is a place for the parties to 

gather support to show, if you’re an opposition member, to 

show that the government’s on the wrong track, but for the 

government, which is us, to show the members that we’re on 

the right track. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member worked hard to prove to 

people that we as a government, and the Premier, is on the right 

track. And I can guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, the people there 

agreed with that because he not only garnered more support 

than the last member that was here, he garnered a lot more to 

prove to the opposition that we are on the right track, and that 

the new road that we are taking is the right road to take. Again I 

want to thank the member for doing a great job in his 

constituency to prove to the people that we are on the right 

track. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also now want to talk about the Throne 

Speech. And I like the heading of the Throne Speech. The 

Throne Speech is “The New Road,” the road less travelled. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that was chosen because the old road 

was a road full of potholes, never looked after because the old 

road was the NDP road. 



5914 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

Now we’ve known for some time that the last 16 years have 

built that road, and that’s the old road. Now why would you 

want to take an old road, especially with the Premier we have 

and the government we have today that are looking to brighten 

up this province and get it moving forward? Then we need to go 

the new road, the road less travelled. In regards to that, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to first talk about health care and how health 

care is working in my constituency — not just the province, but 

in my constituency. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things I think is most prominent 

in this Throne Speech and that is with the new province’s 

children’s hospital. Now remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

members from the opposition now said that they were going to 

do it, that they were going to get around to do it. Well it never 

happened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Under this government, we are going forward with the 

children’s hospital. The people of Saskatchewan have wanted it. 

It should have been built a long time ago, but now we’re 

moving forward. Why, Mr. Speaker? It’s moving forward 

because we have a progressive government in power, a 

government that sees things that need to be done that was 

totally neglected by the members from the opposition side. But 

now the government is moving forward. 

 

I also will make comment on the Minister of Health, and that is 

in regards to the target of 800 new nurses. Now I remember the 

former NDP minister of Health, the member from North 

Battleford, who said it’s no use looking at targets because he 

knows that we can’t keep them anyway. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Are you talking about me? 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Well the member from North Battleford 

said, are you talking about me? And I said, yes I am. But the 

new . . . The minister we have today from the government 

decided to put a target on 800 nurses, and we filled that. In fact, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have overfilled it, all in three years. 

Our mandate was to do 800 nurses in four years, but we’ve 

recruited 800 nurses in three years, Mr. Speaker. That’s what a 

progressive government does and that’s what this minister has 

done. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to talk about the creation of a 

new health ombudsman. The new health ombudsman has been 

something our government has been saying needed in this 

province. And with the minister and the government of today, 

we’ve gone forward with that and it’s welcomed by everybody. 

I know in my business to my constituency they’ve said, it’s 

about time that a government took health care seriously, and in 

order to do that is to make sure that we have an ombudsman, a 

health ombudsman in place, and we do. And I know in the years 

to come he will do excellent work, not only for this government 

but for the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only with the 800 nurses that we’ve 

recruited — we’ve also put in place 170 new nursing training 

seats which is added on top of the 130 previous seats that were 

there before. Well, Mr. Speaker, it goes hand in hand that in 

order to attract 800 nurses, you need more training seats. And 

we have looked at that. And we’ve done a very good job of 

recruiting nurses and also recruiting nurses through the new 

training seats that we have set up in this province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things that our Premier has 

stood out loud and strong in regards to health care and that is 

with the MS [multiple sclerosis] liberation clinic trials. Now I 

know, Mr. Speaker, he’s one of the few premiers in the 

provinces that have said that they are going to look after the MS 

treatment trials. And it brings back memory in my own 

community of Spiritwood where there’s a few people there that 

have MS. In fact, the province of Saskatchewan has the highest 

number of MS patients in the country. 

 

And I remember talking to one lady from Spiritwood who has 

MS. She’s had it for a long time. And she said one day she got a 

phone call from Vancouver to go to Costa Rica for an operation 

for MS. And she was so happy that she was chosen to go. And 

even though she didn’t have the money to go, people raised 

money or actually her uncle raised the money and sent her 

there. 

 

Well she was there for just over a week, and what a noticeable 

change when she came back. And I have talked to her a few 

times in regards to the rehabilitation that she needs in regarding 

to make her dream come true. And that is to be able to walk just 

like a normal person because she’s in a wheelchair. But just her 

attitude and the change in her attitude — it’s just enlightening. 

 

And so her, along with other members within the constituency, 

have said, I’m glad that the Premier took the side and decided to 

look at MS on a serious note. And I tell you, when that Premier 

made that comment, I couldn’t believe the amount of phone 

calls I received in my office from people that were just so 

positive about this government, this Premier, on what we’re 

doing. That alone resonated with people that the Premier is a 

very caring person. He cares about people, all people. And it 

shows. And this announcement he made about the MS 

treatment is one of those reasons why the people of my 

constituency believe in the Premier, they believe in this 

government, and they believe in what we’re doing. 

 

Another comment I want to make about in regards to the Health 

portfolio and that is the establishment of the physician 

recruitment agency, and the announcement that the Health 

minister made in regards to IMGs, international medical 

graduates. Now I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that won’t come 

into effect till next year, January 1 of next year. But it’s 

something that we need to look at in order to bring the 

recruitment of doctors, especially to rural Saskatchewan. I 

remember the NDP said that they were going to do what no 

other government could do, and that is rebuild the rural health 

care in Saskatchewan. Well as we know after 16 years, and 

even with the former minister from North Battleford, nothing 

got done. They were going to do it, but just never got around to 

do it. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at IMGs and bringing 

in foreign doctors to the province, places like Hafford, places 

like Shellbrook, places like Spiritwood will benefit from this. 

They will benefit immensely from this. Right now Shellbrook 

Hospital has been closed for a few weeks because of the doctors 

there having to go and write their exams through the CAPE 

[clinicians’ assessment and professional enhancement] system. 

Well now they’re back and they just reopened the hospital. But 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5915 

there was no emergency care on the weekends there simply 

because the doctors were off studying for their exams. 

 

Well Shellbrook takes in a big area, Mr. Speaker. Because there 

is no doctors in Spiritwood, people from Spiritwood were going 

there. So when that happened, Mr. Speaker, it caused many 

problems. Now this IMG system that we have in place today is 

going to help fill some of the vacancies in Shellbrook for 

doctors to come and work there. And we’ll bring Shellbrook 

back to capacity they want to be to look after the citizens 

around there. 

 

It will also help in Spiritwood where we have a brand new 

hospital and we don’t have physicians. It would help there, Mr. 

Speaker. And there’s a group there called the northern lakes 

recruitment agency. And the president of that, or the 

chairperson is Tracy Schira-Parker, and she is doing an 

unbelievable job, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in raising money for 

recruitment and talking to people, talking to the medical 

association about recruiting doctors and how can they go about 

recruiting doctors to Spiritwood to get that hospital open so that 

we can fully look after the people around Spiritwood. 

 

We’re an hour and a half drive from Meadow Lake, from North 

Battleford, from P.A. [Prince Albert]. There needs to be some 

kind of health care in there to stabilize the population of people 

around there. And I remember talking not that long ago to 

members from Chitek Lake and Leoville in regards to for them 

to come to Spiritwood, it’s a half-hour drive. Never mind going 

to Shellbrook where they will see a doctor. That’s an hour and a 

half. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there needs to be something in 

Spiritwood. And this group and Tracy’s working hard to look at 

getting some doctors into Spiritwood to help open that facility. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to also . . . In fact I’d be . . . 

[inaudible] . . . if I didn’t talk about agriculture in my 

constituency. When you look at the constituency of 

Rosthern-Shellbrook, it is made mostly up of agriculture people 

— farmers, ranchers, you name it. There are business people 

there too, but the thing of it is all works around agriculture. And 

the Minister of Ag . . . And I’m so glad and happy that we have 

a Minister of Ag that has grown up with the system, who’s a 

farmer. He understands it, understands it head to foot. He 

knows what farmers are going through, and this year, with all 

the rain we’ve had, you couldn’t wish for a better minister who 

knows what farming is about than the one we have today. So 

kudos to the Agriculture minister that we have here today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this year was devastating to the farmers and 

ranchers in my area. Even though this spring, many of the 

farmers got a lot of the seeding done, they seeded it in very, 

very wet conditions and it didn’t grow very good. Haying alone 

was unbelievably terrible. You’d cut the hay and before you 

could get it up, it probably had 5 or 6 inches of rain on it. So 

there was lots of hay, there was lots of produce there, but it was 

of very, very poor quality. 

 

And so the farmers and ranchers there dealt with very severe 

conditions to get it up. I, as a farmer alone with cattle operation, 

know this very well. I was lucky. I held off until the rain 

actually quit, or somewhat quit, so I could get my hay up in 

somewhat decent condition. And with the supplement of pellets, 

the cattle will do well. 

 

[20:30] 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the agricultural system that we have 

in place today looks after the people of Saskatchewan. They 

have for a long time. And some of the announcements that the 

Agriculture minister has announced, like the $30 million to 

restore and repair the infrastructure that was so damaged by the 

former government, the Minister of Ag has done that. We’ve 

put money into cattle operation where we see $50 a head being 

paid to cattle producers on the west side of the province, the 

ones that were devastated last year when there was no rain, 

absolutely none. That infrastructure program helped the farmers 

and ranchers in that area. 

 

We again brought out money this year for the farmers and 

ranchers and land producers when they, coupled with the 

federal Ag minister, announced a $30 an acre. And when you 

add the $30-an-acre infrastructure money that came to the 

people plus the crop insurance, $50 an acre, many people in the 

province that suffered from not getting their crop in took 

benefit, at least of looking after some of their expenses, by 

those dollars coming forth. And it’s because we have a Minister 

of Ag that understands farming and fights for farmers. He fights 

for rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to talk a little bit about our 

fiscal responsibility as far as our debt. Now, Mr. Speaker, there 

are many members on that side of the House will stand up and 

say that when they took over some 16 years ago, the 

government was broke. Well according to the Minister of 

Finance — and I put my faith into the former minister of 

Finance, the member from Melfort, and now the member from 

Canora-Pelly — that back 16 years ago when they took over, 

yes, there was debt. There was provincial debt, I think to the 

tune of, say, 15 billion. 

 

Now everybody knows that of that 15 billion, 8 billion of that 

was left by the Conservative government. Well where did the 

other 7 billion come from? It couldn’t have come from the 

Conservative government because they did 8 billion. But where 

did it come from? Well I bet it came from the Blakeney 

government, which is the NDP. Now you hear members on that 

side continuously stand up and say how bad they had things 

when they first took over. But they never, they never ever 

mention the debt they accumulated. Never. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from North Battleford said I’d 

better check my figures. Well I’ve checked with the Finance 

minister, I’ve checked with the former Finance minister, and I 

guarantee him, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I believe both of them long 

before I believe any member from that side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Rosemont when he was 

up speaking talked about the surplus money that was left when 

we took over in 2007. And he can’t figure out where that money 

went. We blew it. We, the Sask Party government, blew it. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to say where we blew the 

money. How about bringing the debt down? The debt, I believe, 

was 6.8 billion. Well, Mr. Speaker, we brought that debt down 



5916 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

to 4.2 billion. In fact, we did that in the first year of our 

mandate. We brought it down to 4.2 billion. That’s where the 

money went. Or maybe the members from the NDP don’t want 

us to spend it there. Maybe they would like debt because they 

accumulated a 7 billion debt and thought there was nothing 

wrong with that. But we like to look after our debt, Mr. 

Speaker. And so that’s why we put money toward our 

provincial debt and brought it down to 4.2 billion. That’s why. 

 

Another thing that we did when we took office, Mr. Speaker, is 

we looked after property tax relief. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

know the members opposite get a little irritated when we talk 

about property tax because it’s another thing that the NDP were 

going to do it; they just never got around to do it. But we looked 

at it and we said, no. In rural Saskatchewan, we’re paying too 

much tax. So the minister at that time decided no, we’re going 

to look at it seriously. And we came up with a plan, Mr. 

Speaker. And we dropped the amount of tax paid in the first 

year — or second year, pardon me — immensely through 

property tax. And we’re not done. We’ve got more to 

accumulate on that debt, but we’re going to look after it. 

Something that the Saskatchewan Party promised to do, and 

we’re going to do it. 

 

There was also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, things like infrastructure 

deficit. What about the roads? The highways? I made mention, 

Mr. Speaker, about this Throne Speech being a new road that 

we were travelling, not the old road. Well we wouldn’t want to 

travel the old road; that was a NDP road, one that was full of 

potholes. And when the Highways minister took over, we put 

the highest amount of money into the Highways budget ever in 

history. 

 

So that’s where some of the money went, Mr. Speaker. Does 

that mean that the NDP say we squandered it? Because I can 

guarantee it, every constituency in the province of 

Saskatchewan, they’re glad that we looked after the priorities of 

this province, and that is with roads. That’s where the money 

went. 

 

If they want to use the words squandered the money, fine. I 

think the people of Saskatchewan are happy we squandered the 

money in the right way, the right areas, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I could go on where other money was spent, but the 

member from Rosemont continuously said we squandered it. 

Well I think we squandered it in a good way, very good way . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 

from Regina Rosemont is speaking. He had his chance to speak 

on the Throne Speech. 

 

And maybe didn’t get around to saying that, but we are doing 

our job as government to look after the people of the province. 

We’re looking after all the constituencies in the province across 

the board because the Premier and this government is a 

progressive-looking, forward-thinking government. And we 

have brought this province back in a short period of time — 

three years; we have a year left in our mandate — but in a short 

three years I can guarantee you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have 

done more in the three years of being in government than those 

members did when they were in 16 years — a lot more, and we 

still got a year to go, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this Throne Speech is any 

indication as where the government is going and what we’re 

planning on doing, we are going to be sitting on this side of the 

benches for a long, long time. 

 

The last little bit I want to talk about, Mr. Speaker, and I 

mentioned my constituency is a lot of farmers. And farmers 

need fertilizer to grow their crops, and fertilizer comes from 

potash. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, last Wednesday was 

probably the highlight of this government, when our Premier 

stood in his place and told the federal Prime Minister, the 

answer is no to BHP taking over potash. 

 

And I remember some of the comments made by members 

opposite, especially, especially the Leader of the Opposition, 

who used his political ways as an opposition to travel on that 

Wednesday down to Ottawa to talk to, not the Prime Minister 

about the BHP takeover, but talk to Jack Layton, to align 

himself in the political arena. Maybe he went down there for 

another reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Maybe he went down 

there to talk to Jack Layton about his future plans. Maybe he 

has other interests, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I mean we know too 

well about the member, the opposition member about ducking 

in and out of the province. I mean it happened not that long ago 

when he ducked out of the NDP government and moved to 

Alberta. All of a sudden then he comes back again. 

 

Though I’m sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he reads the polls. He 

knows what’s happening. And when your polls of popularity 

slip to unheard records like they are now, maybe, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, he went to Ottawa to see if Jack Layton is planning on 

moving on with something else and that would align him to step 

in and maybe take over as the leader of the federal NDP. As I 

said before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he did it once. Nothing 

stopping him from doing it a second time. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s why the people of my constituency 

in Rosthern-Shellbrook agree with what the Premier, the 

government is doing for them and what the Premier and the 

province is doing for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The popularity of our party is growing by leaps and bounds, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’ve only been in power three years. Three years 

and look at what we’ve done. Right now, Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan are happy. I can guarantee you the 

Premier would say it first; we haven’t done everything for this 

province, but we have done a heck of a lot. And there is more to 

do, and we are continually going to do that. 

 

I want to leave, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by saying that this 

Thursday will be Remembrance Day. And the last two 

Remembrance Days I’ve spent in my home town of Spiritwood. 

The reason is I want to pay tribute to the war veterans, but I also 

want to say tribute to a family that lost their loved one in 

Afghanistan. 

 

Some short two years ago, a gentlemen by the name of Dustin 

Wasden lost his life in Afghanistan. He was over there fighting 

for our freedom. He was fighting for our freedom of speech. He 

was fighting for democracy. And the last two years, the 

Remembrance Day service has been huge. Its been 

overwhelming, but it’s brought members of the Legion and 

Spiritwood together because they lost a young one — a young 

one that left his family, a young child, his family there. And so 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5917 

on the 11th, I will be there laying a wreath on behalf of the 

government. But I want to say to the family of the Wasdens, 

your sorrow was not alone. We all think of him, and we miss 

him. 

 

And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can say that the Throne Speech 

that was brought forth here on October 27th is a great Throne 

Speech. It brings new ideas to this province as to what this 

government and this Premier wants to do. It’s a Throne Speech 

a year in advance before the next election, and it will be the 

only Throne Speech before the election. But I can assure you, 

members of the Rosthern-Shellbrook constituency are behind 

this government. They’re behind this Premier, and they’re 

behind me. 

 

On that note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the 

Throne Speech, but I will definitely not be supporting the 

amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Bradshaw): — I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to have an opportunity to respond to the recent Throne 

Speech. But first of all, I want to extend my congratulations to 

the member from Northwest for his victory in the by-election. I 

have no doubt that the member from Saskatoon Northwest will 

serve his constituents well. I’m quite happy to abdicate the role 

of the newest MLA to him, too. 

 

Before I begin my remarks on the Throne Speech, there are a 

few very important people I want to acknowledge. I have 

exceptional staff who have served the constituency of 

Saskatoon Riversdale very well. Thank you, Yvonne, Tammie, 

and Chris, for your hard work, your commitment to the people 

of our constituency and for helping make my job so much 

easier. 

 

As a mom with young children, I would not be able to do this 

job well if I didn’t have such a strong support network. My 

parents, both of whom are almost 80 years old, spend one day a 

week with my preschooler. Ophelia really is the most amazing 

little girl, but she’s also a bit of a tornado, and is more often 

than not completely exhausting for everybody around her. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A special girl. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Very special girl. But for my parents who are, 

as I said, advanced, getting older and older, but still incredibly 

spry, for them to commit a day a week to spend with my 

daughter, it means a great deal to me. I think it’s pretty special 

for them, pretty special for Ophelia, and it’s also incredibly 

appreciated. 

 

My sister Michelle, who actually says I should stop making so 

many thank yous and I should keep my speeches a bit shorter, 

she’s one of the people that I also want to thank. She spends 

tons of time with both my girls and makes a pretty darn good 

substitute for me. In fact Ophelia had her first night away from 

me just a couple of weeks ago and fared incredibly well, thanks 

to Auntie Mich. 

 

[20:45] 

So Michelle’s point is well taken that quite likely not everybody 

wants to hear how thankful I am for all the people in my life. 

But because of the way this job is structured and because my 

long-term goal is to see this legislature far more reflective of the 

makeup of this province, I believe I need to draw attention to 

the fact that this job really needs to be a team effort, especially 

if you have care responsibilities. This legislature and this work 

currently aren’t the most family friendly, but I believe this 

could and this should be very different. And while I’m here, I 

will strive to initiate changes I think could make it easier for 

those with care responsibilities of either children or elders to 

serve as an MLA or to even just contemplate putting their 

names forward to run. 

 

I want to thank my children, Hennessey and Ophelia, for 

putting up with the past two years of our crazy lives. There’s 

been some ups and downs, and it’s been a period of adjustment 

for all of us. And both Hennessey and Ophelia have been real 

troopers, and they also continue to be my inspiration or the 

reason why I put my name forward to do this job in the first 

place. 

 

My husband Blair has put his own career on the back burner to 

be home with Hennessey and Ophelia. Although women have 

done this for their political husbands forever, it is a rarity to find 

a man willing to put his children and his wife’s needs before his 

career. I can’t emphasize enough how much this means to me. 

Honestly, as the person who was home with Hennessey, my 

oldest, for almost seven years, Blair being home really is the 

piece that has created the space in my brain to be able to do this 

work. I can do this job confident in the knowledge that the girls 

are in the care of someone who loves them as much as I do, so 

thank you, Blair. 

 

Last but not least, I want to thank the good people of Saskatoon 

Riversdale for giving me the opportunity to be their voice in 

this legislature. I’m working hard to ensure they know they 

made the right choice in the by-election last year. It really is a 

privilege to be their voice here in this legislature. I couldn’t 

think of a better job in the world, so thank you. 

 

With my thank yous completed, I think — I hope that I haven’t 

missed anybody, but I’m sure I possibly have — there are a few 

things . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Seatmate. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — My seatmate, thank you to the member from 

Regina Rosemont for being a good mentor along the way here. I 

think that’s all the thank yous. 

 

I’m going to talk about this government’s approach to women 

in leadership positions and the lack of the necessary perspective 

around the decision-making table, this government’s less than 

auspicious record of financial mismanagement and its impact 

on the people of this province, the government’s Throne Speech 

nod to the need for picture ID in order to vote, and finally some 

of my perceptions of the reality and the spin that has gone on in 

this place recently. 

 

It was hard not to notice this past spring when the Premier 

embarked upon a cabinet shuffle that saw two women leave the 

cabinet and one woman enter, for a net loss of one female from 



5918 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

around the decision-making table. I think one of the most telling 

signs of this government’s perspective on women was the 

removal of the member from Martensville from her role as the 

minister of Environment and her subsequent placement in the 

very backbenches of government to the seat as far away from 

the Premier as possible. There is no doubt The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act was a poor decision. But we all know this really 

wasn’t this minister’s legislation, that it was in fact at the behest 

of the Ministry of Agriculture that this legislation went forward. 

The former minister did not handle this file well, but she has 

also taken the fall for her Sask Party government. 

 

There has been no shortage of ministerial mess-ups in the past 

three years, including the former Finance minister’s $2 billion 

blunder on potash forecasting and the former advanced 

education, immigration, and labour minister’s complete 

inability to engage with working people. However the Finance 

minister stayed in place until he decided to leave on his own 

terms, and the Advanced Education minister is still sitting very 

close to the Premier although the Labour portion of his portfolio 

has been removed from his responsibility. 

 

Don’t get me wrong. I don’t think you could call me a fan of the 

member from Martensville. In fact last spring in the debate on 

sitting extended hours, I was the subject of vitriolic heckling 

from many members across the way when I argued that sitting 8 

a.m. to midnight is one of the many deterrents that keep good 

women from putting their names forward to run for nominations 

for any party. Both the member from Martensville and the 

member from Estevan, two women I might add, were 

particularly small-minded with their heckles and completely off 

base, I might add. I recall these women pointing out that this 

job is 24-7, 365 days a year, among other things. 

 

Well though I would agree that it is imperative MLAs remain 

responsive and available in a timely fashion to constituents to 

deal with their concerns, I think one of the reasons my 

constituents elected me is because I’m doing what so many of 

them are — trying to balance work and family. Like so many of 

my constituents, I’m working hard to be a good employee — 

their employee — and still remain an engaged, connected 

parent. In fact I think my dual role helps make me a more 

effective MLA, better equipped to understand the needs and 

concerns of my constituents. 

 

All that said, as someone who wants to see more women 

elected, because I know diverse voices around the 

decision-making table make for better public policy, it is 

distressing to me that the Premier has removed a young woman 

wholly and completely from this table. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not use this opportunity 

to discuss the Sask Party government’s financial 

mismanagement and its impact on the average person in this 

province. In this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, we got to hear all 

this government has done previously and very little about what 

they will do going forward on the so-called new road. Well first 

of all, I’m still pretty new here, but I have always understood a 

Throne Speech is supposed to detail a government’s vision for 

the future, not its memory of its past. While listening to the 

speech, I couldn’t help but think that all these past 

accomplishments took place while this government was ripping 

through the more than $2.3 billion they inherited from the 

previous NDP administration. It’s easy to govern when you 

have buckets of money. But when finances get a bit tighter, it’s 

not quite so simple. 

 

It amazes me that in this past budget the government has made 

cuts and told organizations and individuals that we will all have 

to do our part and tighten our belts. Mr. Speaker, for the past 

two years, our province has taken in more than $10 billion in 

revenue — $10 billion, Mr. Speaker. This is billions of dollars 

more than any NDP administration ever had to work with, 

billions of dollars more. The Sask Party government has run 

deficits two years in a row, has expected us all to pay for their 

mismanagement through harmful, misguided cuts, and has 

projected provincial debt to rise by more than $4 billion in the 

next few years. 

 

Having lived through the 1990s here in Saskatchewan where the 

Romanow government inherited a province on the brink of 

bankruptcy and how tough times warranted incredibly difficult 

decisions, and particularly as a mother of two children, I’m 

worried about my children’s future here and our collective 

futures as citizens of this province. I’m worried that if we stay 

on this new road, it will lead us right back to where we started 

after the Premier’s mentor, Grant Devine, lost his last election 

in 1991. That would be in a deep financial hole that will take a 

very long time to climb out of. 

 

Hennessey is only about five years away from university. 

Although her dad and I have been putting a little bit of money 

away every month for her education since her birth, I’m 

beginning to worry that with escalating tuition costs, it’s still 

not going to be enough. I know from experience that it can be 

difficult to juggle employment, to pay tuition, and to rely on 

inadequate student loans. I don’t want this for her. I don’t want 

this for any Saskatchewan youth. I want Hennessey to be able 

to focus on school and not have to graduate with crippling debt. 

I want her to have the option to pursue whatever education she 

needs to in order to create the future she wants and to not be 

hampered by finances. 

 

I have known far too many people who graduate with student 

loans well over $30,000. Coupled with exorbitant housing costs, 

Mr. Speaker, young people graduating from university with this 

kind of debt or more cannot dream of owning a home any time 

soon. 

 

I met a young couple on the doorstep a little while ago where 

they both had student loans and were renting an apartment. 

Their rent had recently gone up by 30 per cent, which seems to 

be about the average increase in rent people have faced in my 

constituency in the past couple of years. This couple has a 

daughter who was nine months old when I met them. 

 

Sadly they told me about not being able to use the full year of 

parental benefits under employment insurance because 55 per 

cent of one of their salaries wasn’t enough to make ends meet to 

cover all their costs. So instead of getting to be home for that 

first year of their daughter’s life or even one of them being 

home, they both had to return to paid employment. 

Complicating matters, they had a difficult time finding child 

care, so they decided to tag team and schedule their shifts so 

they would never have to use child care. This is great for their 

little girl, but it means this young couple rarely gets to spend 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5919 

time together. Not only are they strapped financially, but their 

relationship has added stress and strain. If this is the new road, 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t want my children travelling on it. 

 

I see in here on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker, how this government 

is failing many people in my constituency of Saskatoon 

Riversdale. For example, in my constituency there is a 

wonderful not-for-profit seniors home that should be well 

supported by government. This one home serves about 10 

singles, mostly women, but there is an increasing demand for 

the organization to build a second facility that would create the 

same home-like environment but this time for couples. 

Unfortunately this organization is not in a financial position to 

build this second home and is feeling the pinch in operating its 

first home. 

 

The board and its volunteer executive director that oversee the 

home have done their best to keep rates to the residents 

affordable as possible so people from our community can 

actually live there. But with the combination of residents on 

fixed incomes, increased property taxes and utility rates — this 

organization just had their first electricity bill, over $1,000, Mr. 

Speaker, in August — keeping the lights on and the doors open 

becomes increasingly difficult. In a time when the demand for 

affordable housing for everyone including seniors has far 

outstripped the supply, government should be coming forward 

and supporting such projects. 

 

A regular call into my constituency office is that of individuals: 

what can be done about their rapidly increasing rent? Rent has 

continued to go up, sometimes even by a few hundred dollars in 

one shot, Mr. Speaker. If people facing increased rent could 

find suitable accommodation for less money, they would move 

in a heartbeat. However this is often next to impossible, and 

instead we have people making a choice between paying rent, 

buying food, or sometimes going without needed medication. 

This is a reality, and this is simply unacceptable in a country 

like Canada and in a province like Saskatchewan. 

 

In this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, we heard about the new 

housing program that will build 1,000 new homes in the next 

five years. As a proponent of home ownership and believing 

that good housing and strong roots for families make for 

healthy communities, I will commend the government for 

committing to this and look forward to its implementation. 

However this is just a drop in the bucket and will do little to 

ease the housing shortage around the province. 

 

Like my colleagues, I spent a large part of my summer 

travelling to communities outside our province’s larger centres. 

It doesn’t matter where you go in this province, Mr. Speaker; 

affordable housing is an issue. It might look a little bit different 

in various communities, depending. It could be oil workers in 

southern Saskatchewan, or seniors who have nowhere to live so 

they’re staying in homes that they can’t handle. Meanwhile 

there’s young families who would love to purchase their home. 

So it looks a little different around the province, but it’s an issue 

everywhere, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The government needs to put a serious, long-term plan in place 

to meaningfully address this housing shortage. They boast of 

the increased population numbers but have not put their money 

where their mouth is, ensuring all residents have a decent and 

affordable roof over their heads. Rather we see a lack of vision 

that translates into actions like mean-spirited cuts in the last 

budget to a community organization that has helped put many 

families into homes in my constituency. Mean-spirited cuts, 

that’s what this vision is of this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, there was no plan for a 

much-needed rent control. There was no mention of policy 

around affordable tuition. There was no mention of help with 

increasing electricity bills. And there was no new commitment 

to child care, either in creating spaces or ensuring there’s 

enough trained staff for these facilities, Mr. Speaker. There was 

nothing in this Throne Speech that would address the concerns 

of the young family or the seniors I mentioned earlier. There are 

thousands of people out there like them who are working hard 

to make a good life here in the province or who have 

contributed greatly to this province over the years. But they 

need support, Mr. Speaker, real support. 

 

A few days ago, we heard the Social Services minister tell us 

how well individuals who require income support are doing 

under this government. There is no doubt this government made 

some positive changes for those on social assistance when they 

were first elected, but I might add these changes were all made 

when this government had a huge pot of money to work with. I 

can tell you, now that they have mismanaged their finances and 

now that money is tighter than when they took office, people on 

social assistance are paying the price. 

 

I’ve only been in this job for a year, but I have the benefit of 

having an assistant who served Premier Calvert since 2001. 

Yvonne is the front line for all the calls and concerns we receive 

in our constituency office. Aside from serving as a constituency 

assistant under both the NDP and the Sask Party government 

and seeing how individuals who are having difficulties are 

treated comparatively, she also has another perspective — a 

before and an after the 2010-2011 budget view. Yvonne was off 

for eight months this year receiving treatment for breast cancer. 

From her departure last fall until her return this summer, times 

have changed for those on social assistance, she says, and it is 

apparent ministries have been directed to cut costs wherever 

and however they can, no matter what the consequences. 

 

There have been Social Services ministry policies that have 

changed in the past few months which appear to be directly tied 

to saving pennies here and there on the backs of the most 

marginalized citizens of our province, Mr. Speaker. For 

example in the past if a client received an overpayment, they 

would of course be expected to pay it back. However a client 

could point to hardship and make smaller payments over a 

longer period of time — $15 off a cheque perhaps rather than 

25, where an extra $10 can mean a bit more food in their 

children’s bellies, Mr. Speaker. This hardship clause is now 

gone. 

 

[21:00] 

 

Another area under Social Services in which there seems to be a 

change is around the special diet program which provides 

additional money for people who have concerns like diabetes. 

People have been denied additional support for their special diet 

or have seen money for it reduced for no apparent reason. 

 



5920 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

Away for eight months, Yvonne says the difference upon her 

return is profound. We have had people come into our office 

looking for help who are desperate but completely apprehensive 

to be there as they’ve been told by their workers not to come to 

MLAs’ offices. Yvonne explains that she and other 

constituency assistants have always had good working 

relationships with supervisors in Social Services and could in 

the past deal directly with them to try to resolve issues. Now 

supervisors are also hesitant to talk to opposition CAs. Instead 

Yvonne finds herself having to go directly to the minister’s 

office to attempt to resolve issues for clients. 

 

This nickel-and-diming on the backs of our poor citizens is not 

about legislation that we can all read and debate here in this 

Chamber or grand policy announcements for the media. Rather 

this is about internal policy that is hidden from view from most 

of us except for those who are impacted by it. These 

consequences of these internal policies mean the difference 

sometimes between food on the table or a decent roof over 

one’s head. This is all happening under a government who has 

squandered our collective future and tries to claim it’s the 

champion of the most marginalized. 

 

I have spent a great deal of time in this speech speaking of what 

was noticeably absent in this Throne Speech. Now I want to 

address one item that cuts to the core of our fundamental right 

as citizens. This is the Sask Party government’s proposal to 

require voter identification in order to vote. The first question 

one must ask is, why is this even necessary? The government 

might answer this is to address fraudulent voting, which would 

be a good response if the Sask Party government could illustrate 

this really is a problem here. According to the Acting Chief 

Electoral Officer, David Wilkie, he is not aware of any recent 

election where the issue of identification came into play. Not a 

problem here. 

 

My next question would be, is this really, is this really the most 

pressing piece of legislation the Sask Party can produce for the 

people of the province? I can tell you people are not flooding 

into my constituency office or stopping me at events to discuss 

the need to address voter fraud. Rather they’re talking to me 

about the need for support to pay their rent or mortgage or 

about the huge wait-list for affordable child care or of their 

struggles with health care and the rising cost of living. Those 

are the issues people are talking to me about. And I suspect 

they’re probably talking to people all around Saskatchewan 

about those issues. 

 

Aside from voter fraud being a non-issue here in this province, I 

have to comment on how this will impact many people who live 

in Saskatoon Riversdale and across the province, for that 

matter. The Minister of Justice made the comment that people 

would have time to get their affairs in order to get ID, and he 

also pointed out that for seniors, SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance] issues picture ID for free. 

 

He seems to say, what’s the big deal? This is no big deal. But it 

is. First of all, the member from Saskatoon Southeast and this 

government clearly have no concept, not a clue, of the kind of 

challenges some citizens face here in this province on a daily 

basis — that sometimes basic survival, putting food on the 

table, getting kids to and from school, and getting to work or to 

school in a day is more than challenging enough. And add to 

that the bureaucratic shuffle of getting photo ID, of getting your 

affairs in order, this is going to be the last priority of 

marginalized citizens who will continue to remain 

marginalized, especially if they cannot vote. 

 

This minister clearly has no idea what some of the barriers to 

obtaining ID can be. Although finances do come into play and 

it’s good that at least seniors have access to free photo ID, there 

are a whole host of other issues. For example, if you have a 

driver’s licence, you are okay. You are in good shape as you 

already have picture ID along with your document with your 

signature, so you can prove who you are. However, if you don’t 

have a driver’s licence, this is where the problem would occur. 

And I would encourage the Minister of Justice to listen to this. 

 

You need to have two pieces of ID to get photo ID, including 

one piece with your signature to prove who you are. Everyone 

has a health card and that has a signature. However the other 

piece of ID that people can obtain is a birth certificate. In order 

to get a birth certificate, you need two pieces of ID. Most 

people are able to get or replace a health card but the other 

piece is harder to get so it becomes a vicious circle. It can be 

even tougher for someone who doesn’t have the correct spelling 

of his or her parents’ names. That happens, Mr. Speaker. That 

happens when you might have been in the foster care system for 

most of your life. You might not know how your parents’ 

names are spelled on the birth certificate. So it becomes 

increasingly difficult, and getting this ID does still cost money, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

If this sounds complicated to you, try being the individual 

attempting to obtain that picture ID. And this, Mr. Speaker, is 

what our Sask Party government wants us to do to be able to 

practise our right to vote. This is shameful, and completely not 

necessary. 

 

On a final note, I just want to talk a bit about potash and how 

these past few months have played out. When the news of this 

hostile takeover first broke, my leader and my party took a 

strong position early on. We’ve been advocating that no matter 

who owns the companies that mine our potash — doesn’t 

matter who: PCS, BHP Billiton, or any other possibility — the 

people of Saskatchewan need to get a better deal for our potash. 

 

This hostile takeover opened the door. This is a great 

opportunity to talk about royalties, to talk about taxes, to talk 

about equity shares, and to talk about a company’s commitment 

to this province. This is about guaranteeing these resources do 

what we need them to do: ensure all the people of 

Saskatchewan have the right mix of programs, services, and 

taxes to live our best lives possible and to fulfill our potential. 

Ultimately this is what the potash file is all about. 

 

It’s absolutely amazing to me that the members opposite could 

ever say my leader and my colleagues gave up — and myself 

for that matter — gave up on Saskatchewan, the line they were 

using last week in this Chamber. This is all Sask Party spin and 

absolutely reprehensible, as nothing could be further from the 

truth, Mr. Speaker. The opposition NDP and our leader are, and 

have been all along, pushing this government and this Premier 

to get what we need for our resources since the emergence of 

this issue, providing real leadership. 

 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5921 

The people of Saskatchewan deserve a plan. Where is the Sask 

Party plan to secure maximum benefit for our resources? We 

haven’t seen any sign of a plan yet, despite asking repeatedly 

during question period in this Chamber for the past few days, 

and despite the fact time is still ticking on the final Industry 

Canada decision. 

 

It would be amusing, if it wasn’t so sad, that the only reason the 

Premier took his position over the past couple of weeks and 

came out, at least on the surface, looking like a leader, was 

simply because his attempt to receive a one-time $1 billion 

payment and some infrastructure money for a domed stadium 

failed. 

 

When he botched his negotiations with BHP Billiton, or as 

these negotiations have been referred to by the media, a tawdry 

shakedown, and BHP Billiton called him out on it, that’s when 

he chose to don his Captain Canada cape, take the NDP 

position, and see the light about social democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

And power to him. He appears to have done it well, at least for 

a week or two. There is no doubt our Premier is the master of 

the spin. 

 

We are all pleased on both sides of the House thus far that 

Minister Clement has not approved the Billiton offer. But we 

want the Premier to shore up our province’s position and to 

encourage PCS [Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.] to 

help us to do so by putting its seven-point advertising pledge 

into a real document with real signatures and real consequences 

for failing to live up to it. A pledge in a newspaper is not 

enough, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’d be remiss actually if I didn’t set the record straight 

today, Mr. Speaker, when the member from Meadow Lake, 

among other members from across the way, have made some 

incredibly disparaging comments about my leader today. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll say it here — and this is not news to anyone who 

knows me — the member from Douglas Park was not my first 

choice in the NDP leadership race. But I have had the 

opportunity this past year to get to know him, to see his 

incredible work ethic, and to see first-hand why my fellow New 

Democrats chose him as our leader. I respect him immensely 

and believe his leadership qualities have shone during this 

potash debate. It is my leader’s knowledge and his approach to 

the potash debate that has helped bring the Premier to the place 

he is today. 

 

I had one of my proudest moments as an NDP MLA last week 

when my leader, the member from Douglas Park, spoke here in 

this Chamber about how we should be tackling the issue of our 

natural resources, how we should be having a debate and 

discussion about this. My leader is thoughtful, knowledgeable, 

passionate, and most importantly, guided by social democratic 

principles — that we should all get to share in the wealth of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, given the choice between my leader or our current 

Premier when it comes to qualities of leadership, experience, 

and depth of knowledge on just about any issue, there is no 

question. The member from Douglas Park is a clear choice. I 

will spend the next year ensuring people in my constituency and 

throughout this province see my leader as I have had the chance 

to get to see him. 

Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment. I will be 

supporting . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . They’re awake over 

there, Mr. Speaker. They’re awake. I will be supporting the 

amendment, and I will not be supporting the motion put forward 

by the Sask Party government. I’m glad to see they’re awake 

over there. They were pretty quiet. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

South. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Well I’ll begin my remarks by congratulating the member from 

Saskatoon Riversdale on not supporting the amendment — wise 

choice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a wise choice indeed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour for me to rise and provide a few 

comments about this year’s Speech from the Throne. 

 

I’d like to begin by commenting on the special importance of 

this current week. Mr. Speaker, this is Veterans’ Week in 

Canada. And all across our country, Canadians are pausing, 

each in their own way, to acknowledge the enormous sacrifices 

made every single day on our behalf by Canada’s regular forces 

and reserve military personnel as well as RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] members stationed overseas. 

Whether it is armed intervention from World War II and the 

Korean conflict in earlier decades, to Iraq and Afghanistan in 

today’s era, or peacekeeping assignments from Suez and 

Cyprus to Bosnia and Rwanda, these courageous women and 

men have placed themselves in harm’s way — far too often at 

great personal cost — to protect Canadians at home and 

oppressed peoples around the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we owe them our freedom and our cherished 

values and our eternal thanks. I’d like to add my sincere and 

abiding thanks to that of all Canadians and certainly all 

members of this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, speaking from a personal perspective, I want to 

offer my thanks to the people in my life who make it possible 

for me to participate in politics, most of all the residents of 

Regina South, the constituency that I have the honour to 

represent in this Assembly, and especially to them for taking 

time to share with me on an ongoing basis their views, their 

opinions, their ideas, and their concerns. It’s greatly appreciated 

and extremely helpful in the discharge of my duties on their 

behalf. 

 

Thanks also to my constituency assistant, Kyle Leonard. He 

helps me stay in touch with my constituents, schedules 

appointments. And not only that. He’s a great website 

administrator, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which is a very fortunate 

thing because I am definitely not. 

 

Thanks as well to my ministerial staff here in the building: 

Darin Banadyga, Kim Jalbert, Heather Howell-Shiplack, Bob 

Krawchuk, and Margaret Huntington. They do a splendid job. 

They support me extremely well. They do scheduling of 

correspondence and research on a very wide variety of 

important issues. 

 

My wife, Jocelyn, of course is a source of enormous support 

and encouragement to me in my work here. She understands the 



5922 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

demands of public life herself and devotes a great deal of her 

time and expertise to civic issues in her role as a member of 

Regina City Council. Jocelyn and I are both tremendously 

proud to be citizens of this great province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I have to say that I have never been more proud to call 

Saskatchewan my home than I was last week when 

Saskatchewan’s Premier and its citizens were at the centre of 

world news for having shown the courage to say no. Our 

Premier said no to a potential takeover of one of our most 

precious and strategic resource industries, Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan. And last week he was backed up by federal 

Industry Minister Tony Clement at Ottawa who agreed that the 

BHP Billiton offer presented no net benefit to Canada. 

 

Our answer demonstrated that while we are most definitely 

open for business, we will make good, sound business decisions 

based on the best outcome for our citizens. And that means that 

we reserve the right on occasion to say no to transactions that 

have the potential to jeopardize job creation, capital investment, 

and authority over natural resources that have national strategic 

value. 

 

I’d like to take this opportunity to publicly thank Regina area 

MPs [Member of Parliament], Ray Boughen, Tom Lukiwski, 

and Andrew Scheer for their support on this very, very 

important issue. At the local level, my constituents have 

expressed their overwhelming approval of our stance on this 

matter and their strong desire that we continue to stay the 

course on their behalf. 

 

Now regarding the Throne Speech itself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the Government of Saskatchewan on behalf of its citizens has 

chosen a new road to pursue. The new road on which we are 

travelling is an exciting one indeed. The level of economic 

activity in our cities and towns, our RMs, and northern 

communities is unprecedented. 

 

[21:15] 

 

In my constituency and nearby, we are experiencing an 

unprecedented number of construction projects, housing starts, 

and employment opportunities. Most notably, construction 

continues on the Global Transportation Hub, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, a new intermodal inland port that will soon become, I 

predict, one of Regina’s and indeed Saskatchewan’s most 

important economic engines. 

 

The provincial government is contributing by building new 

all-weather highways connecting this vital hub with the No. 1 

and No. 11 highways. The Lewvan interchange is proceeding 

right on schedule despite setbacks with wet weather this year 

and is going to make an enormous difference in the safety of 

that intersection that connects the No. 1 Highway and our very 

busy south end. Again funding from the province is helping to 

make this dream become an important reality. 

 

Harbour Landing is already a bustling centre, providing our city 

with new stores and services that they have previously only 

seen in larger centres in addition to a whole new and very 

exciting residential community. 

 

These are indeed remarkable times for the city of Regina and 

for our province. People all over the country are now not only 

aware of what potash is, they are also aware that we have the 

strongest economy in the country and that we are leading the 

nation in economic growth and with predictions saying that we 

will see a GDP [gross domestic product] increase of 3 or 4 per 

cent, which is truly amazing, Mr. Speaker, given the 

circumstances that prevail elsewhere in the country. 

 

Our population is now at an all-time high, over 1.045 million 

citizens. Our employment figures show that we have more than 

5,000 more people working in Saskatchewan than one year ago, 

setting an employment record for the month of September. And 

our unemployment rate is now at 5.5 per cent, almost the lowest 

rate in Canada. 

 

The housing start figures for both Regina and Saskatoon are 

incredibly strong. In fact they have increased by some 60 per 

cent over the same period last year — 60 per cent, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And building permits for commercial construction 

continue at a record pace. 

 

Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the entire country is taking notice of 

our province, Saskatchewan. 

 

A few comments with respect to tourism, Mr. Speaker. Just a 

few days ago, our friends from Tourism Saskatchewan visited 

this legislature and spoke of the increased level of visitation that 

we experienced last year despite a significant downward trend 

experienced in many other neighbouring jurisdictions. The fact 

is that tourism contributed over $1.6 billion in total traveller 

expenditures to our provincial economy in 2009, an increase of 

almost 3 per cent over the previous year. And that’s remarkable 

indeed. It is in fact the number four industry in our province’s 

economy, and it employs some 62,000 Saskatchewan residents, 

an increase this year of 14 per cent over 2009. Again, 

remarkable statistics, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party government understands that the new 

road will include an even greater profile for the tourism 

industry, and consequently we have been investing resources 

into event hosting, a very important aspect of tourism revenue. 

Successful events such as the World Junior Hockey 

Championships in Saskatoon and Regina, the World Women’s 

Curling Championship in Swift Current, and the Back to 

Batoche Festival showed the world that we host world-class 

events and that these events serve to showcase our beautiful 

province to everyone else. 

 

Our continued investment in tourism is showing results. Regina 

will host the World Men’s Curling Championship in 2011. And 

Saskatoon, we were happy to announce recently, will host the 

Canadian Country Music Association Awards the following 

year in 2012. Our province and these two great cities will once 

again be on the national and indeed the international stage. 

 

This government, along with municipal and corporate sponsors, 

took Saskatchewan to the world stage in Vancouver recently for 

the 2010 Winter Olympics and again in Whistler in March for 

the Paralympic Games. We shared the Saskatchewan experience 

with over 120,000 people who visited the Saskatchewan 

pavilion. This dramatically exceeded all expectations. I 

welcome this opportunity to thank our good friends at Sask 

Sport whose staff managed the pavilion so well, together with 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5923 

personnel from Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport — my 

ministry — who dedicated an enormous number of hours 

making sure that Canada and the world learned about 

Saskatchewan and what we have to offer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a final reference on the tourism file is their 

support for the great work that Tourism Saskatchewan and its 

CEO and her staff do each and every day on our behalf. The 

previous NDP government had a commitment to Tourism 

Saskatchewan of some $8 million. This government has 

increased funding to Tourism Saskatchewan to $11.8 million. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s nearly a 50 per cent increase to 

support an agency that is in fact representing the fourth largest 

sector of our provincial economy. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Hear, hear, indeed. So says the 

previous minister for Tourism and Parks. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the NDP had the very best of 

intentions in this regard. I’m sure that if you ask them, they’ll 

tell you that they really, really wanted to do it. And they 

certainly intended to do it. They just didn’t get around to it. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we did get around to it. We did it, and we’re 

proud of that fact. We supported the tourism industry as it 

deserves, with a larger grant and a stable event-hosting pool of 

funds with which to work. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, members may be aware that we have 

participated recently in a comprehensive review of the tourism 

industry itself. Our tourism review, I’m happy to announce, is 

well under way. The participants in the process are very 

supportive of this consultation, and we look forward to a 

stronger, improved system of supports once the review is in fact 

completed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, speaking briefly about parks, if I may. Many of 

the visitors travelling to Saskatchewan come to enjoy our 

beautiful parks. Today, on the new road of this province, our 

provincial parks are more popular than ever before. We’ve 

experienced record visitation in the last three years. The 

statistics are remarkable. Demand is exceeding supply for our 

campsites, and that’s a trend that we fully expect will continue 

into the foreseeable future. 

 

This government sees the new road as an opportunity to create a 

better visitor experience in our parks. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

have invested, in the first three years of our mandate, over $65 

million in our provincial and regional parks for capital projects, 

improved programming, and increased operating grants. This 

amount of investment is 70 per cent more than the previous 

NDP government did in their last three years. Mr. Speaker, a 70 

per cent increase, and that’s the new road for Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government cares for the parks of this 

province. And we’re willing to invest in them, and the statistics 

prove it. 

 

Our promise to electrify 1,000 campsites is we’re doing better 

than expected; in fact, we’re ahead of schedule. As of present 

day, we have electrified nearly 850 sites with more to come 

next year. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we expect to exceed the target 

of 1,000. 

An Hon. Member: — Good news. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Good news indeed, as the member 

from Weyburn-Big Muddy reminds me. Mr. Deputy Speaker, as 

a reminder to members here, especially, the members opposite 

on the NDP side, the last eight years of their park management 

saw electrification increase by a paltry 340 sites. A dismal 

record, Mr. Speaker, amounting to about 40 sites per year. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Forty. We could do that next week. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Absolutely you could. No planning 

for the future. No planning for the recreational needs of our 

province. No planning for tourism and growth, further evidence 

of the lack of vision for our provincial parks and our province. 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the old road of planning — not for growth, 

but decline. That’s giving up on Saskatchewan. That’s giving 

up on Saskatchewan people, and that’s not good enough. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Shame. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Shame indeed. The new road of 

parks investment took us to Buffalo Pound Provincial Park this 

summer, located in the beautiful constituency of Thunder 

Creek, where I had the pleasure of opening a brand new 

campground. This, Mr. Speaker, is in fact a big deal. The Trails 

End campground was the first new campground in a provincial 

park in more than 20 years. Twenty years, surprising as that 

sounds. More than 20 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. With 76 new 

sites along with a fully accessible new service centre, accessible 

campsites. Beautiful indeed. A children’s playground and other 

washroom facilities located throughout the entire campground.  

 

Mr. Speaker, improvements to our parks are happening all 

across this great province. In fact I have a little bit of 

information to illustrate this fact. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It’s all highlighted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — It’s all highlighted, absolutely it is, 

as the member from Kindersley knows full well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more information than we’ll have 

time to recite this evening, but I thought if I just tried to pare it 

down to some of the basic facts, perhaps we could squeeze in 

some of the most important facts here. 

 

Buffalo Pound, as I just mentioned, a brand new campground, 

the first one in 20 years. Remarkable, first one in 20 years. 

Candle Lake, Sandy Bay water treatment plant upgrade; very 

important, safe, clean drinking water, Mr. Speaker. Cypress 

Hills Provincial Park, a brand new maintenance building, much 

needed and much appreciated. Upgraded electrical service at 69 

campsites at the Rainbow campground. Danielson Provincial 

Park in the Diefenbaker area, electrical service to 44 campsites, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. Nearby, Douglas Provincial Park, 

electrical service . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It’s a great park 

indeed. I’ve seen all the parks in that area; they are all fabulous 

parks. 

 

In fact I’ve actually taken the time so far to see more than 

one-third of the provincial parks in our entire system. We are 

blessed. There are 34 in total, 34 in total. 



5924 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

An Hon. Member: — Have you been to 13? 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Absolutely I have . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . All right, well we’re pretty much matched in 

that regard then. Douglas Provincial Park, electrical service has 

been added to 51 campsites, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Now on the other side of the province. Beautiful Duck 

Mountain Provincial Park, new electrical service centre for the 

Birch campground. Echo Valley Provincial Park, electrical 

service has been added to 123 campsites, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

remarkable achievement. Meadow Lake Provincial Park, an 

update of the Murray Doell campground service centre. And 

Moose Mountain Provincial Park, new roof on the staff 

residence. Various locations all around the province, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, new picnic tables and barbecues. And that’s 

just 2010. 

 

I was just wondering, for the member from Biggar, do I have 

time for a couple of more details? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — I do? Then I’ll be happy to continue. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s move on to 2009, the year just past. 

Anglin Lake, a water system upgrade, very important, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. Buffalo Pound, Trails End campground 

development, 76 new campsites, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Candle 

Lake, a service centre replacement at the Sandy Bay 

campground. Duck Mountain Provincial Park, sewage pump 

replacement, also very critical, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Douglas Park, beach shoreline cleanup. Emma Lake, a new 

entry kiosk. Greenwater Lake, vehicle bridge replacement. 

Meadow Lake, electrical expansion at Sandy Beach, Murray 

Doell, Greig Lake, Waterhen campgrounds and 145 new 

campsites, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Also we’re not through yet: 

campground electrical upgrade, Kimball Lake, 53 campsites 

and Greig Lake, 37 campsites. Again all of these improvements 

at Meadow Lake. 

 

Moose Mountain, Fishcreek north service centre replacement 

and also Fishcreek south service centre replacement. At Narrow 

Hills, Lower Fishing Lake outlet control structure replacement. 

Saskatchewan Landing Provincial Park, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

campground renewal and electrical expansion, Sagebrush and 

Bearpaws campground, 74 new campsites. 

 

This is why we’re actually ahead of schedule with campsite 

development, Mr. Speaker: all of these developments in all of 

these provincial parks are going ahead. 

 

And finally at various locations, the National Trails Coalition 

trail development and upgrades, heavy equipment upgrades, 

new equipment and repairs, and as well playground structures 

in a number of different locations around the province. And 

that’s 2009. 

 

I’ll ask the member from Biggar: do I have time to review the 

2008 details? 

 

An Hon. Member: — No. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — I don’t? Probably not? Why don’t 

we just . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member to direct all 

his remarks through the Chair. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — You make a compelling case, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Absolutely. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, improvements to our parks are 

happening all over this great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss, I would indeed be remiss, in 

remiss if I didn’t mention this government’s commitment to our 

sister parks organization, the Saskatchewan Regional Parks 

Association. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have so far delivered over 

$2.1 million to this valuable organization in the first three years 

of our current mandate, well on our way to meeting to the $2.4 

million commitment that we mentioned. And there’s more to 

come. 

 

Once again I remind the province of the previous NDP’s 

three-year spending on regional parks — a paltry $425,000, Mr. 

Speaker. Shameful really when you consider all the good work 

that these fine people do on our behalf. Again, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s the old road. We’ve abandoned the road. We’re pursuing 

a new road for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last week one of the NDP members of this 

Assembly mentioned a fact as he understood it that operations 

funding for Wascana Centre Authority, right here in the capital 

city of Regina, while held at zero increase this year was 

perhaps, with inflation in consideration, some kind of a 

decrease to core funding. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish NDP members would do their 

homework before they offer opinions. I wish they would come 

prepared. I wish they would come to this Assembly ready to do 

a day’s work for a day’s pay. That would be a welcome change, 

Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately it isn’t the case. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the numbers tell a vastly different story. 

I’m happy to have this opportunity to clarify the facts. The NDP 

funding for Wascana Centre — and I remind members this 

information is budget information, freely available for anyone 

in the province to see at their convenience — that amount was 

$2.7 million in fiscal year 2003-2004 and was held at zero, no 

increase at all, for three years. And then on the eve of the 

provincial election, was increased at last to $2.8 million, on the 

eve of the provincial election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[21:30] 

 

Now using Bank of Canada inflation statistics, we find that the 

NDP fell short of even covering inflation costs, Mr. Speaker. 

Not good enough. That’s the old way. Not good enough for the 

new way, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In contrast this government’s very first grant to Wascana Centre 

in the 2008 budget was $2.835 million; an increase, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And the subsequent increases to $2.948 million in both 

2009 and 2010 have exceeded the rate of inflation. That’s the 

new road for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5925 

Let me also remind the members opposite that additional 

investment of $1.2 million in recreational infrastructure was 

made. Now that includes the brand new, beautiful Broad Street 

pedestrian bridge; upgrades to the playing surface at Leibel 

Field to support the activities of the soccer and football teams, 

minor sports; improvements at Candy Cane Park; and also a 

brand new accessible playground structure for the children at 

Wascana Rehab Centre. All of these things were done, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In addition $4.7 million in engineering infrastructure. And 

that’s road repairs; sidewalk, curb, and gutter repairs; light 

standards; mechanical work — all manner of engineering 

infrastructure, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As well, increases to the 

legislative precinct, enhancements from the Capital 

Commission budget totalling $1.2 million. Now altogether, over 

three years, that represents over $7 million invested by this 

government within Wascana Centre for infrastructure. 

 

Now as stated in the Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

new road for Saskatchewan will lead through new provincial 

parks. As this government has committed, we will be planning 

for growth and planning for an increased quality of life for 

residents and for those that visit this great province as tourists. 

My ministry accordingly will begin the process of identifying 

potential park areas and starting a public consultation process 

that will include local communities, municipalities, First Nation 

and Métis residents, and other interested groups. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this past February, we felt as a nation and 

as a province a new level of pride in our athletes as we watched 

and cheered during the 2010 Vancouver and Whistler Olympic 

and Paralympic games respectively. In this Throne Speech, 

announced only a couple of days ago, the new Saskatchewan 

Party government, choosing a new road along with our partners 

at Sask Sport, announced the first-ever high performance 

athlete’s funding program for Saskatchewan. A great advance. 

This program will invest $350,000 annually to support the new 

Saskatchewan program for athletic excellence. This new 

program will provide carded athletes up to $6,000 per year as 

well as developmental carded athletes up to $3,600 per year. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this support program provides a 

natural continuum of support as athletes move from the local 

and provincial systems to national and international levels of 

competition. The program for athletic excellence is amongst the 

best of its type in Canada. This athlete funding will work hand 

in hand with the Sport Canada athlete assistance program, with 

the ongoing support and encouragement of our good friends at 

Sask Sport. Mr. Deputy Speaker, with this new program, we 

will guarantee that we feel the pride once again for our sons and 

daughters in Saskatchewan as they take their place on medal 

podiums for years to come. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s also recall that new money is 

also being made available to increase opportunities in sports for 

athletes with disabilities and also at youth risk as well — other 

important areas where we thought significant improvement was 

needed and very appropriate. 

 

Further, this government’s new five-year lottery agreement, 

signed by my colleague the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy 

in his tenure at TPCS, has allowed Sask Sport to enter into 

long-term funding programs that meet the needs of more sport 

participants in our province than ever before while providing 

their associations with stable, predictable funding. And that 

assists planning activities. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with respect to culture and heritage, 

we are also tremendously proud of the accomplishments of our 

artists and our cultural and heritage communities. They are 

definitely travelling on a new road to greater opportunity and 

prominence than ever before. 

 

Just this spring, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this new government 

introduced a comprehensive policy. It’s called the pride of 

Saskatchewan: a policy where culture, community and 

commerce meet. Its creation was the culmination of very 

extensive consultation with dozens and dozens of cultural and 

heritage groups over the course of 14 community dialogues held 

last year. The policy emphasizes the development of 

co-operative and productive relationships among the number of 

arts, culture, and heritage organizations that exist in our 

province in order for them to achieve a greater number of 

common goals. 

 

One of the goals of the new policy is to increase the economic 

potential of the cultural sector. This is very important, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in terms of ensuring that our artists and our 

cultural workers are able to earn a living in their home province 

pursuing the business that they love and do best, which is 

capturing the beauty and the essence of our home province and 

expressing it to the rest of the country and to the world at large. 

 

One of the actions of our new government is to improve the 

commercial status of our artists through the proclamation of The 

Arts Professions Act, which came into effect this last June, Mr. 

Speaker, a welcome development indeed. No question about it. 

This new Act serves to better promote commercial practices 

through requiring written contracts between engagers and 

artists. The outcome will be improved protection of intellectual 

property and greater economic benefits for all of the artists of 

our great province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, another excellent program introduced by 

this government is the active families benefit, which was made 

effective in January of last year. This incentive program offers a 

tax benefit to families who enrol their children in all kinds of 

cultural, recreational, and sports activities. Parents can receive 

an annual refundable tax benefit of up to $150 per child when 

they enrol their youngsters in art classes, drama classes, dance 

lessons, piano lessons, language lessons. All kinds of cultural 

learning opportunities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are included. 

 

Now just this past spring we also initiated the community 

vitality program through the Community Initiatives Fund. Now 

this important new program which can be accessed by arts and 

cultural organizations will have $9 million allocated to it over 

three years for their use. 

 

In April 2011 our artists will once again be showcased 

nationwide through a national arts festival called the Prairie 

Scene. It’s going to be fantastic. The festival will take place at 

the National Arts Centre as well as numerous other venues 

throughout Ottawa, and will feature artists from all across 

Saskatchewan in a wide variety of genres. And also Manitoba 



5926 Saskatchewan Hansard November 8, 2010 

will be included as well. In fact, Mr. Speaker, on November the 

18th there will be an announcement regarding this important 

event, outlining the details and revealing some of the selected 

performers. It’s going to be an exciting day. I can hardly wait. 

 

Overall, Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy to point out that the Sask 

Party government has in its first three years increased the 

funding to arts and culture — and this is very important, Mr. 

Speaker — to just over $61 million. Now that’s an $11.3 

million increase over the funding allocated to arts and culture 

by the NDP, Mr. Speaker, in its last three years — an $11.3 

million increase. Again a very stark contrast indeed between the 

new road that we are following today and the old road that we 

were obliged to follow before. 

 

Now as for funding to our heritage sector, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

our record is similarly strong. We have increased funding to 

that sector by almost $6 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Once 

again that’s Saskatchewan’s new road. We believe in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would like to wholeheartedly 

endorse the message in the Speech from the Throne. 

Saskatchewan is most certainly on a new road to a strong future 

for our province. We will continue to forge a path to great new 

places the province hasn’t been to before, places the NDP 

government couldn’t even imagine going in the first place. 

 

I’m very proud to be travelling on this government’s new road, 

Mr. Speaker, and I’m proud to support the motion to adopt the 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, at this point, at this point I will sit down. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 

Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise to address the speech, the reply on the Speech 

from the Throne. This is the fourth Speech from the Throne for 

this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yesterday, November the 7th, was the third anniversary of the 

election of the Saskatchewan Party. And in the period leading 

up to that election, it was like the people of Saskatchewan were 

holding their breath. And once the election was held and the 

ballots were counted and the Saskatchewan Party had won, the 

people of this province said, yes, we can go now. And that’s 

certainly been the case across the province. 

 

I was at home for a funeral last weekend, Mr. Speaker, and my 

cousins hadn’t been down to the Cannington constituency for a 

while. One of them’s from Kuala Lumpur. And so driving down 

he says to me afterwards, boy, your roads are sure busy. Under 

the NDP, when he lived here previously, there was no traffic on 

the roads. They never fixed them; that’s part of the reason why. 

But now there was so much business going on in our area that 

the traffic on the roads are constant — constant, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

For myself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just celebrated my 19th year 

in this Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m just starting. I’m still 

very young, and I’ve got a long ways to go, Mr. Speaker. So I 

would like to thank my wife for her support over the years. 

And, Mr. Speaker, she’s prepared to help me and assist me to 

go perhaps even for another 19 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, other members have been talking about their 

constituency assistants. I have the same constituency assistant 

that came to work with me 19 years ago, Mr. Speaker. And I 

know some people might say that’s because nobody else wants 

to work for me but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Jeannie is an excellent 

constituency assistant, Mr. Speaker. And I also have another 

lady that works for me. She’s been there now for a number of 

years — Bonnie — and does a very good job as well. And they 

have different skills, Mr. Speaker, and it works out to be 

complementary. They don’t have the same skills, but they work 

together quite well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a number of issues that I want to discuss 

this evening. One of the issues that I want to talk about is the 

weather, Mr. Speaker. We have had an excellent fall. Because 

of the nice warm weather, the farmers have managed to get all 

their crops in. Mr. Speaker, because of the nice warm weather, 

the hunting season has been very good. I was out on Saturday 

hunting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And one of the things that you’ll notice with the weather, over 

the summer we had lots of rain. Down at Alameda dam, Mr. 

Speaker, I had a few fishermen complaining to me that they 

weren’t catching fish in the normal spots they were at. The 

problem was the dam was full and the water levels were up, and 

so the depths had changed. 

 

Now the Leader of the Official Opposition said he was going to 

walk across that dam, Mr. Speaker, because there would never 

be any water in it. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of my past 

colleagues gave the Leader of the Opposition a Little Mermaid 

fins and snorkel because we didn’t believe he was going to be 

able to walk across it and that he would need a little assistance. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, after looking at the polls this past weekend, 

he needs more than assistance at crossing the Alameda dam, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have many things that I want to say about this 

Speech from the Throne and about the Cannington 

constituency, but I think that needs to wait for tomorrow, Mr. 

Speaker. I would like to move that we now adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cannington has 

moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I move we now adjourn 

the House. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved to adjourn the House. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



November 8, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5927 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands 

adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 21:44.] 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5903 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5907 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5913 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5917 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 5921 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5926 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


