




















































Hansard: April 29, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 53B  THURSDAY, APRIL 29, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5247 

 April 29, 2010 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 13:30.] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Being now 1:30, the House will resume with 

routine proceedings. I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to introduce some folks who have joined us today. And joining 

us from various environmental organizations are — Darrell 

Crabbe from the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, Lorne 

Scott from Nature Saskatchewan. I believe Brent Kennedy from 

Ducks Unlimited was supposed to be here. I’m not sure where 

he is. I would also like to welcome representatives from cattle 

and stock growers associations. My colleague, the Minister of 

Agriculture, will be introducing them shortly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I would like to invite 

the leaders of both the environmental organizations and the 

stock growers and cattle associations to meet with me 

immediately following question period. I know there are some 

concerns over WHPA [The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act] 

legislation. I would like to meet with them, and we can discuss 

those concerns. So I put out that invitation today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to welcome the conservation organizations that are here in 

the legislature visiting the Assembly today. I’m very pleased to 

have these individuals in the legislature today, as they have a 

great interest in the legislation that is passing before the House. 

 

And it’s unfortunate that the minister is only willing to meet 

with them today given that there was been some concern 

expressed for a fair length of time. So, Mr. Speaker, as I said, 

it’s very good to have them here in the House. And we’ve 

invited them to meet with us as well afterwards and we’ll have 

some good productive talks. And I would like all members to 

welcome them to the legislature as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats, the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave to 

make an extended introduction. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave for an 

extended introduction. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, today to you and the members of the legislature, in 

your gallery, I’d like to introduce a number of our producers, 

ranchers and farmers from across Saskatchewan that are very 

interested in the WHPA legislation that’s coming forward, has 

been spoke on for a number of hours in the legislature, and are 

showing their concern today and their support for that Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce, start off with Jack and Kim 

Hextall from Grenfell, if they would wave as I introduce them. 

Jack is the Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s Association president. 

Calvin Knoss from Rockglen. Calvin is the Saskatchewan Stock 

Growers Association president. Rick Toney from Gull Lake, Ed 

Bothner from Beechy, Larry Grant from Val Marie, Orin Balas 

from Ponteix, Harold Martens from Swift Current, Ross 

Beierbach from Consul, Chad McPherson from Regina, Jim 

Warren from Regina, Reg Schellenberg from Beechy. 

 

Reg and his wife, by the way, Mr. Speaker, his wife Shannon’s 

parents, Ted and Olive Perrin, were winners of both the 

Saskatchewan and National Environmental Stewardship Award 

in 2004, and congratulate them for that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also I’d like to introduce Murray McGillvray from 

Radville. Murray and his wife Selena were winners of the 

Saskatchewan Environmental Stewardship Award in 2002. And 

I congratulate the McGillvray family for that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also I’d like to introduce Eric Lawrence from 

Maple Creek. Eric and his wife Anne were winners of the 

Saskatchewan Environmental Stewardship Award in 1999, and 

congratulations. 

 

Terry Ostrander from Hallonquist. Terry’s parents Jim and 

Louise were winners of the Saskatchewan Environmental 

Stewardship Award in 1996. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome all those producers to 

their legislature, and congratulate all of them for the good care 

they take of our Crown land right across the province of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you for coming. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to join with the minister and all 

members of the Assembly in welcoming our producers and 

organizations here today — the farmers and ranchers who do a 

great job of not only producing, but looking after the farm land 

and ranchland. 

 

I would also be remiss if I didn’t give a special introduction to 

our friend, Harold Martens, who served in the Assembly for a 

number of years representing the — I believe at that time — the 

Morse constituency. And we had some great debates in the 

Assembly, Harold, and I’m glad to see you here. And also 

Lorne Scott who has gone on to, I might say, bigger and better 

things, winning national awards. 

 

And I just wanted to say to all the visitors here today, welcome 

to your Assembly. And again, to the minister, thank you for the 

work that you’ve done with these folks and people and we look 

forward to the great debate that’s going on on the use of 

agricultural land but, more importantly, to the land that is 

owned by all Saskatchewan residents. It’s a wonderful 

discussion and we look forward to that debate continuing today. 

 



5248 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways, the 

MLA for Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you to this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to 

introduce in the west gallery a number of dignitaries that are 

here visiting from out of province. We have the Hon. Luke 

Ouellette, the Minister of Transportation from Alberta. Luke, 

we’ll get you to give everybody a wave. 

 

We also have the Hon. Steve Ashton, Minister of Infrastructure 

and Transportation from Manitoba. We have Mr. Daryl Reid 

who is the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for the 

Transcona constituency in Manitoba. And we have a number of 

officials travelling with them as well: Warren Chandler, Tammy 

Forbes, Courtney Mosentine. 

 

They are here for the WESTAC [Western Transportation 

Advisory Council] meetings. I had the opportunity to have 

lunch with them today and I look forward to seeing them again 

tomorrow. And I ask all members to please give them a warm 

welcome to this Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to join with the minister in welcoming our out-of-province 

guests here today. I hope they enjoy their time in Saskatchewan 

and I hope, Mr. Speaker, that most of them had the opportunity 

of flying here because if they would have travelled across 

Saskatchewan roads, I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, they would 

remember that for a long time. But nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, I 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of this Assembly I’d like to 

welcome Mr. Kyle Addison, president of the University of 

Regina Students’ Union, to his Assembly. I was just over this 

morning at the University of Regina for the announcement of 

our new International Education Council, an announcement that 

went very well. And we’re delighted that we were able to do it 

at the University of Regina. 

 

And certainly Mr. Addison’s leadership and his presence this 

morning certainly helped to make that announcement a success. 

So I would ask all members to join me in welcoming Mr. 

Addison to his Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, and to all members of the Legislative Assembly, I’m 

pleased to introduce a few members of SCN [Saskatchewan 

Communications Network] Matters in the west gallery. I can’t 

see everybody up there behind me. 

 

But SCN Matters is a group of SCN fans, viewers, and industry 

professionals who are dedicated to saving SCN. And despite the 

looming deadline of SCN fading to black tomorrow night, the 

group remains hopeful, ever hopeful, that the Wall government 

will see the error of its ways and come to its . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I just remind the member that we’re 

not to refer to members by their names but by their 

constituency. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Pardon me. They’re hopeful that the Sask 

Party government will come to its senses. In particular I’d be 

remiss if I didn’t point out Heather Malek who’s become a 

fixture here in this Legislative Assembly. And I see Jan 

Nowina-Zarzycki, and obviously my Polish hasn’t gotten any 

better. And I’m sorry if I can’t see the rest of you, but I ask that 

all members welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the minister in welcoming Kyle Addison to the Assembly. It’s 

good to see him here. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to 

introduce a few relatives and friends that are in the Assembly 

today who have come to watch the proceedings. If you could 

give a wave when I introduce you. In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 

is Carman Rabuka, who is my brother-in-law. He married 

Esther, my wife’s sister. Carman is a dentist practising in 

Saskatoon and is also a very accomplished musician, plays cello 

with the Saskatoon symphony. 

 

With Carman, I see beside him is Nathanial Gibson, who 

married my wife’s first cousin, Elke Mau. So a few folks on the 

opposite side know the Maus from the southwest corner. We’re 

all very lucky to marry into one of the best families in 

southwest Saskatchewan, I would say. 

 

And also with the group, Mr. Speaker, is Luke Hnenny, Dr. 

Luke Hnenny, who is a third-year neurosurg resident at the 

University of Saskatchewan, a proud Ukrainian from 

Saskatoon. I should point out that also Nathaniel’s wife — and 

he just moved to Winnipeg — she’s doing her medical 

residency in Winnipeg. So they’re gone for four years. We’re 

sad to hear that, but we are happy that they are going to be 

coming back to Saskatchewan, and that’s what we tell them. 

 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to 

introduce in the east gallery — this is like a Broten family 

reunion here today — my uncle, David Rosom, who was able to 

join with the proceedings today. He’s a resident of Regina. So 

I’m very happy that everyone was able to come to the Assembly 

today. I ask all members to join me in welcoming these guests. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are many guests 

that we have that are acquaintances of mine, and I want to 

welcome them. But there’s a few, I have to say, acknowledge 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5249 

the Beechy boys that are here, that being the town I grew up in. 

 

But what I rose to my feet for was to introduce a very good 

friend of mine, Paule Hjertaas. Paule is sitting there giving a 

wave. 

 

I single out Paule because it’s quite obvious that it’s a bit of a 

chore for Paule to appear in public. She’s got allergies — it’s 

beyond that. It’s a severe environmental issue and when Paule 

appears in public, she wears the respirator. Many of us have 

seen her around Regina from time to time, but Paule is someone 

that I have known for 20, more than 25 years. Paule and her 

husband Dale are just super people who care deeply about the 

environment from a very personal perspective. So I’m asking 

all members to join me in welcoming my friend Paule Hjertaas 

to the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to join the member 

from Massey Place in his introduction. The last time that Dr. 

Luke Hnenny was here was during Premier Romanow’s 

induction into this House as premier. And he was here with his 

class, the St. Goretti class. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’d like to, in the east 

gallery, recognize a couple of trade unionists. Tom Graham, 

president of CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] Sask 

is here. And Jen Britton with the SOSC [Save our 

Saskatchewan Crowns] and CEP [Communications, Energy and 

Paperworkers Union of Canada]. I ask all members to welcome 

these people to our legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — It’s also been brought to my attention that 

retired director of broadcasting Mr. Gary Ward has joined us as 

well today. So we extend our welcome. Okay. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned 

about the conditions and the safety of our provincial highways. 

This petition pertains to Highway No. 10 between Fort 

Qu’Appelle and the junction of No. 1. This particular portion of 

the highway is a year-round route for tourists to a tourist 

destination, Mr. Speaker, as well as a highway that serves three 

major inland grain terminals. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and 

the junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety 

of Saskatchewan motoring public. 

 

[Mr. Speaker,] As in duty bound, the petitioners will ever 

pray. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from Fort 

Qu’Appelle and Weyburn, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of the protection of wildlife habitat 

lands. And, Mr. Speaker, there are many citizens concerned 

about this issue currently, and it speaks to the issue that The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act protects 3.4 million acres of 

uplands and wetlands or one-third of all wildlife habitat in the 

province of Saskatchewan in its natural state. And there is 

concern with the government’s actions of repealing the 

schedule listing these designated lands. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately and 

without delay recognize the importance of protection of 

the wildlife habitat lands and immediately withdraw 

proposed amendments that will negatively affect the 

protection of said wildlife lands; 

 

And in so doing, cause the provincial government to 

commit to meaningful and adequate consultations with all 

stakeholders that will be affected by future legislative 

changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens of Moose Jaw, 

Indian Head, Regina, Estevan, Biggar, and Saskatoon. Thank 

you. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition on 

behalf of citizens who know that many Saskatchewan seniors 

live on fixed incomes and are victims of physical, emotional, 

and financial abuse and believe that seniors have a right to 

social and economic security and a right to live free from 

poverty and that Saskatchewan seniors have a right to 

protection from abuse, neglect, and exploitation. The petition 

reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors bill of rights which would 

provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and economic 

security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

And the signatures are from Garrick and Nipawin. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition in support of 



5250 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

maintaining educational assistants, particularly in rural 

Saskatchewan. And as we know, the Ministry of Education is 

considering changes that would drastically reduce the number 

of educational assistants in the province and replace them with 

a much smaller number of professionals such as speech and 

language therapists and psychologists, but we know those folks 

don’t provide front line services. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Cause the government to provide funding for the required 

number of educational assistants to provide special needs 

students with the support they need and maintain a 

positive learning environment for all Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

And this petition is signed by people from Big River, 

Shellbrook, P.A. [Prince Albert], Major, Christopher Lake, and 

North Battleford. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reinstatement of the 

domestic abuse outreach program in Saskatchewan. And we 

know that this program, the domestic abuse outreach program, 

provided a number of valuable services to women victims of 

domestic violence and their children, including helping women 

to find emergency shelter and accompanying women to their 

homes, courts, and the hospital or police station as needed. And 

we know this was cut December 31st without consultation. I’d 

like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to reinstate the domestic abuse outreach 

program as a provincial government service and make it 

available in all parts of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — I rise today to present a petition in support of 

upgrading and repairs to Highway 123 that goes to the 

community of Cumberland House. I will read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to maintaining and repairing 

this highway. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people and leadership in the community 

of Cumberland House and the Cumberland House First Nations. 

I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that has been circulated by the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition, a petition that calls on the Sask Party 

government to live up to its election promise. The prayer reads, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement the promised Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Swift Current and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to present a 

petition in support of financial assistance for the town of Duck 

Lake water project. The petition is being signed by residents 

from all over Saskatchewan because of the exorbitant amount 

that Duck Lake citizens pay for clean, safe water, and that’s 

causing them hardship. The leadership in the community went 

so far as to tell me that folks are moving out of their community 

because of the costs. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks from the town of 

Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present yet another petition on behalf of residents of Furdale 

dealing with another water issue. These customers are no longer 

able to use non-potable water using methods approved by Sask 

Health, although these residents, dealing in good faith with Sask 

Water for over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their 

domestic systems and in-home treatment. An alternative water 

supply referred to by the government ministry is a private 

operator offering treated, non-pressurized water at great cost, 

with no guarantee of quality, quantity, and availability of water. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives, to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5251 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002, and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Furdale and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a 

petition in support of maintaining quality health care services. 

Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan essential 

services legislation is making a mockery out of collective 

bargaining process in this province, Mr. Speaker. The 

Government of Saskatchewan must realize that the utilization 

and value of the full range of professional skills offered by 

health care providers is promoted through the address of 

retention and recruitment issues and that the promotions can 

only be achieved through the commitment of adequate funding 

and installation of good-faith bargaining in the provincial 

collective bargaining process. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Where your petitioners humbly pray that your honourable 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to negotiating a fair and just 

collective agreement with health care providers in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition is signed by residents of Maple Creek. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 

here today to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 

from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive billion dollar deficits put forward by the 

Sask Party and the billions of dollars of debt growth under the 

Sask Party. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Nipawin 

and Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased again to present a petition in support of the 

Saskatchewan film and television industry. This petition is 

signed by residents concerned that this government left the film 

and television industry to languish for two and a half years and 

then dealt a huge blow to the industry with the impending 

closure of SCN, based on ideology rather than good public 

policy. I’d like to read to the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take 

the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to make changes to 

the film employment tax credit that will allow the 

Saskatchewan film industry to be more competitive with 

other provinces, to reverse its decision to shut down the 

Saskatchewan Communications Network, and to work 

with the industry to reverse the decline in film production. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon 

and Regina. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Catholic Women’s League Convention 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on Monday I had the 

opportunity to bring greetings to the 75th annual Saskatoon 

Diocesan Council of Catholic Women’s League convention, 

which took place at St. Patrick’s Parish in Saskatoon in the 

constituency of Saskatoon Fairview. The theme of the 

convention was Women of Hope and Peace, and there were 

over 220 delegates in attendance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Catholic Women’s League and the Diocese of 

Saskatoon consists of 52 separate councils and approximately 

3,200 members. The Catholic Women’s League is the official, 

unified voice of all Catholic women. Some of the good work 

they do includes CWL [Catholic Women’s League] clothing 

depot, harvest suppers, Christmas and Easter teas and bake 

sales, funeral receptions, financial assistance, and the list goes 

on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the work they do in their parishes, the Diocese of 

Saskatoon, as well as nationally and internationally helps make 

stronger and more vibrant communities. Mr. Speaker, please 

join me in recognizing the good work of the Saskatoon 

Diocesan Council President Margaret Schwab along with her 

organizing committee for all their hard work in organizing their 

75th Saskatoon Diocesan Council Catholic Women’s League 

convention. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Celebrating the Roughriders’ 100th Anniversary 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a life-long 



5252 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

member of the Rider nation, it gives me great pleasure to rise 

today to recognize the organization’s centennial anniversary. 

The Roughriders are part of the fabric of Saskatchewan. For 

100 years the fortunes of this community-owned team have 

captivated people living throughout the province. 

 

The team formed on September 6th, 1910, as the Regina Rugby 

Club with gold and purple sweaters. Fourteen years later, the 

team became the Regina Roughriders and were sporting red and 

black uniforms. In 1948 the modern era of the Roughriders was 

born when the team became the Saskatchewan’s team and 

adopted the familiar green and white uniforms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the Roughriders embark on their 100th season, 

the passion for this team has never been stronger. I know that 

the Roughriders organization is paying homage to the 100th 

anniversary with a number of great events and celebrations 

across the province, including an opportunity for one 

community to be named Riderville. On Monday the Minister 

Responsible for SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority] helped Corby Distilleries unveil its commemorative 

Wiser’s small-batch whiskey at the Normanview liquor store in 

Regina. The product celebrates the centennial anniversary and 

is a keepsake that Rider fans will want to have in their 

collection. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate the Roughriders and leave 

you with one thought: green is the colour. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Signs of Spring 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Spring has 

sprung, and the signs of the season are all around us. Here on 

the shores of Wascana Lake, Mr. Speaker, the geese are 

flocking their way home, the jackrabbits are turning colour, and 

the days, Mr. Speaker, are getting noticeably longer. 

 

The Sask Party government isn’t immune to spring fever, Mr. 

Speaker so it’s no surprise that they’re showing some 

symptoms. They may not be honking, Mr. Speaker, but if a 

gaggle of 38 Sask Party MLAs hadn’t laid nine goose eggs 

worth of fiscal foolishness on the province’s bottom line, that 

billion-dollar deficit wouldn’t be coming home to roost. And 

their hides may not be turning colour, Mr. Speaker, but with 

jackrabbit speed they’ve turned the province’s signature colour 

of budget ink from black to red. Deficits and fiscal 

mismanagement aren’t all they’ve sprung on the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They’ve unilaterally forced 

changes to the sitting here in the legislature as a result of their 

own mismanagement. 

 

Spring’s a season of change in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker . An 

April day of summer heat can be followed by an April day of 

winter cold. So it surprised no one, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Government House Leader blew hot for a motion to extend the 

sitting hours of the House and then immediately reversed and 

blew cold to adjourn proceedings right away. 

 

Mr. Speaker, whether they’re mismanaging the books, 

mismanaging our Crowns, or mismanaging the House, it’s no 

wonder people are saying this spring that the Sask Party 

government is as incompetent as the day is long. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Government’s Nursing Strategy 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m proud to 

announce that the Saskatchewan Party government’s nursing 

strategy is moving forward and hitting its targets. In today’s 

Leader-Post the headline reads, “Nurse numbers booming.” 

This is great news for health care in our province. 

 

According to the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association 

recent annual report, there are 506 more nurses who migrated to 

the province in 2009. The rise in the numbers can be attributed 

to our government’s ongoing investment in the nursing 

profession. 

 

The NDP’s [New Democratic Party] history of shortchanging 

nurses essentially shortchanged the people of this province. By 

offering wage increases and more nurse training spaces, the 

profession of nursing in this province has never looked better. 

In today’s Leader-Post article on nursing, Shirley McKay, the 

registrar for the SRNA [Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 

Association] commends the efforts by the government and its 

employees for retaining nurses. McKay goes on to say that the 

economic picture of the province is certainly attractive. 

 

In light of this recent news, it is our government’s hope that the 

opposition will begin to work with our government to 

implement more successful strategies for this province, 

particularly in the challenges facing rural health care. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Resources for Francophone Students 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, this Sask Party government is 

continually breaking promises. The Minister of Education takes 

more seriously his love for photo ops, news releases, and 

making announcements than he does his actual responsibilities 

to provide a quality education. 

 

Finally the French school board got tired of waiting and made 

its own announcement. It is suing the Wall . . . the Sask Party 

government and demanding that the minister acknowledge his 

obligation to ensure that all students, regardless of their culture, 

have a right to a quality education as enjoyed by students in the 

public and Catholic school systems. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Monsieur le Président, hier le Conseil des écoles fransaskoises a 

classé un procès juridique contre le ministère de l’éducation en 

raison de son inhabilité à fournir des installations adéquates 

pour les élèves francophones de Regina. Les étudiants sont 

enseignés dans les couloirs et forcé dans les autres écoles, où ils 

sont niés que leur droit d’être enseigné dans la langue française. 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5253 

Le CÉF est la division scolaire qui gère les 14 écoles 

francophones au Saskatchewan. Selon la Loi sur l’éducation, le 

CÉF est supposé d’offrir une éducation équivalente des 

systèmes public et séparé de Regina. 

 

La réaction du ministre était de se moquer des inquiétudes de 

l'école Monseigneur de Laval. Le gouvernement du Parti 

Saskatchewan a prouvé un manque complet de respect vers les 

communautés francophones. Ce ministre n’a rien montré mais 

l’insensibilité . . . 

 

[Translation: Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Conseil des écoles 

fransaskoises filed a lawsuit against the Minister of Education 

due to his incapacity to provide adequate resources for 

francophone students in Regina. The students are being taught 

in the hallways and forced into other schools where they are 

denied their right to be taught in the French language. 

 

The CÉF is the school division which manages the 14 

francophone schools in Saskatchewan. According to The 

Education Act, the CÉF is supposed to offer an equivalent 

education to the public and separate systems of Regina. 

 

The reaction of the minister was to mock the concerns of 

l’École Monseigneur de Laval. The Saskatchewan Party 

government has proven a complete lack of respect towards 

francophone communities. This minister has shown nothing but 

insensitivity . . . ] 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Moose Jaw North. 

 

Central Collegiate Institute’s 100th Anniversary 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was pleased to 

be in Moose Jaw this morning along with the Lieutenant 

Governor and my colleague from Moose Jaw Wakamow to 

bring greetings and celebrations of the 100th anniversary of 

Central Collegiate Institute in my hometown of Moose Jaw. 

 

This high school has done so much for the community. One 

hundred years is certainly an incredible milestone. The 

longevity of Central Collegiate is linked to the longevity of this 

province. Many of Central Collegiate’s alumni have gone on to 

do so much for the province of Saskatchewan and Canada as 

well as the world. 

 

Lloyd Probert, a retired ophthalmologist in Moose Jaw, 

graduated from this fine institute in 1939. He described the 

Central Collegiate centennial as being a “family affair” in the 

Moose Jaw Times Herald. While Mr. Probert was probably 

referring to the fact that his siblings and children also attended 

Central Collegiate, I’d like to think of Central Collegiate as one 

big family, a family that has been with us throughout the history 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

There’s also the example of Robin Broadway who graduated 

from Central Collegiate in 1960 and then went on to become a 

Rhodes Scholar in 1964. Just recently he was awarded the 

Order of Canada due to his impact on public policy through 

over 30 years of research in economics at Queen’s University. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the House to join me in congratulating the 

staff and the students, both past and present, at Central 

Collegiate Institute on their centennial celebrations. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Checking Numbers 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, it turns out the Sask Party 

ministers must all be using the same calculator. The Minister of 

Energy and Resources stated that provincial potash revenues 

last year would be $3 billion. Just a small mistake, Mr. Speaker, 

he was only off by $3.2 billion. But the minister isn’t the only 

one who better check his numbers. The Provincial Secretary 

believes that 20 per cent, a full one-fifth of the world’s natural 

resources come from within Saskatchewan’s borders. And 

here’s some more Sask Party math, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Premier’s Finance minister predicted a GDP [gross 

domestic product] growth rate of 2.1 per cent for last year and 

stated at the P.A. chamber that Saskatchewan “wouldn’t take 

part in the global recession.” Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve learned 

today that unfortunately our GDP growth shrunk by 6.3 per 

cent, all the while the Premier and his Finance minister had 

their heads in the sand. 

 

Sask Party incompetence must be contagious because 

yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the Minister for Municipal Affairs 

stood up in this Assembly and proudly proclaimed that 

Saskatchewan has the largest population in the country. 

According to him, Saskatchewan has more people in our 

borders than Ontario and Quebec, more than British Columbia, 

and more than Alberta. 

 

Mr. Speaker, maybe this is the same Sask Party logic that took 

$2.3 billion in the bank and, with the addition only of their 

incompetent government, turned it into $1 billion deficit. Mr. 

Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan want leadership they can 

count on, and not leadership that can’t count. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery in 

the front row, is Mr. Justice Ron Barclay and his wife, Mrs. 

Barclay. I will be introducing a motion later this afternoon to 

have Mr. Barclay appointed by the Assembly as the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner, and the motion will be seconded by the 

member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

I will say a little bit more about Mr. Barclay’s history at that 

time, but he is well respected on the Court of Queen’s Bench 



5254 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

and I think both the member from Meewasin and myself have 

appeared in front of him on occasion — and not against each 

other, so I think we can both claim that we were successful. In 

any event, I’d ask that all members join me in welcoming Mr. 

Justice Barclay and his spouse to the Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Quennell: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Meewasin has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know about 

the Minister of Justice, but I can’t remember the occasions 

when I appeared at court and wasn’t successful. 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Quennell: — I think members misunderstand me. That 

goes to my memory, Mr. Speaker, not my legal skills. 

 

I, on behalf of the official opposition, want to join the Minister 

of Justice in welcoming Justice Barclay here. I don’t want to 

predict or, you know, trump the outcome of any motions that 

might take place later on in the Legislative Assembly, but it’s 

again a pleasure to see Justice Barclay and in a situation that is 

probably less stressful than some of the situations the minister 

and I saw him in over the years, for us anyway, Mr. Speaker. So 

welcome to Justice Barclay and to his spouse today. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Walsh Acres 

on her feet? 

 

Ms. Morin: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh Acres has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great pleasure 

to introduce two guests to the Assembly today. Today we have 

with us Uta Bellmann and Katrin Dahlmann. They’re just new 

arrivals from Germany. 

 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in German.] 

 

I’d like to ask all my colleagues to join our guests and welcome 

them to the Assembly today. Thank you so much. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Consultation on Interprovincial Agreement 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Premier 

finally admitted that he was signing the new West partnership, 

an agreement that the government in British Columbia admits is 

really built on TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour Mobility 

Agreement]. Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier, based on 

your own documentation from your last election campaign 

under the title “More Accountable Government,” and I quote, 

“A Saskatchewan Party Government will provide Saskatchewan 

people with more transparency and accountability than any 

previous government.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is, why is the Premier 

breaking his own promise and not sharing this document with 

the public before it’s signed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday the Premier indicated to the Leader of the Opposition 

the broad-based consultation that took place. In September of 

2009, the Crown corporations were consulted. The big city 

mayors were consulted at that time. In October of 2009, the city 

managers . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Well I would ask 

the Opposition Leader to allow the minister to answer the 

question. I recognize the Minister of Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In October of 

2009, the city managers were consulted. The Saskatchewan 

urban association of municipalities was consulted. The 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities was 

consulted. The Saskatchewan Association of Health 

Organizations were consulted. The University of Regina was 

consulted. The University of Saskatchewan was consulted. 

 

In November of 2009, the health regions were consulted. The 

Saskatchewan association of business officials were consulted. 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] was consulted, and school divisions were 

consulted. Mr. Speaker, there has been very broad-based 

consultations on this agreement. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question on behalf of 

the people of Saskatchewan, many who believed the Sask Party 

when they promised consultation on these kind of issues, when 

the Premier said that he would be more open and transparent, 

the public, many of them believed that in fact he would consult 

on this trade deal. He hasn’t done that. And my question to the 

Premier or to the representative of the Premier: when the 

consultation with those few people went on, what about the 

public? What about the million people in the province who 

were promised consultation? Why wasn’t that done, and when 

will this Premier do the consultation that’s needed before this 

deal is signed? 

 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5255 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Official 

Opposition, may like to say that these people represent virtually 

no one. I think the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association represent a few people here in Saskatchewan. The 

rural municipalities represent people in Saskatchewan. The 

health regions represent people in Saskatchewan. There has 

been extremely broad-based consultations with the people of 

Saskatchewan. The only people . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The minister may continue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — There has been extensive consultation with 

the people of Saskatchewan with respect to that. These people, 

the representative organizations have been consulted very, very 

widely on it, and I believe that they’re in agreement that this is 

a very, very good agreement for the province of Saskatchewan 

to enter into. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, the 

member from Kindersley, can talk about the people being 

consulted, but the fact of the matter is the phones are ringing off 

the hook, of people who weren’t consulted and want to be. 

 

But the fact of the matter is, the fact of the matter is the Premier 

has now said, I will sign the deal tomorrow, but there’s an 

opportunity for the public to be consulted and talk about the 

advantages and disadvantages after the deal is signed. Now how 

much sense does it make to promise consultation with the 

public, and in this case sign the deal and then say the debate and 

discussion will go on after the deal is signed? 

 

Now this may be the Sask Party way of doing consultation, but 

my question to the minister is this: when will proper 

consultation with the public at large take place on this 

arrangement and this deal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve indicated, 

there has been very, very broad-based consultation with the 

public of Saskatchewan through their representative 

organizations. That consultation will continue. That is a 

hallmark of what the Saskatchewan Party is all about. We will 

continue to do this, and we’ll continue to go forward with this 

because this provides for a better agreement in terms of 

procurement for health regions, for education. It provides for an 

internal labour mobility agreement. That is something that was 

started under the NDP under Premier Romanow and carried 

forward under Premier Calvert as well. It provides for consumer 

and environmental protections, health and safety standards, 

labour standards. 

 

This is an agreement that moves Saskatchewan forward. The 

only people in this province that don’t want to move forward 

are members of the official opposition. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is right about 

one thing. We don’t want to move forward and talk about $3 

billion, $3 billion in revenue from potash. He’s the minister 

who promised the people of Saskatchewan we would get $3 

billion. And do you wonder why we don’t trust and why the 

public doesn’t trust you? It’s because you don’t get it right, 

that’s why. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the member opposite is this. When 

it comes to consultation, there are many people in this province 

disappointed in that member and that government’s ability to 

consult: people who dealt with Bill 5 and weren’t consulted; 

people who had to live and now have to live with Bill 6, no 

consultations; Bill 80. Bill 80, I’m talking about consultation 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I would ask the 

minister to allow the Leader of the Opposition, the leader to 

propose his question. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — I repeat, people were not consulted on 

Bill 5 and Bill 6 or Bill 80. People who are here from SCN were 

not consulted. This is why there’s distrust of this government’s 

consultation process. 

 

My question is this, my question to the minister is this: will he 

commit today to a legislative review and hold full and 

transparent public involvement and review on this topic, the 

trade deal that is going to affect every citizen of this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Energy and Resources. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, as the Premier indicated 

yesterday and as I’ve indicated, there has been very, very 

broad-based consultation with the representative groups of a 

large number of Saskatchewan people here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I don’t think that anyone on this side of the Assembly 

needs to take any lessons about consultation from that member, 

Mr. Speaker. When that member was involved in a leadership 

campaign here in Saskatchewan, one of the people that were 

involved in his leadership team presented . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 

minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — When one of the members of the Official 

Opposition Leader’s membership team consulted, did he 

consult with the people of Meadow Lake when there was 1,100 

memberships sold without their consultation or consent? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 



5256 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

Consultation on Changes to Legislation 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the Environment minister has 

confirmed as recently as last year that her ministry follows a no 

net loss policy in relation to The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act. Under that policy, when lands are removed from the Act, 

they’re replaced with new lands of similar ecological value. Mr. 

Speaker, the minister is taking 3 million acres of land out from 

under the Act, and she has confirmed that up to 10 per cent of 

this land, or 300,000 acres, may be sold without conservation 

easements attached. 

 

To the minister: how does she plan to replace those lands? 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important 

when we’re having the discussion about any legislation or 

proposal, particularly this one, that we make sure that we are 

using accurate information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 3 million acres are not getting pulled out of 

wildlife habitat protection. As I’ve said before, an evaluation 

was done on the land, Mr. Speaker. There is going to be a large 

chunk of land that stays under The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act. There’s another chunk of land that will be pulled out to be 

sold with conservation easements, and it’s a very tiny portion 

that can be sold without restriction. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the vast majority of the land that is currently 

under protection will continue to be under protection, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think it’s important, as I said, that if we’re going 

to have this discussion that we have the accurate facts in front 

of us. Mr. Speaker, of those 3 million acres, the vast majority 

will continue to be under protection in this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, the 3 million acres are no longer 

going to be protected under legislation. They’re going to be at 

the whim of the minister, Mr. Speaker. That’s how they’re 

going to be protected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just 50 per cent of the critical habitat land in this 

province is currently owned by the Crown. The other 50 per 

cent is privately held. Some of that land is no doubt available 

for purchase. The minister could replace those acres if she 

wanted to. Mr. Speaker, the minister claimed that she consulted 

with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations about this 

legislation. Vice-chief Lyle Whitefish says that just isn’t true. 

And other groups here today, like the Wildlife Federation, say 

the minister didn’t consult them either. 

 

To the minister: does she define consultation as telling people 

about decisions she’s already made after the fact? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the contact that we had 

with various groups happened last summer. On June 18th, 2009, 

both the Ministry of Environment and the Ministry of 

Agriculture met with representatives from Nature Conservancy 

of Canada, Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, Nature 

Saskatchewan, and Ducks Unlimited. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on June 29th a workshop was held to discuss all of 

this, both the methodology behind it, the changes that we were 

proposing to WHPA legislation and The Conservation 

Easements Act. Mr. Speaker, there’s a long list of folks on that 

list including the Wildlife Federation, the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Saskatchewan Cattlemen’s 

Association, Mr. Speaker. Some people were able to attend, 

others weren’t, but everybody received the information package 

with a request that they contact us for follow-up information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a technical meeting was held on July 22nd 2009 

where Nature Conservancy of Canada and Ducks Unlimited 

attended. There was also representations made to the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, Mr. 

Speaker. And as I said earlier, I invite those representatives to 

meet with me again today for further discussion. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, once again we see we’re going to 

have consultations with groups after the decision has been 

made. Talking about an ecological assessment of those lands is 

not the same as taking those lands out from legislation and 

putting them in regulation under the whim of the minister, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The minister is taking three million acres out from under the 

protection of the Act and giving herself the power to sell them 

off without any public consultation. She tells us that most of the 

land that will be sold off will have a conservation easement, but 

the changes she’s making to The Conservation Easements Act 

will make it almost — not almost — but will make it 

impossible for the public to challenge any of her decisions with 

respect to those easements. 

 

Instead of an open and transparent process in full public view, 

the minister wants the power to make decisions behind closed 

doors, decisions that the public can’t challenge. To the minister: 

why does she believe that she has the right to make decisions 

without being accountable? 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d like to just remind our 

guests that they’re more than welcome to join us today, but they 

are asked not to participate in any form of the debate. I thank 

them for recognizing the rules of the Assembly. I recognize the 

Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said in 

my first answer, I would hope that we can have some accurate 

information on this. Three million acres are not being pulled out 

of The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. The Act remains. There 

will still be a large portion of land that is covered under that 

legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on the issue of conservation easements, 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5257 

conservation easements are used by groups in our province. 

There’s over 200,000 acres currently being held through 

voluntary conservation easements with groups like 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, the NCC [Nature 

Conservancy of Canada], and other such groups, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The difference between the conservation easements that they 

use and the conservation easements that we use is, Mr. Speaker, 

that they’re mandatory. They are tied to this land. There is a 

mandatory easement that will be attached. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

thank the member for Regina Lakeview last night. He referred 

to them as super easements, Mr. Speaker, and I absolutely agree 

with that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here is what’s not so super: 

the fact that they are going to be subjecting all Crown land is in 

the minister’s explanatory notes. The fact that The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act is now going to be containing four pages 

instead of the massive document that it was before, protecting 

those lands, now will no longer exist, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a pattern with this minister, and it’s the 

reason that so many people are concerned about this. She makes 

promises on climate change, but won’t put the targets in 

legislation. She tears up 16-year agreements with a phone call 

on budget day. And she’s brought in far-reaching changes to 

The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act without proper consultation 

and then made it impossible for her decisions to be challenged. 

Mr. Speaker, the people deserve an opportunity for their 

concerns to be heard. 

 

To the minister: will the government agree to public hearings 

on this Bill to allow stakeholders and concerned members of the 

public to share their concerns and their ideas for improving the 

Bill? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, starting as early 

as last summer we had contacted various organizations. All of 

the information on our proposals were presented to those 

organizations, Mr. Speaker. And I have to say that in my 

ministry, in my office we’ve received, I would say, virtually no 

feedback on these proposals, Mr. Speaker. But as I said earlier, 

we will continue to meet with those stakeholders, I’ve extended 

the invitation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we believe in the 

principle of landownership. We also believe in the principle of 

habitat protection and protecting our environment, but, Mr. 

Speaker, we don’t believe that they are exclusive from one 

another. As we heard earlier today, landowners and users are 

the best stewards of that land. They get national and provincial 

recognition for the use of their land, Mr. Speaker. We have 

absolute confidence in the people that are using that land, Mr. 

Speaker. It is to their benefit, it is to the provincial benefit, and 

we have confidence in those folks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale.  

 

Saskatchewan Communications Network 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in a 

recent meeting with SCN Matters, the Minister of Tourism, 

Parks, Culture and Sport admitted the decision to privatize SCN 

did not come from him or his department. He also said the 

decision was made at the last minute. While the minister was 

busy learning his portfolio, the people who make the real 

decisions in this government decided to privatize 

Saskatchewan’s public broadcaster. 

 

To the Premier: who made the decision to privatize SCN? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to have 

the opportunity to clarify what was said at a meeting a couple of 

days ago with the members of the SCN Matters group. Mr. 

Speaker, we had a very thorough discussion about the decision 

that was made. We obviously came to an agreement to disagree 

on the decision but, Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport, I take full responsibility for 

the decision that was made. And that decision stands, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t surprising to learn 

axing SCN wasn’t the minister’s idea. This government and this 

Premier have demonstrated time and again their top-down 

approach to decision making. Mr. Speaker, if SCN goes off the 

air tomorrow at midnight as planned, it could lose its CRTC 

[Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 

Commission] broadcast licence and its coveted space on the 

dial, making its remaining assets considerably less valuable to 

any buyer. 

 

The minister suggested to one media outlet that he might keep 

SCN on the air past tomorrow, but the remaining employees are 

preparing to fade to black as they have not been told otherwise. 

To the minister: is SCN going off the air tomorrow at midnight 

or not? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, when the budget came 

down in the province of Saskatchewan last March 24th, as we 

announced the SCN decision, we also announced that we would 

be putting together a team that would explore the possibilities 

of transferring the licence over to another interested party and 

also selling off the broadcast assets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that expression of interest process has lasted the 

last two weeks. It does end Friday at 2 o’clock, tomorrow at 2 

o’clock, Mr. Speaker. At that time if there are no proposals that 

come forward, Mr. Speaker, then broadcasting of SCN will 

conclude at the end of tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 

 



5258 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

If there is a proposal that comes forward that merits further 

study and review, Mr. Speaker, the broadcast operations can 

continue into the month of May while we discuss that, Mr. 

Speaker, but at this time I won’t presuppose whether or not 

proposals will be coming forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, as we’ve heard, the government 

has imposed an extremely tight time frame, just two weeks for 

people to express interest in purchasing SCN. That deadline, as 

we’ve heard, is tomorrow. The deadline in that expression of 

interest for approving a sale is one month from now, May 31st, 

and the government plans to transfer the assets of SCN to its 

new owners just two months from now, June 30th. 

 

With such tight timelines, the government must have a buyer 

waiting in the wings. To the minister: who does the government 

have lined up and how long has this buyer known about the 

government’s plans to privatize SCN? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said to the member 

opposite in previous discussions on this topic, we certainly, 

prior to the expression of interest period, we certainly had a 

number of individuals that called and emailed and contacted the 

government to determine whether or not there was an 

opportunity to take over the broadcasting of SCN. In fact the 

member from Lakeview on budget day introduced me to an 

individual who asked if the government was interested in 

transferring the licence and the assets, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other thing I want to clarify for the member is, while the 

expression of interest was a two-week period, Mr. Speaker, the 

decision was announced on budget day. And in the news release 

of March 24th, it clearly says that a team would be put together 

to explore whether or not there was interest for somebody else 

to operate SCN going forward in the future, Mr. Speaker. So 

that is over five weeks of time that people have had to put forth 

proposals, and we will see after tomorrow at 2 o’clock whether 

or not there is any interest, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know whether 

that’s going to be happening though, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the government announced its 

plan to shut down SCN just five short weeks ago — five weeks 

ago. If they were truly interested in a fair and open process, they 

would not be imposing such a tight deadline for people to 

express interest in buying SCN. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The short time frame makes it impossible, for example, for 

people in the film and television industry to even consider 

putting together a bid. Mr. Speaker, these people understand the 

crucial role that SCN plays in telling Saskatchewan stories and 

in leveraging out-of-province investment, but the government is 

shutting the door on this option. 

To the minister: will he extend the deadline for accepting bids 

to ensure everybody has a fair opportunity to make a bid, or is 

the process been rigged to favour the government’s preferred 

buyer? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat to the 

member opposite that the public, whether that be individuals or 

organizations, have had five weeks to determine whether or not 

they want to put forward a proposal, Mr. Speaker. The 

expression of interest has been a two-week period, Mr. Speaker, 

but people have known about this for five weeks whether or not 

they want to come forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the expression of interest does say that . . . Or as I 

have said, Mr. Speaker, is that if somebody does come forward 

and we need more time to study the merits of their proposal, 

that we’d be very interested in looking at extending the 

broadcasting into the month of May while the details are 

worked out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I want to correct the member that there is no preferred 

buyer that is waiting for government, Mr. Speaker. In fact I’m 

not even sure we will have anybody come forward by 2 o’clock 

tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

State of the Provincial Economy 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In this 

morning’s Leader-Post it reported that Saskatchewan’s 

economy is at its lowest point since 2005. Here’s a quote from 

the article. I quote, “So, in real terms, Saskatchewan’s economy 

is operating at the same level of output as it was four or five 

years ago . . .” Another quote, “In other words, we just lost all 

of the gains we made . . .” All of the gains, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To the minister: why is the Sask Party turning back the clock on 

Saskatchewan’s economy, and why won’t they give the straight 

goods to Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, there’s no question that 2009 was a difficult year 

around the world. It wasn’t just here in Saskatchewan, it was 

around the world. In Canada, in the United States, Europe, 

really across the world the economies of countries were affected 

negatively in 2009, and we said all along that Saskatchewan’s 

economy was not immune from those forces. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we have to also recognize what remarkable 

achievements happened in 2009. We’ve created more jobs than 

any other province in the country in 2009. Our population grew 

to unprecedented numbers in 2009, Mr. Speaker. The average 

wages went up, Mr. Speaker. All of these things happened in 

2009. In the midst of a world-wide recession, Saskatchewan 

fared better than most jurisdictions on many indicators in the 

economy. 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5259 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, a couple other facts from 

2009 — $1 billion deficit put forward by that Finance minister, 

Mr. Speaker. The second largest contraction in all of Canada at 

6.3 per cent, Mr. Speaker, another fact from 2009. All we get 

from this government is spin, empty rhetoric, and it’s 

disingenuous, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yesterday the Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation claimed that our economy was, I quote, “never 

growing before we became government.” That’s the talking 

point, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier wants the ministers to use, 

but we know it’s not even remotely true. Under the Sask Party 

our economy has not grown, it has shrunk back to 2005 levels. 

Why are the Premier and his cabinet ministers not telling 

Saskatchewan people the truth about the state of our finances 

and about the state of our economy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in the face 

of a global, world-wide recession that is worse since anything 

experienced since the 1930s, Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan has 

improved its position in many indicators. And I would like . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d ask . . . Order. I’d 

ask the members to allow the minister to respond to the 

question presented by the member from Regina Rosemont. I 

recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, just recently BMO said, 

and I quote, “But with commodity prices and global demand 

rebounding, Western Canada should remain atop the provincial 

leadership board again this year.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, just today the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan released their first quarter report, the second 

highest sales in the first quarter report at any time in the future. 

Clearly the industry is rebounding. Clearly Saskatchewan was 

negatively affected by the drop in sales of potash last year, and 

clearly the industry believes in its future. Why do not the 

members opposite believe in the future of Saskatchewan? 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 137, The Safer 

Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2010 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister Responsible for Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 137, The 

Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2010 

without amendment and that the Bill be now read the third time. 

Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 137 — The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods 

Amendment Act, 2010 
 

Hon. Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing that 

Bill No. 137 . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I’d ask members to allow us to 

proceed without a lot of interference so we can hear what’s 

going on when we’re moving through this stage of the Chamber 

this afternoon. 

 

It has been moved by the Minister Responsible for Corrections, 

Public Safety and Policing that Bill No. 137, The Safer 

Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2010 

without amendment be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 



5260 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 119, The Ticket Sales Act 

with amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill, and this 

Bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

119, The Ticket Sales Act with amendment and that the Bill and 

its amendments be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read the first 

time? 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 119 — The Ticket Sales Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that the amendments be now 

read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to the third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 119 — The Ticket Sales Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

that Bill No. 119, The Ticket Sales Act with amendment be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 

143, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2010 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 

to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

143, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2010 without 

amendment and that the Bill be now read the third time. Is leave 

granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 143 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

 

Hon. Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 

that Bill No. 143, The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

without amendment be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5261 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 121, 

The Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009 with 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 

leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 

Bill and that the Bill and its amendment now be read the third 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 121, The 

Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009 with 

amendment and that the Bill and its amendments be now read 

the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 

time? I recognize the minister. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 121 — The Environmental Management and 

Protection Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

amendments be now read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 

amendments be now read the first and second time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 121 — The Environmental Management and 

Protection Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 

Environment that Bill No. 121, The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act, 2009 with amendment be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 123, The Forest 

Resources Management Amendment Act, 2009 with 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill and its amendment be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 123, The Forest Resources Management 

Amendment Act, 2009 with amendment and that the Bill and its 

amendments be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 

Bill No. 123 — The Forest Resources Management 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 

time? I recognize the minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — I move that the amendments be now 

read a first and second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 

Environment that the amendments be now read a first and 

second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 



5262 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 

reading of the amendments. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 123 — The Forest Resources Management 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for the Environment that Bill No. 123, The Forest 

Resources Management Amendment Act, 2009 with amendment 

be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy 

Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on the Economy 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 

Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 131, The 

Conservation Easements Amendment Act, 2009 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister Responsible 

for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this Bill and that 

the Bill be now read the third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 131, The Conservation Easements 

Amendment Act, 2009 without amendment and that the Bill be 

now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 131 — The Conservation Easements 

Amendment Act, 2009 
 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — I move that this Bill be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for the Environment that Bill No. 131, The 

Conservation Easements Amendment Act, 2009 without 

amendment be now read the third time and passed under its 

title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I seek leave to present a 

resolution for the appointment of Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has asked for leave to 

move by resolution regarding the appointment of the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Appointment of Conflict of Interest Commissioner 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the 

conclusion of my remarks I will be moving a motion that the 

Honourable Mr. Justice Ronald L. Barclay of the city of Regina, 

who is in the gallery today, be appointed to serve as the Conflict 

of Interest Commissioner by this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members of this Assembly will know that The 

Members’ Conflict of Interest Act establishes the Office of the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner as an independent officer of 

this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the commissioner’s role in the operation of the 

legislation is vital. Members are required to disclose all their 

personal and business interests and those of their spouse and 

dependent children to the commissioner for use in a public 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5263 

disclosure statement. The commissioner also serves as a 

counsellor to, if not the conscience of, the members of this 

Assembly with respect to conflicts issues. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, 

the role of commissioner is one which requires the utmost trust 

of this Assembly. The commissioner meets with each member 

of this Assembly to assist them in ensuring that they have 

complied with all responsibilities under this Act. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Members of this Assembly will be familiar with Mr. Justice 

Barclay’s recent service as a distinguished jurist with our 

Saskatchewan Court of Queen’s Bench. Justice Barclay was 

called to the bar in Saskatchewan in 1960. He articled with Tom 

Gauley in Saskatoon and worked there until 1962. From 1962 to 

1966 he served with the provincial Attorney General in the east 

wing of this very building. In 1966 he joined the firm of 

MacPherson Leslie Tyerman here in Regina and served there as 

an active senior litigator for some 20 years. He was appointed 

Queen’s Counsel in 1979 and at the time of his appointment to 

the Court of Queen’s Bench in 1986, he was head of the 

litigation department at MacPherson Leslie Tyerman. 

 

Following his appointment to the court, Justice Barclay was 

also active in a variety of governance roles on behalf of the 

court. He served as national president of the Federal Judges 

Association starting in 2003 as well as serving as the 

Saskatchewan representative on the national committee of 

judicial ethics for a three-year term. 

 

Most recently Justice Barclay received the 2010 Distinguished 

Service Award from the Canadian Bar Association and I 

understand he will soon be receiving a Lifetime Achievement 

Award from the Trial Lawyers Association of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure, following consultation 

with members of this Assembly through the Board of Internal 

Economy, that I put forward the Honourable Mr. Justice Ronald 

Barclay for consideration of this Assembly for this position. I 

encourage all members of this Assembly to join me in 

supporting his appointment. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

conclude my remarks by making the following motion which 

will be seconded by the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

I move: 

 

That this Assembly appoint the Honourable Ronald 

Barclay, Q.C., of the city of Regina in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Conflict of Interest Commissioner pursuant 

to section 18 of The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice: 

 

That this Assembly appoint the Honourable Ronald 

Barclay, Q.C., of the city of Regina in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Conflict of Interest Commissioner pursuant 

to section 18 of The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

speak to the motion made by the Minister of Justice, and to 

express the support of the members of the official opposition 

for the appointment of Justice Barclay to this position. I concur 

with all the remarks that the minister made about the 

importance of the office and the service, experience, and 

character of His Lordship, Justice Barclay. 

 

I’d like to add to his comment that the commissioner requires 

the utmost trust of this Assembly, our comments that this 

position — like other positions, independent positions, 

independent officers of the legislature that are particularly 

responsible for governance of the conduct of members — 

requires also the utmost trust and confidence of the public. And 

as in judicial appointments, all the legislation and rules in the 

world are no replacement for character and judgment. And we 

believe that in the character and judgment of Justice Barclay, 

we have found a more than suitable appointment for the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner. 

 

And so it’s with those words, and those very brief words — 

partly because His Lordship and Mrs. Barclay are seated in very 

uncomfortable chairs at the moment, sitting at the moment and 

with those very brief words — I wish to, on behalf of the 

opposition, express support for this appointment. 

 

Justice Barclay will have heard kind things said about him 

today. We know from earlier proceedings in the Chamber this 

sitting that when he retires from this position, he will again hear 

kind things said about him. In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, his 

character and unfailing courtesy will have to carry him through. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the Minister of Justice: 

 

That this Assembly appoint the Honourable Ronald 

Barclay, Q.C., of the city of Regina in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Conflict of Interest Commissioner pursuant 

to section 18 of The Members’ Conflict of Interest Act. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — With leave to introduce a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted for introduction of guests? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before they 

leave the gallery, I just wanted to, to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly, introduce Byrna Barclay who is in 

the gallery today with her husband, Justice Barclay, on this very 

special occasion. 



5264 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

Byrna serves very ably as the Chair of the Saskatchewan Arts 

Board and I want to tell all members how much I enjoy the 

working relationship that we have developed over certainly the 

short time that I’ve been Minister Responsible for the Arts 

Board. And I look forward to that in the future. And I would ask 

all members to join with me in welcoming Byrna Barclay to her 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 1,552 through 1,554. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1,552 through 1,554 are ordered. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

The People’s Trust 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

today to enter into debate on a motion that I will be reading 

later in the Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a motion that is 

consistent with many of the concerns that the official opposition 

has been raising for the weeks of this spring legislative sitting. 

And it’s a motion, Mr. Speaker, that cuts to the heart of the 

issue, the concern that Saskatchewan people are feeling and 

experiencing with the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because time and time again what members of the public, what 

Saskatchewan people are experiencing from the Sask Party 

government is that of government members breaking the trust 

that they have established with the people of Saskatchewan, 

breaking the trust that they promised to the people of 

Saskatchewan based on the things they said during the election 

campaign, based on the things that they have said since they 

have been elected to government. 

 

And we see a number of instances of this issue, Mr. Speaker, 

where the Saskatchewan Party government is having a 

consistent track record of breaking trust. Today in question 

period, Mr. Speaker, we saw some very clear examples of 

breaking the trust with the people of Saskatchewan by the failed 

approach to consultation. Time and time again through question 

period and through the question periods we’ve seen throughout 

this sitting, we’ve seen examples where consultation has been a 

failed consultation, where consultation has been inadequate, and 

it’s occurred after the fact, Mr. Speaker — whether it’s 

examples like educational assistance cuts where the idea is 

floated out there and is suggested to be policy but then there is a 

retraction, Mr. Speaker, whether it is on issues of the 

environment where members opposite will say they want 

consultation but it’s at the very last hour, or it’s after the fact of 

the matter that legislation has been passed that consultation 

does take place. 

 

So we see through question period, Mr. Speaker, that when it 

comes to breaking the trust with the Saskatchewan people, 

members opposite are very consistent. We also see, Mr. 

Speaker, a consistent pattern of breaking trust with the people 

of Saskatchewan in the area of finances. 

 

And it was very clearly stated to Saskatchewan people that 

members opposite could be trusted with the finances. And we 

saw some promises made early on in the campaign, Mr. 

Speaker. The members opposite said they were going to 

manage the province’s resources in a responsible and safe 

manner. We’ve clearly seen the opposite. 

 

And last week’s motion in private members’ debate spoke to 

that aspect where the motion was put forward by members 

opposite, and it was basically a let’s pat ourselves on the back 

kind of motion. It was a motion saying we have delivered a 

good budget. Well, Mr. Speaker, if you talk to anyone in the 

public, if you talk to people out in the community, people that 

have experienced cuts through SCN, people that have 

experienced cuts through chiropractors, people that are 

experiencing cuts on a number of fronts, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 

think that they’re agreeing that it was a quality budget. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, for today’s private members’ debate, the 

motion that we are considering is another motion which points 

out the shortcomings that this government has with living up to 

its word, with living up to its promises, and living up to the 

level of trust that the people of Saskatchewan have placed in 

their control. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the three areas that we’ll be focusing on today 

through the debate are three very clear examples where 

members opposite certainly cannot be trusted, where members 

opposite have said one thing and are doing another. The one 

example, Mr. Speaker, that will be addressed by other 

colleagues — and I may make some remarks on it, Mr. Speaker 

— is the meddling that has occurred by members opposite in 

the selection of the Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

And just moments ago in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we 

appointed a new Conflict of Interest Commissioner, an 

independent officer of this legislature. And the comments made 

by the member from Meewasin . . . I hope members opposite 

heard those comments and not only heard them but took them to 

heart because he clearly said that the importance for 

independent officers of the legislature . . . We can’t pick and 

choose, as MLAs, which officers we like, which officers we 

don’t like. We can’t pick and choose which officers we’re going 

to listen to and which officers we’re going to ignore. And sadly 

what we have seen with the Sask Party government, in its bit 

over two years in office, are some fairly concerning actions 

with respect to the Chief Electoral Officer and the role that he 

has in ensuring that we have fair and free elections in the 

province. So I’ll allow other members to comment on that. 

 

Another area, Mr. Speaker, where we have certainly seen some 

problems from members opposite is with how they are ignoring 

a ruling from a United Nations body, the International Labour 

Organization. And we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, in recent weeks, a 

very clear example where a United Nations body — a body that 

represents individuals from government, from labour, from civil 

society — have made a ruling based on the actions of the Sask 

Party government, a ruling that is not in favour of the actions of 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5265 

the Sask Party government, and have called for action to reverse 

or called for actions to fall in line with the ruling and correct 

their behaviour. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we see shortcomings in the area of the Chief 

Electoral Officer. We see shortcomings in the area of respecting 

rulings by a United Nations body. 

 

Another area, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve had the opportunity to 

speak to this issue on other occasions in the Assembly tied in 

with discussion on Bills. But we’ve also seen very concerning 

behaviour through allegations that members of the Sask Party 

government have inappropriately, inappropriately taken 

millions of dollars from another political party in order to serve 

their own purpose, their own aim. And, Mr. Speaker, these 

allegations are very serious because they tie in with the 

concerns that we see on the area of the Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

Now we, as elected officials in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we 

have to put our faith and trust in the process. We all compete in 

open, we want to compete in open and free and democratic 

elections at the local level. That’s how we end up in this 

Assembly. And the integrity of that process is of the utmost 

importance for Saskatchewan people. So when we see actions 

that are contrary to open, free, and fair elections, I know that is 

a worry for people that are in this Assembly and a worry for 

people outside of the Assembly as well. Thank you to the 

officials who fixed the clock. I appreciate that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, last week when we looked at the area of how the 

Sask Party government has broken trust with the Saskatchewan 

people through delivering a failed budget . . . how they have 

gone from a position of having huge surpluses to huge deficits, 

how in a few short years, Mr. Speaker, they have managed 

somehow to mismanage the books in such a way that the 

provincial finances, Mr. Speaker, are no longer being taken care 

of in a responsible manner, that people in Saskatchewan can no 

longer trust that things are on solid ground because of the 

actions of the Sask Party government. And we’ve seen this with 

the pie-in-the-sky, fantasyland budget projections of putting all 

their eggs in one basket and hoping that we would bring in over 

$3 billion in potash revenues. That was one problem. 

 

More recently, Mr. Speaker, in the last budget, we’ve seen how 

the members opposite have engaged in financial trickery, have 

changed the way that traditional practices of accounting have 

occurred in the province and changed these midstream in an 

election term. And to all Saskatchewan people that raises a 

number of red flags because when changes like that are made in 

midstream, it causes people to ask what are members opposite 

trying to hide — changes in how debt is recorded, changes in 

what spending needs are, changes in how all this information is 

clearly and transparently provided to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when I was making comments last week on 

the Sask Party government’s failed approach to budgeting, I 

shared a story with the people watching at home and members 

in this Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, it was a story of a young 

man named Walter. And it was a story of Walter’s quest for 

love and how Walter had his eye on a certain woman, how he 

set himself up, pretended he was something that he wasn’t in 

order to eventually end up with this woman, but how at the end 

of the day his actions were causing his partner to worry because 

his actions . . . He said he was a sound fiscal manager, and he 

could run the family household well, but it turns out that he was 

a failure in doing that. 

 

[15:00] 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s another story about Walter that I 

think speaks to the concerns that we see with the Sask Party 

government in the allegations that they have taken $3 million 

from another political party. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s the story of 

Walter and his love for the game of football. 

 

When Walter was a young man, Mr. Speaker, there was nothing 

more than he loved than football. He would spend all his time 

going to games. He would spend all his time reviewing the 

statistics. He would spend all his time looking up to these 

football players because to them they were a picture of strength, 

a picture of good athletes, and a picture of the type of individual 

that they would like to be in life. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there was one team that Walter loved the most 

and, Mr. Speaker, this team was called the Proud Cougars. And 

the Proud Cougars, Mr. Speaker, did have a good deal of 

organization at the team level, and they had gained a fair 

amount of success as a football team. Well spring tryouts were 

coming along, so Walter worked as hard as he could. He was 

running laps around the football field. He was lifting a few 

weights. He was trying to eat well. He was trying to get in the 

best possible shape, Mr. Speaker, that he could make the team. 

Well tryouts came, Mr. Speaker, to join the Proud Cougars, his 

favourite team. And it didn’t go well. Walter, he wasn’t fast 

enough. He wasn’t strong enough. He couldn’t memorize the 

plays properly. So while his heart was in it, Mr. Speaker, he 

simply didn’t have the ability to make the team. 

 

So when the coach told him this, Walter was devastated. He 

said please just let me be involved with the Proud Cougars in 

some way. I’ll even be the water boy. And while, Mr. Speaker, 

the coach, who had a good reputation — he came from the 

university campus and had a farm background and people 

thought fairly well of the coach at the time — he said okay 

we’ll let you be the water boy, Walter, so long as you do a good 

job. 

 

Well Walter poured himself into this job. Every opportunity he 

ensured they had plenty of cups all the time. He hauled around 

huge bags of ice, many bags of ice, sometimes 60 pounds of ice, 

a significant amount of ice. And he always ensured, Mr. 

Speaker, that there was an adequate supply of beverages — of 

water, Gatorade — and other things that the Proud Cougars 

needed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well the Proud Cougars had a good run as a team, but as all 

things come to an end, Mr. Speaker, as things come to an end, 

they eventually had problems with their team management, had 

problems with the players, and the good fortune that they 

experienced as a team came to an abrupt halt. And many of the 

Proud Cougars found themselves in a bad situation with the 

league commissioner. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there were still a good number of Proud 

Cougars that loved football, still a good number of Proud 



5266 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

Cougars that wanted to carry on, wanted to compete. And they 

said, well we still love football. We’ve gained this experience. 

We have this culture of the Proud Cougars. What if we just 

change our name and become a different team? We can get a 

different coloured jersey, and no one will really know the 

difference. We can use the remnant of Proud Cougars that we 

have. We can pick up a few free agents along the way from 

another failed team, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We can come together and form a new team. We can call this 

team Team Sasquatch. So sure enough, Mr. Speaker, Team 

Sasquatch, they tried to pretend they were a fighting team. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Team Sasquatch, throughout the Proud 

Cougars’ reign as having won a couple of cups, they managed 

to raise some resources for funding their team and for recruiting 

players, a number of resources to ensure that they had enough 

practice time and travel money. Well, Mr. Speaker, Team 

Sasquatch simply felt well, why isn’t this money ours? I mean 

we were part of Proud Cougars. I think this money rightfully 

belongs to us, and we could use this money because we’re 

trying to compete as Team Sasquatch. Certainly we need to rent 

field time. We need to buy equipment. We need to be in the 

game. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they carried on with these actions. And the 

quarterback, Walter, who had risen from the position of water 

boy to quarterback, at the same time he was fumbling a lot, Mr. 

Speaker. He was trying to be a one-man team. Instead of 

playing with the team, he was always choosing to run the ball 

himself. He wasn’t passing properly. Now this could have to do 

with the poor depth that he had in terms of receivers and other 

players, Mr. Speaker, but it really was the 

one-man-Walter-quarterback show. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you can imagine how this annoyed some of 

the Proud Cougars because they had a tradition of working 

together, and they believed in certain things about the game of 

football. So when they saw Walter going astray, when they saw 

young Walter not living up to the motto of the Proud Cougars, 

Mr. Speaker, they wanted to take action. So they called the 

league commissioner, Mr. Speaker. They spoke to the league 

commissioner and said Walter and the Sasquatches have taken 

our money. We want it back because we’re the Proud Cougars, 

and this money rightfully belongs to us because we want to 

field a team in the next season. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, isn’t that what every individual society 

wants, simply a level playing field allowing them to compete 

fairly and openly in whatever pursuit that they are engaged in? 

So, Mr. Speaker, right now the commissioner is trying to decide 

in how he’s going to rule on young Walter and the Sasquatchs 

because the Proud Cougars certainly want their resources back 

to field a team. And the sad part is, Mr. Speaker, Walter could 

stop all of this if he simply gave the money back. He doesn’t 

have to waste the commissioner’s time if he simply does the 

right thing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this story illustrates what we’ve seen with 

members opposite with respect to their treatment of the PC 

[Progressive Conservative] trust funding. So with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I will now read the motion that will be debated by 

other members: 

That this Assembly condemn the Saskatchewan Party 

government for breaking trust with the people of 

Saskatchewan as evidenced by its disregard for a ruling by 

United Nations body, its interference in the appointment of 

the Chief Electoral Officer, and its continued efforts to 

thwart free and fair elections by not allowing the 

Progressive Conservatives to access their funds. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I will move my motion. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Hart): — The member from 

Saskatoon Massey Place has moved the motion: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the Saskatchewan Party 

government for breaking trust with the people of 

Saskatchewan as evidenced by its disregard for a ruling by 

United Nations body, its interference in the appointment of 

the Chief Electoral Officer, and its continued efforts to 

thwart free and fair elections by not allowing the 

Progressive Conservatives to access their funds. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Prince Albert Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s an honour 

once again to stand up in the House and take part in the 75 

minute debate. Now unlike the member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place, a very learned individual I know, he went off with a 

certain type of wildlife. I’m not going to go into that particular 

discussion right now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But it was fascinating to listen to his discussion about the 

International Labour Organization and the ruling that they 

believe we aren’t following and adhering to, Mr. Speaker. Now 

I’ll get into that in one second. But we definitely respect the 

work done by the ILO [International Labour Organization] 

when it comes to child labour, Aboriginal rights, and poverty 

reduction, advancing labour laws in the Third World countries 

to make them more like the strong laws we have in our 

democracy, in our society, and our Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

I say our Saskatchewan meaning all of our Saskatchewan, not 

just the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re very positive that our labour legislation is appropriate 

and consistent, in fact, with the International Labour 

Organization convention on freedom of association. And I 

would argue very strongly that as we took our part in 

developing our legislation moving forward, we didn’t do that 

without looking at some very learned friends in Justice. The 

same individuals, I would argue, were in Justice at the same 

time the previous, the opposition now, when they were in 

government used as the sounding board to move forward on 

legislation and changes in the rules and the Acts. So I feel very 

strongly that the individuals in Justice provided the right, sound 

legal advice moving forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the member from Saskatoon Massey Place talked about 

ignoring the ruling of the ILO. And that’s somewhat 

concerning, in fact very concerning given the fact that, you 

know, I think that the ILO’s opinion were, their previous 

opinions involving, related to Saskatchewan laws or rules — 

back from 1966 with Mr. Ross Thatcher’s government and 

more recently with Mr. Romanow’s government in 1998 — 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5267 

would fall in line with what the Saskatchewan Party 

government believes. We disagree, as those two leaders of their 

parties did back in those days and those eras, in regards to the 

legislation and the ruling of the ILO, the complaint. The 

complaint, Mr. Speaker. Now I’m sure there was some very 

interesting conversations around the caucus and cabinet tables 

of those two particular leaders in those times as well in regards 

to the ILO ruling. 

 

And I think what’s interesting right now . . . And I believe the 

member from Saskatoon Massey Place may want to discuss this 

with his current leader, Leader of the Opposition because I’m 

sure he would recall this information very clearly when he was 

the minister responsible for SaskPower in 1998, when it was his 

actions — and I would say probably not his actions alone, but 

the actions of the entire government at the time, Mr. Speaker — 

were cited by the ILO committee on freedom of association. 

And interestingly enough, it involved the Bill 65, The 

Maintenance of Saskatchewan Power Corporation’s Operations 

Act of 1998, which imposed back-to-work orders on all 

SaskPower workers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’m sure the Leader of the Opposition, and I’m sure the 

member from Saskatoon Massey Place would like to consult 

with him, maybe before he spoke today, just to make sure he 

had his particular facts going forward correct. 

 

But I’m sure the Leader of the Opposition will also realize and 

will also probably want to mention to his members that the idea 

of that Bill, Mr. Speaker, was to ensure, provide — and this is 

going to be good, Mr. Speaker — to provide essential services, 

essential services of electricity for the people of Saskatchewan 

when in fact they were talking about being on strike, and being 

on strike, in fact. So the Leader of the Opposition brought in 

Bill 65 for the essential services legislation portion to ensure the 

electricity flow to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So now we have a Leader of the Opposition, who I would say 

that I’ve heard on numerous occasions talk about being against 

the Bills that we brought into this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, into 

the province to protect the people of this province for essential 

services. He did the same thing back in 1998 with Bill 65, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now ironically when the ILO made their decision in regards to 

that particular Bill 65, governments can take that advice and 

they can discuss it freely amongst the cabinet table, around the 

table, within their caucus, as well of other individuals. But 

ironically you would expect that what we did was more prudent. 

We said that we believe our actions are correct and proper 

within the convention of the ILO freedom of associations. 

 

Well the previous leader, this Leader of the Opposition, the 

previous minister of SaskPower, the previous Roy Romanow 

NDP government, Mr. Speaker, spent two years, two years 

before they actually responded to the ILO and their ruling 

which . . . I find that to be very concerning that a government 

wouldn’t actually start talking about a relation to the actual Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, in relation to how it affected SaskPower 

employees and essential services which is . . . I guess we’re on 

the same page here now. I believe that now it’s pretty much on 

record now, Mr. Speaker. Essential services are an important 

part of this province to make sure we in fact maintain services 

to those people in the province day and night, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s very critical. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker, ironically, ironically for 

some reason the Leader of the Opposition and the cabinet and 

the premier of the day decided that they would make a decision 

on the ILO ruling. But this is what their decision was. And I 

find it quite funny that they would in fact say that, well Bill 65 

is going to expire on December 31st of 2000 — two years after 

the ruling, Mr. Speaker. And because the Bill was going to 

expire, they decided that there was no reason to cancel it, to 

cancel it and then fall in line with the ILO ruling. Let it run its 

course. Ruling wasn’t on the books. But rather than take a stand 

and actually make a statement regarding that, they let it just 

expire, Mr. Speaker, the Bill. And therefore no reason to 

address ILO ruling. 

 

So I think that we have here is a legacy judgment, a legacy 

judgment made by the now current Leader of the Opposition, 

the former minister of Sask Power and the cabinet of the day, 

and the leader of the day Mr. Romanow that set up a precedent 

as Mr. Thatcher did before that. 

 

We respect the ILO, absolutely. But when it comes to the fact 

of making rulings in our province in regards to the actual way 

we do business, Mr. Speaker, is that we are positive that our 

legislation — as I’m sure they were at the time, Mr. Thatcher’s 

government before that, Mr. Speaker, in 1966 — that it’s 

consistent with Canadian law and similar to the same laws of 

other provinces, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’m sure that the members opposite will in fact support the 

fact that labour laws are actually put in place, changes to laws 

are put in place to support the operations of government, the 

operations of a province and for the safety and protection of the 

people of this province. Bill 65, Mr. Speaker, in 1998 

demonstrated that under the NDP government and now current 

Leader of the Opposition. 

 

So I think moving forward, we also look at the fact that, you 

know, the member from Saskatoon Massey Place talked about 

some of the labour rulings involving the ILO. 

 

I think it’s also very important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to say that 

in a poll that was done by The Leader-Post in 2008 in regards to 

the labour legislation changes, 70 per cent of the public wanted 

unions and employers to negotiate essential service agreements, 

75 per cent supported the use of secret ballots when voting to 

join a union. And you know, this situation’s not uncommon, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the ILO has responded to complaints 

by Canadian unions nearly 100 times since 1958. So again the 

issue of governments making laws, changing laws to ensure 

essential services for the safety of the people of the province 

isn’t something new. It’s not. 

 

[15:15] 

 

The ILO may not agree with it because unions will in fact . . . 

and they have the right, through different means, through 

different processes to get rulings from the ILO, possibly from 

the courts in the country as well. I think what we see though is 

we have a government now who says they are opposed to 

essential services. The opposition, sorry, is opposed to essential 



5268 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

services. The government wanted it in place. But this has got 

precedents already in place, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the 1998 

Bill 65, Sask Power back-to-work legislation put in place to 

ensure that essential services are provided to the people of this 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So I think it’s also critical to note that we believe that, when it 

comes to our country of Canada and this province, that we 

respect the ILO, most definitely. But we don’t believe people 

from Geneva, an organization from Geneva, should have a 

ruling here . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member 

from North Battleford wants to talk about judgments. I’m not 

sure where he was in 1998, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I’m sure 

after what he’s heard today, he can check Hansard, go back to 

Bill 65. Maybe he needs to go and get a little social studies 

lesson, a little history lesson, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before he 

starts to sit from his chair now and take part in this debate.  

 

Maybe he will get up and take part in the debate. I look forward 

to his, I look forward to those comments maybe later if he so 

chooses to now argue against a government position, or an 

opposition position that was government at the time, which has 

now set a legacy position which has been in the province of 

Saskatchewan three occasions now — 1966, when Mr. 

Thatcher; 1998, Mr. Romanow; and now with the 

Saskatchewan Party government, essential services and labour 

laws. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, before I sign off for the day, I think it’s 

important that we also recognize the most recent Insightrix poll, 

an online poll which is done independently, showed that our 

leader is 40 points above the current Leader of the Opposition, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s important to realize. When it 

comes to trust in this province, the people of this province have 

spoken through poll after poll that shows the Leader of the 

Saskatchewan Party is well above and trusted more than the 

leader of the current opposition. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. 

Calvert was much more honourable than that . . . 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Member’s time has 

expired. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise to speak to the resolution currently before the 

Legislative Assembly this afternoon. I will make most of my 

remarks about the government’s treatment of the Office of the 

Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

I earlier today had an occasion to speak about the importance of 

the independent offices of the legislature, particularly those 

offices that have governance over the conduct of members, as 

does the Chief Electoral office, and the importance of a public 

confidence in those institutions. 

 

The acting Chief Electoral Officer has been doing that job for 

over 18 months. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, he is the only 

person in that office, a neutral office, who has actually been in 

that office during the time of the Saskatchewan general election. 

He is the institutional memory of that office. 

 

He won a fair and impartial competition which was conducted 

by a bipartisan selection committee comprised of the Speaker 

and a government representative, the Minister of Justice, an 

opposition representative, and an independent representative. 

And the Minister of Justice referred to the acting Chief 

Electoral Officer as the ideal candidate to become the Chief 

Electoral Officer. 

 

He had enough confidence to take his name back to his caucus 

as a recommendation from the Board of Internal Economy, but 

the Premier decided to veto that appointment, which causes 

great amount of consternation in the province of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again I find myself quoting my hometown paper, a paper 

whose, I think the politics of the editorial board are not exactly 

my politics, Mr. Speaker. But again, very, very well-reasoned 

editorial on March 24th which said, “. . . the premier has the 

duty either to accept the results of that process or make it 

absolutely clear why he would allow his caucus to throw it out.” 

The editorial went on to say, “Not only does it harm the office 

of this most critical public servant, it also throws into question 

Saskatchewan’s democratic process.”  

 

To have the Premier use his caucus to reject the Chief Electoral 

Officer without providing reasons leaves the impression that, to 

quote The Star-Phoenix again: 

 

. . . the only reason the Saskatchewan Party would refuse 

his appointment would be an effort to gerrymander the 

electoral boundaries or to subvert the electoral process by 

stacking the office. 

 

It appears that the position of the Saskatchewan Party is that a 

majority of the Legislative Assembly gets to choose the Chief 

Electoral Officer who will oversee their conduct in an election. 

That amounts to attempting to select an independent officer of 

the Legislative Assembly by government appointment. When 

faced with this very simple question, as to subversion of the 

rather short-lived — because it’s only been about a dozen years, 

Mr. Speaker — the short-lived institution of an independent 

Chief Electoral Officer, the Saskatchewan Party unilaterally 

announced a change to the rules, or an attempt to change the 

rules, to how independent officers and particularly the Chief 

Electoral Officer of the Legislative Assembly would be selected 

and appointed. 

 

When the government interferes with the appointment of an 

independent officer of the Legislative Assembly, attempts by 

the Premier’s fiat to appoint an independent officer of the 

Legislative Assembly, that’s a clear sign that that’s a 

government and a Premier that cannot be trusted. When they try 

to change the rules for how independent officers of the 

Legislative Assembly are appointed halfway through the term, 

that’s another sign that the government cannot be trusted, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It has been often said — it’s not original to me — that the 

premier or prime minister in a majority government situation in 

our British parliamentary form of democracy can be, for all 

intents and purposes within the jurisdiction of that government, 

a dictator. And in a majority government situation where the 

Premier can, if he wishes to act like a dictator, which they have 

done, the Premier has done in the case of the Chief Electoral 

Office — an understaffed and demoralized office in my view, 

Mr. Speaker, and an understaffed and demoralized office as we 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5269 

grow close to a year and a half, only a year and a half from the 

next Saskatchewan general election — a very serious concern it 

should be for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

When a premier wants to act like a dictator, there are very few, 

very few restraints on him. One can be an Attorney General that 

has a strong sense of the robust rule of the law and a willingness 

to defend it. That is, I’m afraid, more often the exception than 

the rule, Mr. Speaker. The other is the opposition, Mr. Speaker, 

but ultimately we are overruled, and the rules are changed 

unilaterally by a government. And we’ve seen this government 

quite willing to change the rules to prejudice the opposition and 

to favour the government and use its majority. And of course 

there’s a free press, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But the opposition and the press are all dependent upon 

information. And we have a government that uses the slogan of 

transparency and accountability but in fact — in a very 

Orwellian sense, Mr. Speaker — is a secretive government, is a 

government that does not provide information. It is a 

government that signs deals and consults about them 

afterwards, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a government that will not 

debate its decisions that it makes if it can avoid doing so, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have recently seen video of eggs being thrown at the 

Speaker in Ukraine, and the Speaker cowering underneath an 

umbrella, Mr. Speaker. Many people found that video 

entertaining, Mr. Speaker. I was not one of them. I am 

apprehensive, if not fearful, for people of the Ukraine, a country 

that many people in this Assembly and the province have an 

attachment. Mr. Speaker, it is a new and young democracy. And 

although that is not the violence that we are seeing, the 

bloodshed that we are seeing, say in Thailand, Mr. Speaker, it is 

still disturbing. And for those of us who have hopes for 

Ukraine, because of our family attachments to that country, 

have to be apprehensive about how this will end up, how this 

will turn out, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But even old democracies where institutions are taken for 

granted, it is not sufficiently acknowledged how fragile those 

institutions can be if people do not treat them with respect. And 

the office of the Chief Electoral Officer, that independent 

officer, as an independent officer of this legislature is not yet 20 

years old. It is a new and, I would suggest, fragile institution. 

This legislature in its wisdom, and I think it was wisdom, 

moved away from a government appointment of that position. 

And it was a New Democratic Party government, obviously in 

the ’90s, who initiated that move away from a government 

appointment to an independent office, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That’s what the spirit of the legislation provides for. That’s 

what the spirit of the legislation provides for. That is what we 

have seen with successful appointments to that position. That is 

the spirit that informed the appointment, the resolution that was 

in this House this afternoon appointing the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner, Mr. Speaker. That was the spirit that informs 

how this officer was to be appointed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The independent, non-partisan and bipartisan — in representing 

both sides of this House — made a recommendation. And 

without very good reason, without very good reason because of 

the danger of subverting the independence of the office, without 

very good reason, that recommendation should have been 

accepted by both sides of the House, Mr. Speaker, and it was 

not. 

 

And the failure of the majority Sask Party caucus to accept that 

recommendation, the veto by the Premier of that 

recommendation, has the effect of reverting or attempting to 

revert — because the opposition do not accept that the Chief 

Electoral Officer has not been appointed, Mr. Speaker — has 

the attempt to subvert the independence of that office and the 

independent appointment of that office, Mr. Speaker, and to 

revert back to a government appointment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if we allow this to be done by the government and by the 

Premier, then we are setting a precedent for removing the 

independence of officers of this legislature, perhaps of officers 

whose institutions they lead are longer than this office, Mr. 

Speaker. And it is not just that the government can’t be trusted 

on matters of the day and matters of policy, but on fundamental 

matters of protecting democracy, this government, this Premier 

cannot be trusted. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — The member’s time has 

expired. I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 

to speak to this motion today. I do question somewhat the 

motion that was put forward and I’m just going to give a little 

bit of my theory as to why the opposition would feel that it was 

important to put forward a motion like this. 

 

It isn’t a motion about the social democratic principles of their 

party. It’s not about, you know, something that they would like 

to see achieved in our province. Mr. Speaker, this is just one 

more piece of what they think is going to be a successful jigsaw 

puzzle they’re trying to put together. They’ve looked at some 

polling, they’ve looked at their leader, and they’ve said, you 

know, it’s probably not going to work for us to repaint this 

picture. I think we need to maybe tear down the government 

instead of trying to build ourselves up. 

 

And you read this. It’s about breaking the trust. It’s full of 

innuendo, Mr. Speaker. And I’m very pleased today to have an 

opportunity to maybe point out some of the hypocrisy that that 

organization, the NDP in Saskatchewan, are currently engaged 

in and how they think this might be a successful . . . I think it 

will be futile, but it is an active campaign on their part, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I’d like to start by trust. I think that’s very important for 

political figures, for a political parties to have the trust of the 

people of Saskatchewan. Our party went out of our way, Mr. 

Speaker, because it’s a fundamental belief for the people on this 

side of the House that you do what you say you’re going to do, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

We made about 150 promises during the last campaign. At last 

count, with two years into our mandate, well over 100 of those 

commitments were achieved, Mr. Speaker. Big picture, small 

picture, all of them are important. 

 

And when I go back to my constituency, and I can look the 

members of my community in the eye and they say, you know I 



5270 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

heard you talk about that during the campaign or I saw the 

Leader of the Opposition at that point during the campaign 

speak about this, and today it’s a reality, that’s a powerful thing, 

and it will continue to be. 

 

I also think that the decorum in the House, Mr. Speaker . . . On 

this side of the House we’ve made a very conscious effort. 

There is no heckling, Mr. Speaker, from this side of the House. 

We think if the opposition has a point to make, Mr. Speaker, 

that they should have that opportunity to ask those questions. 

 

[15:30] 

 

On the other side of the House, Mr. Speaker, they have a 

different view. They think that if they ask a question, that there 

should not be an answer. They think that they are the 

government that we should have, and that the people of 

Saskatchewan were wrong, so why would we want to hear the 

answers to the questions that they ask, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, maybe that is their belief. Maybe they think that the 

people of Saskatchewan made a horrible mistake and that that’ll 

be reversed, but I think that that attitude is the exact attitude 

which will keep them on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see on that side of the House constant bickering and finger 

pointing, innuendo. I don’t think that’s productive, Mr. Speaker, 

and I think that the media, who the former Speaker mentioned 

as one of the pillars of holding governments accountable, have 

grown tired of inaccuracies in their statements. 

 

I know that their Finance critic has had many a red-faced scrum 

in the rotunda where he was trying to defend a position that 

those members put together for him to take to the public, and it 

wasn’t defendable. And trying to defend an undefendable 

position, Mr. Speaker, I think . . . I’ve seen the shade of those 

people’s faces when they’re trying to do that, and it isn’t pretty, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think the way they treat each other is sometimes questionable, 

specifically the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. Doing a 

little research for this debate on the Internet I saw some clips of 

where the Leader of the Opposition, who had left his party and 

had moved to Alberta, was at an event, a public event, making 

jokes about his own people — that he had served with — his 

colleagues. He called one of them a wimp, Mr. Speaker, in a 

public venue, a wimp. He talked about them as a lefty or, I 

served with those left wingers for years. Mr. Speaker, I just, you 

know, you may joke with your colleagues but you don’t get in 

front of a TV camera and make those sorts of statements. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, is who made those 

comments. He made some very disparaging comments about 

the then premier, Mr. Calvert. He said he was redder than . . . 

and I won’t repeat it, Mr. Speaker. But I will also say that he 

made that exact same slur against who is now the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana, Mr. Speaker. A woman who has dedicated, I 

would say, the largest part of her career to this Assembly and 

too for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I don’t share her views, I think I would be more centrist on the 

scale and I think she’d be more left wing, but I wouldn’t in a 

public venue be saying that she’s redder than a . . . Mr. Speaker, 

and I will not say it. I will not say it because I don’t think it is 

appropriate to say it. But that, that is the leadership that’s 

leading that party right now and I think that the debate motion 

we have before us today is just one more statement that carries 

down that line. I don’t think it’s acceptable. 

 

Another thing, Mr. Speaker, that’s recently happened is again, 

the minister, the critic of Finance wasn’t allowed to speak on 

budget day. And the members of this House have never seen a 

situation where the critic of Finance . . . budget day. The 

galleries are full. People are here to hear his comments; what 

does he think of the budget? Again, it probably wouldn’t agree 

with what our side of the House thinks of the budget, but people 

expect that he’s going to give voice. On budget day, Mr. 

Speaker, he was kicked to the curb, kicked to the curb by the 

Leader of the Opposition, and I know that a lot of people were 

disappointed. I would imagine most specifically that member. I 

just don’t think that that’s how you treat your team, and I think 

the people of Saskatchewan see that and they notice that, Mr. 

Speaker, and it’s not acceptable. 

 

One story that was related to me recently by a member of my 

constituency, and I’d heard it before, but it struck home with 

me, and it’s about trust. It’s about the Leader of the Opposition 

when he was a cabinet minister, Mr. Speaker. He was the 

Minister of CIC, Crown Investments Corporation, and one of 

their largest investments was a little company called Wascana 

Oil. 

 

It was a nationalized oil company in Saskatchewan under a 

former NDP government. It then got privatized, stock was sold 

off, but the Government of Saskatchewan was still the largest 

shareholder. It held a golden share to ensure that the head office 

remained here in Saskatchewan, that it remained a 

Saskatchewan presence, and a real asset for the people of 

Saskatchewan. But when he was minister of CIC, he sold it, Mr. 

Speaker. And there’s transcripts in Hansard of why we had to 

sell it and what it would mean. He assured the people of 

Saskatchewan as minister of CIC that the head office would 

remain in Saskatchewan and that that wouldn’t be a problem 

and, in fact, the head office would probably grow. That was his 

commitment to the people of Saskatchewan as the minister 

responsible. 

 

How it worked out, Mr. Speaker, is he sold that company. He 

sold it to a larger oil company in Calgary called Nexen. Nexen 

buys Wascana Oil. Everything’s going fine. The oil’s still 

pumping. But the surprising thing, Mr. Speaker, is that Nexen 

all of a sudden needs a vice-president. They decide they need a 

vice-president — a junior VP if you will — and they go on a 

talent search, and if they don’t hire the cabinet minister that had 

just sold them that very major asset. Now this individual back 

home, when you’re talking about trust, Mr. Speaker, this person 

back home told me that didn’t smell right. And I don’t know 

what happened. I wasn’t in the Chamber at the time. But on the 

surface, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t. 

 

So he moves to Calgary. He leaves Saskatchewan and that’s 

fine. We all move on from politics and we all find careers 

afterwards or we retire. But, Mr. Speaker, that person’s first 

task as the VP of public relations of lobbying for Nexen was to 

come back to Saskatchewan, lobby his former colleagues, many 

of which are sitting across the aisle right now, Mr. Speaker, one 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5271 

of which is heckling because he doesn’t want the people of 

Saskatchewan to hear this, Mr. Speaker. He comes back to 

Saskatchewan. His first job as an employee of Nexen is to 

lobby his old colleagues to get the golden chair, to allow them 

to move the head office out of Saskatchewan, which he just 

months earlier had committed would never leave Saskatchewan. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, that might not smell right. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that that’s not what the people of Saskatchewan 

will trust today. And I think the people of Saskatchewan will be 

remembering that, Mr. Speaker. And their motion to pull 

everyone down to that level, I don’t think anyone can lose the 

confidence in the way that an Act like that would do, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I’d also like to touch on the electoral officer, Mr. Speaker. I 

think it’s important we have a very good and trusted electoral 

officer. The recent scandal in the NDP leadership, Mr. Speaker, 

when the Leader of the Opposition has a record, a track record 

of . . . You know, maybe he wasn’t involved. I’m not here 

making any accusations. But when there’s serious accusations 

about leadership races of the successful leadership candidate of 

the NDP who now sits in the Chamber, I think it is imperative 

that we don’t rush into any decision, Mr. Speaker, that we do 

the research necessary to get the best, most appropriate electoral 

officer in this province, Mr. Speaker. And I would ask the 

member opposite, the former attorney general, that he would 

support us in that. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this motion. I believe 

the people of Saskatchewan have complete confidence in this 

government to do the right thing, and we will continue to do the 

right thing, Mr. Speaker, for a long, long time. I know that the 

members opposite will . . . 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I suppose the 

purpose of the 75-minute debate is to allow private members to 

practise their skills, but they should, they should, Mr. Speaker, 

talk to the motion at hand, Mr. Speaker. That would be . . . 

Perhaps someone over there could advise that member. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I do want to make some comments on this. 

And the one thing I did notice that the member from 

Lloydminster was talking about, he was talking about taking the 

time to make the right decisions. But I think what we all have 

seen over the last couple of years is that this Sask Party has 

done anything but take time to make decisions, and it has now 

got them into hot water. It’s got them in hot water with the ILO, 

the International Labour Organization, Mr. Speaker, which is a 

tri-part body of the United Nations, which consists, Mr. 

Speaker, of representatives from government, labour, and 

business. And that body has now ruled against the Sask Party 

government in favour of Saskatchewan workers. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they can write this off. They can say they 

have passed it by their lawyers or whoever they want. But, Mr. 

Speaker, we know that — with all due respect to lawyers — but 

they can be wrong. And that is why we have bodies like the 

ILO. That’s why we have courts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the thing that brought us to put forward this 

motion is to point out the degree to which this Sask Party 

government has mismanaged the labour legislation file. 

They’ve mismanaged it so bad that they have now got the 

attention of the United Nations. And it’s recognizing, not only 

as we recognize here, their mismanagement and incompetence 

around the finances of the province, but it’s recognizing their 

incompetence in labour legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just as a bit of background, the Saskatchewan 

Federation of Labour, 16 provincial unions, and 5 national 

unions filed a complaint with the United Nations in 2008 over 

the Sask Party’s — if I may — ham-handed approach to labour 

legislation. And it was this filing, these parties taking this to the 

International Labour Organization where there was a ruling 

made. 

 

So that we all understand here, that government, the Sask Party 

government, had to work through the Harper Conservatives 

because now they have included the national government in this 

because national government, Mr. Speaker, deals directly with 

the ILO. That is, the ILO can’t deal directly with the provincial 

governments because they recognize Canada, because Canada 

signs onto these things that they will abide by, and Canada’s a 

signatory at the ILO. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, so they had to contact their cousins at the 

federal level and say we’ve messed up. We’ve messed up, and 

now you have to speak on our behalf. So they had to put 

forward, they had to put together some arguments as to why 

they felt they were right. And those arguments, the very 

arguments that they said they had passed by their lawyers, and 

they passed that on to the ILO, and they said you’re wrong. 

They said you’re wrong. And Mr. Speaker, they said they were 

wrong. 

 

And from here what we see is, we told them about this because 

if we all . . . I know this is all old history, Mr. Speaker, but on 

many occasions we had the Premier saying that he would not, 

for example, under Bill 5, the essential services legislation, that 

this was not necessary. We had the Minister of Health saying oh 

no, we don’t have to go there — I think was the quote. We 

don’t have to go there. It’s not necessary because up to that 

point in time, Mr. Speaker, we had a form of essential services 

legislation. I know that might surprise some of the members 

across, but we had essential services legislation. 

 

But that essential services legislation was worked out when 

there was a strike, so we didn’t go into spending enormous 

amounts of money which have already, Mr. Speaker, been spent 

at the Labour Relations Board, determining who was essential. 

And as we know — which has been stated here quite clearly — 

that in fact if there ever was a strike, to the embarrassment of 

them, that there would be more people having to work during a 

strike than the Health minister is able to afford to put in place 

now. So if it’s essential during a strike, we wonder what their 

definition of essential services and essential health care is when 

it comes to that. 

 

But Mr. Speaker, also for the record, I want to put in what the 

ILO has said about their legislation. And here’s what they’re 

facing. Here’s what they’re facing. The committee expects the 

government will ensure that the provincial authorities hold full 



5272 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

and specific consultations. Now there’s a great wakeup call for 

that side who does not consult on anything. I mean, this is going 

to be a trademark of those folks over there when they’re gone in 

2011 after November, that they’ve never talked to the people of 

Saskatchewan. They felt . . . as we heard earlier, what they used 

to say is that we just had an election, and that’s enough 

consultation. But people have grown tired of that. So they’re 

telling them they have to consult, and they have to roll back 

everything and start again. 

 

And here’s what they say, another thing the committee has to 

say. To amend in consultation, they say: 

 

. . . to amend the Public Service Essential Services Act so 

as to ensure that the LRB may examine all aspects 

relating to the determination of an essential service, in 

particular, the determination of the sectors in question, 

classification, number, and names of workers who must 

provide [that] . . . 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I wonder sometimes, when I listen to what 

they’re saying, if they even understand what that means. And to 

try and put it simply to them . . . And the money that has been 

wasted at . . . money, money that is so needed in the health care 

system that is being wasted before the Labour Relations Board, 

spending hours determining who is essential and who is not, not 

getting any resolution there. The resolution is not there because 

the Act is so flawed. The Act is so flawed that it doesn’t work, 

but they will not listen to that. We can tell them that time and 

time again, but it’s flawed, and it doesn’t work. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, so that’s not working, and they’re 

spending money. And then maybe a bit more, a point that 

should be made as well is that where people — and this might 

really come back to be a problem — where the government has 

required people to be essential or has taken them off, that they 

“. . . take the necessary measures so that compensatory 

guarantees are made available to workers whose right to strike 

may be restricted or prohibited and keep it informed in this 

respect.” 

 

[15:45] 

 

Now when you take all this together, there are potentially costs 

here into the future. There are potentially even costs here into 

the future. And we saw in British Columbia when that 

government there snubbed its nose at collective agreements, 

what happened, and the dangers, and the dangers that that 

poses. 

 

Now one of the things that they also should understand is this is 

a first step because the unions in this file are proceeding to the 

Supreme Court. And one of the things that the Supreme Court 

will look at is the ruling of the ILO. They respect the ruling 

ILO. So if they say, well we think we’re right at the ILO and 

just dismiss that, they’ve got a problem because they obviously 

don’t understand how the Supreme Court works. And even 

though I am not a lawyer, that part is that they will take into 

consideration a ruling of an international body. 

 

And if they do that, and we come back here and we then say, 

well now there could be costs with this, then I would think as 

. . . I see the Minister of Resources sitting there and shaking his 

head. Probably he’s not one who should be making 

predications, as we see his $3 billion prediction in potash. But if 

that’s going to be the degree and the sophistication of their 

predictions, then I would say that perhaps that’s the wrong 

crystal ball to look at from the member there from Kindersley 

because I would venture to say that there’s a good chance they 

might be wrong. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think in the few short minutes that I’ve had 

to try and put this together so that perhaps this government, 

giving them one final chance to understand, to understand the 

issue before them here . . . because it becomes at times very 

frustrating, very frustrating where they walk away from a deal 

where they . . . We had a court case against the federal 

Conservatives which could have resulted in $800 million, which 

was quite clear that that federal Conservative Party promised 

before the election. All of these MPs [Member of Parliament] 

that we have in Saskatchewan agreed that Saskatchewan should 

get $800 million with that kind of a backing. We backed them 

as well, as I recall, on that. Both parties were going to take this, 

and now they back away from that. 

 

But what they don’t back away from is fighting the people, the 

people, the very people who work and create the wealth for this 

province. They don’t back away. They take them to the 

Supreme Court, and they want to hurt them. So as we’ve said 

earlier here in the present negotiations that are going on in 

health care, where over 80 per cent are women, they’re willing 

to hurt those people. They’re willing to hurt those families, 

working families in the province, but they’re not willing to take 

on and take what is Saskatchewan’s $800 million. They’re not 

willing to fight that fight, but they’re willing to take on the 

workers in this province. And I say shame to them, Mr. 

Speaker. I say shame to them. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s, you 

know, it is indeed a pleasure to get up and speak in this House. 

Mr. Speaker, when I look at the motion that was presented, it 

certainly reflects the negative attitude of the people on that side 

of the House. They talk about breaking trust, disregard, 

interference, thwart. It’s just a negative attitude that just spews 

over here constantly. 

 

And I took, I took up the disregard. And when we talk about 

disregard, they seem to have a total disregard for the people of 

the province and the traditions of this House. And I’m saying 

that, Mr. Speaker, because there have been traditions in this 

House for many years of speaking on both sides. And two of 

those opportunities for speaking in the House generally come, 

as tradition, twice during session. One is during the budget 

speech, and one is during the Throne Speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we had the budget speech . . . and tradition 

is that all members on both sides have some time, 15, 20 

minutes by tradition, by agreement that they are allowed to 

speak. Mr. Speaker, this was disregarded by the members of 

that side. And I, for one, was not allowed to speak, not given 

permission to speak because of the disregard for the traditions 

of this House when we were talking about the budget. 

 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5273 

There’s a lot of things about the budget that I would have 

preferred to have talked about, you know, the infrastructure that 

we’re following up on, the highways. You know, the twinning 

of Highway 11, very important to this province to have the 

transportation in this province, that’s a very important part; the 

Lewvan interchange just west of the city here, part of what 

we’re doing to increase the productivity of this province, 

improve the infrastructure; the Yorkton bypass. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, talking about highways, there are over 700 

. . . 470 kilometres of highway construction and over 600 

kilometres of resurfacing. Those are some of the things that I 

wanted to talk about in my speech on the budget. But because 

of the disregard of that side of the House, I was never allowed 

to. 

 

You know, when the Leader of the Opposition got up and gave 

his little retort, he talked about back in the ’80s. That’s what he 

was referring to, back in the ’80s, in the old days, we might say, 

from the modern times. Mr. Speaker, he talked about Minister 

Berntson and the former Premier Devine back in the ’80s, of 

how they made decisions for the caucus and only caucus could 

talk if they were given permission to. That’s what he said. 

That’s what he indicated when he spoke. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not how it was. When we put the 

budget together, there was no disregard for other members. The 

members on this side went out to their constituencies. They 

talked to the constituencies and got the feeling of the people of 

Saskatchewan, came back and sat around the caucus table and 

said this is what we like to see in the budget. This is what we 

want. 

 

And did I get everything that I thought that should be in the 

budget? Well not really. But at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, 

when we all had our input in, we accepted the decisions of the 

caucus as a whole. We came out with a budget that was fair. It 

was hard because we’re in some times that we need to be very 

careful with our expenditures, Mr. Speaker. It was presented. It 

was passed. And I’m grateful for that. 

 

But what I’m saying, you know, I didn’t have a chance to talk 

about that because of the disregard . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d just like . . . Order. I’d just 

like to remind the member, the motion before the Assembly is 

the motion we’re currently debating, and I ask the member to at 

least acknowledge the motion. And his comments, direct them 

towards the motion. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And perhaps I got 

a little carried away on the disregard for this side of the House. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the motion as it 

sits, and it talks about this side of the House having a disregard 

for different things, and one of them is the International Labour 

Organization. And we realize that we respect the International 

Labour Organization working on important issues like child 

labour and Aboriginal rights and poverty reduction, advising 

labour laws in the Third World to make them more like the 

strong labour laws we have here. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the International Labour Organization can 

have those recommendations. They can say that. But they don’t 

have the jurisdiction to dictate in here, in this legislation. We 

appreciate what the ILO has the opinion of, but we strongly 

disagree with their recommendations. And I’m sure it’s much 

the same that would when Ross Thatcher in 1966 strongly 

disagreed with them, as did Roy Romanow. And my learned 

friend from Prince Albert spent some time on this, that the 

legislation was just the ILO’s complaint. 

 

Again it was a . . . And at that time, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of 

the Opposition was the minister for SaskPower. Total disregard 

for the ILO’s recommendations at that time. Total disregard. In 

fact they sat on this for two years. The maintenance of 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation Act of 2009, Bill 65, imposed 

back-to-work legislation, Mr. Speaker. It was disregarded just 

like they’re accusing us. But that was a disregard, and they do 

that often. 

 

They have a disregard for people’s . . . the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan with the money they spent on places like 

SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company] and Channel Lake and Navigata, and the list goes 

on. Even the health issues, Mr. Speaker. They talk about the 

disregard for the health issues. In fact they closed 52 hospitals 

in their reign. They disregarded the concerns for the people of 

Saskatchewan in so many respects — for schools, hospitals, and 

highways. 

 

They didn’t even bother when the ILO put up their objection to 

the back-to-work order in regard to Bill 65. They didn’t even 

bother to respond for two years, Mr. Speaker. They planned to 

take no action, they said, on the ILO’s recommendation because 

Bill 65 would be expiring at the end of December. What does 

that tell you, Mr. Speaker? They didn’t have any disregard then. 

They don’t have any disregard now. They go through, they go 

through all this rhetoric, but it really has very little meaning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s just . . . And a total of $204 million that 

they disregarded in ventures that that government tried right 

from SPUDCO to Navigata to Coachman Insurance — all the 

stuff that they disregarded and yet they’re trying to tell us that 

we’re not doing things right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I really don’t support the motion in any way. I 

can’t support the motion. I can’t the support the negative 

position that is put forward by that party that disregards the 

traditions of the House, that disregards the traditions of the hon. 

members, that disregards even the members of their own party. 

When the member from Rosemont was to give his reply on the 

budget, he was told to sit down and wait till he was spoken to. I 

can’t support that, Mr. Speaker. He has shown . . . They have 

shown that there’s no disregard even for the position of the 

Speaker. They have no regard for the people of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The members’ 65-minute debate has elapsed. 

I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Question 

to the member from Prince Albert Carlton. The motion in front 

of the Assembly is very clear, condemning the Saskatchewan 

Party government for breaking trust with the people of 

Saskatchewan. The member from P.A. Carlton knows that 



5274 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

nothing destroys trust more than a broken election promise. The 

member from Prince Albert Carlton made a very specific 

promise: a vote for Darryl is a vote to keep the mill open. What 

does he say to the people of P.A. Carlton today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well let’s begin with 

some trust issues. Let’s talk about things like, well SPUDCO, 

Channel Lake — money invested, money lost. Well it has to go 

there, Mr. Speaker. It has to go there. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the members to 

allow the member to respond to the question presented to him. I 

recognize the member from Prince Albert Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well having said that 

now, this government has a stand. We’re not going to risk 

taxpayers’ dollars in business ventures like the Leader of the 

Opposition did back when he was in cabinet for SPUDCO, 

Channel Lake, and others. 

 

And I guess the way it’s now the same over there, hasn’t 

changed at all. They’re prepared to risk hundreds of millions of 

dollars in business ventures, Mr. Speaker. You want to talk 

about trust. Let’s talk about trust about the Insightrix poll, Mr. 

Speaker. Forty points our leader leads their leader, and that’s 

based on things like trust — messaging, promises made, 

promises kept, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know what, Mr. Speaker ? The Leader of the Opposition in 

the year-end poll, the year-end discussion with the Leader-Post 

said that he believes, he thought, he wouldn’t be surprised if a 

poll was done . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member from 

Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A current 

candidate contesting the nomination for NDP in Regina South 

has in the past requested that the NDP leader withdraw from the 

2009 NDP leadership race. This demonstrates a complete lack 

of trust within his own party. My question to the member from 

Saskatoon Fairview: how do you intend to restore trust within 

your own party after such a sorry performance in 2009? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I am not certain the pointing 

of fingers here, when what we have is the member from 

Saskatoon Northwest and what is happening over there. Mr. 

Speaker, the number of broken promises from that Premier is 

now enough to start filling up a book, and I could go on naming 

a number. I just spoke on the labour Bill about saying we’ll not 

need labour legislation or essential services legislation. That is 

not necessary. 

 

There are certain things in terms of this government in terms of 

their handling of the finances of the province as far from 

lending itself to trust. So I think before they start pointing 

fingers here, I think they should have a look at the track record 

that they’ve established over the last two and a half years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The final paragraph 

of the Court of Queen’s Bench ruling starts this way: 

 

Clearly, the action against the Saskatchewan Party would 

not be allowed to proceed if it were just a publicity stunt 

or an exercise in paranoia but the dual roles of the trustees 

and the questioned changes in the trust agreement by the 

trustees raise enough questions that the matter is not plain 

and obvious and beyond doubt as the precedents require. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everyone knows if you take something that isn’t 

yours, that’s not right. Surely the member from P.A. Northcote, 

who is a police officer, knows that if you take things that don’t 

belong to you, that is not right. Given that the member from 

P.A. Carlton, the member from P.A. Carlton is a police officer, 

knows that taking things that don’t belong to other people is not 

right, will he go to the Premier and the Deputy Premier and tell 

them to give back the $3 million that they have taken from the 

PC Party? 

 

[16:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the analogy that 

I want to bring up is a bully at the playground, Mr. Speaker. 

And I want to talk about a bully at the playground like we have 

Walter with the Cougars and some Sasquatch team from the 

member from Saskatoon Massey Place. I want to talk about the 

fact that a bully in a playground who goes into a community 

and decides that he would like to all of sudden impose himself 

and say, I want 1,100 memberships sold and I want them sold to 

anybody under any name and one box number, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that bully needs to be taught a lesson. I think that is the 

level of trust that the people of the province see. He took 

something that wasn’t his. He took the leadership of the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question once again will be for the member from P.A. Carlton. 

Mr. Speaker, we all know that in the Court of Queen’s Bench 

documents the Premier and Deputy Premier are named as 

involved in the issue of the PC trust fund and the $3 million, 

Mr. Speaker. Why, if a political party is in possession of 

another political party’s money, why would they not simply 

return it to clear the air with that cloud hanging over them? 

 

My question to the member is: will he immediately urge his 

Premier and Deputy Premier to return the money? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I want to make 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5275 

mention that this matter is still before the courts, so I don’t want 

to comment about any specifics related to that. 

 

But we’re talking about if there’s anything about any kind of 

return of anything in this province, how about the hundreds of 

millions of dollars that that particular Leader of the Opposition 

was responsible for around the cabinet table, in poor business 

decision in his tenure with the NDP government? 

 

They have a practice of investing in bad business decisions that 

cost the taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t know but I think the current Leader of the 

Opposition has some explaining to do when it comes to next 

election about how he invested money back in the day. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, the ILO has responded to over 

100 complaints by Canadian unions since the late 1950s. Most 

Canadian jurisdictions have ignored these ILO rulings. To the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview: why are you putting the 

interests of the bureaucrats way over in Geneva over the good 

people of Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this coming from a member 

who said, this is the best budget . . . or what was the exact 

words that he said? 

 

An Hon. Member: — The best budget in the world. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — The best budget in the world. The best 

budget in the world, he said, Mr. Speaker. And now they’ve had 

$2.3 billion. And now they’re in debt by $1 billion. They put up 

. . . Theirs is the party, the same party that puts up billboards all 

over, all over the city of Saskatoon, defacing the skyline saying 

the debt’s going down. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s probably correct 

for about one day. It’s probably correct for about one day 

because after that, it’s downwards. 

 

And then there’s a projection, a projection that the debt is 

projected to increase by 55 per cent by 2014. And then they 

have the nerve to talk about bureaucrats in the ILO. This will be 

the day, if we come back here and they have to pay money 

because of a Supreme Court judgment, that’ll be the day. 

That’ll be the day. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — To the member from Moose Jaw North, why 

did his caucus veto the choice of the Board of the Internal 

Economy and the recommendation of the Attorney General of 

Saskatchewan, the ideal candidate for Chief Electoral Officer? 

What was the reason of the caucus opposite, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to selecting 

someone like that, it takes a long time to find the right person. 

We wanted to make sure that we do the right process, to look 

far and wide to make sure that the right candidates were . . . had 

an opportunity to apply, we could review them, and then we 

would look at them. 

 

So this is what the process is doing. This is the process we’re 

going through. And when it’s done, we will have the right 

person that everybody will be happy with. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Mr. Speaker, party members of the NDP 

considered a resolution to remove the cost of party membership. 

To the member from Saskatoon Fairview: was the intent of this 

proposal to make the rigging of future NDP leadership contests 

easier? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, again this from a 

party that has been on a massive spending spree, a massive 

spending spree over the last two and a half years, over two and 

a half years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is incredible that that 

should be that question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I was just 

amazed by some of the rhetoric over there from the Sask Party, 

especially when it comes to the ILO, as if that’s something to 

do with Third World countries only and has no jurisdiction here 

in Canada. I’m simply amazed by that. 

 

And less than 24 hours ago, we were commemorating the Day 

of Mourning here in Canada, something very serious. But yet 

24 hours later they aren’t doing anything. So to the member 

from Moose Jaw North: will he encourage his party to scrap 

Bill 80? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Mr. Michelson: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Mr. Speaker, given that the NDP government 

business failures totalled something just south of a quarter of a 

billion dollars and that their leader’s popularity is currently in 

the lower 30’s, how can the member from . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed on the 75-minute debate. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



5276 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

Sutherland. 

 

Motion No. 4 — Support for Bill C-391 

 

Ms. Schriemer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

make a motion that states: 

 

That this Assembly encourage all members of parliament 

to support Bill C-391, a private member’s Bill that seeks 

to abolish the expensive and ineffective long-gun registry, 

which unfairly penalizes law-abiding firearm owners, but 

fails to provide further protection for Canadians against 

crimes committed with firearms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1995 the Liberal government of the day passed 

gun registration legislation. The legislation was set out that long 

guns — which are the rifles that are used in Saskatchewan in 

everyday life for some ranchers; they’re used in sport for 

hunting — the law stated that we would have to register these 

long guns. 

 

We, the Sask Party, has always not supported this legislation. I 

believe that it was a bad piece of legislation and it was created 

to appease female activists in Quebec after the Polytechnique 

shooting. The interesting thing about that shooting is that Marc 

LePine, the offender in that case, got his weapon because he 

was a military person. That doesn’t diminish the fact that there 

exists violence against women. That does happen; we know 

that. But in Saskatchewan we know and we can say that most of 

the offences against women are done by physical force. In fact 

most of the murders that are done, committed in this province 

and in Canada, are done so with sharp-edged weapons, not 

firearms. 

 

So in 1995 the Liberal government of the day passed this 

legislation that requires the registration of legal firearms. In the 

Criminal Code at that time and today, there was still legislation 

concerning the prohibition of firearms. There is prohibited 

weapons. You cannot possess a prohibited weapon, and that 

includes guns that have a short barrel length. It’s stipulated in 

the Code how long the barrel length on a firearm must be. And 

also the registered weapons as far as handguns, those weapons 

had to be registered. There had to be permission given to a 

person transporting a hand-held firearm, and so there was 

legislation that governed firearms that were used primarily in 

offences such as a sawed-off shotgun. Those were illegal at the 

time and no one could be allowed to have them. 

 

So the gun legislation of 1995 set out to control what was legal 

previously. In 2004 there was a report released to CBC 

[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] that to date, from 1995 up 

to 2004, $2 billion had been spent on the long-gun registry. And 

that money, Mr. Speaker, $2 billion would pay for 1,000 police 

officers for 20 years. 

 

In May of 2004, the Liberal government, just days before an 

expected election call, eliminated the fees for registering and 

transferring firearms. Ottawa says it would also limit spending 

on the gun registry to $25 million a year, spending that has 

averaged $33 million a year and reached as high as $48 million. 

That’s a lot of tax dollars, Mr. Speaker, to regulate something 

that didn’t need regulation. We didn’t need to register a 

law-abiding citizen’s firearms. 

As a police officer, in my experience, there aren’t a lot of 

firearms calls or offences committed with a long gun. Shotguns 

are sawed off by the bad guys when they are going to use 

something like that for a robbery, but most of the offences are 

done by fists, as I stated before, or sharp-edged weapons or 

blunt objects. And as I stated before, violence against women is 

primarily done with physical force as well in domestic disputes. 

 

To tell you the truth, Mr. Speaker, when I’ve come across any 

long guns in my policing career, they were suicides actually. 

But the handguns, etc., are starting to appear more frequently 

today, but as related to drug trafficking. Drug offences are a 

lucrative proposition, and in order to protect their money and 

their product, probably 80 per cent if not higher of drug 

traffickers also have firearms, handguns mostly. But handguns 

were registered anyway prior to 1995, so it wouldn’t restrict 

handguns today. It has no affect on the handguns. 

 

A lot of the weapons that come into Canada that are 

unregistered and found, in cases of organized crime or drug 

traffickers, things like that, are coming up from the United 

States, and they’re smuggled across the border, so most of them 

are not even purchased in Canada. 

 

[16:15] 

 

In 2006, May 17th of 2006 actually, Public Safety minister 

Stockwell Day says the Conservative government will introduce 

legislation to eliminate the long-gun registry. He announced 

that a number of measures would affect the gun registry while 

it’s still in effect, and that would be a one-year amnesty for 

those who have not yet registered their non-restricted firearms, 

which pertains to the long guns. Long-gun owners will no 

longer have to pay to register their weapons, and the 

government will provide refunds to those who have already 

registered their long guns. 

 

Responsibility for the registry will be transferred to the RCMP 

[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] from Canadian Firearms 

Centre and the annual operating budget for the program will be 

cut by $10 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, due to the fact that there is an unstable opposition 

in parliament — we have a minority government — the gun 

legislation could not be amended. So a private member’s Bill 

recently has been put forward, Bill C-391, in Ottawa in 

parliament by a Manitoba Conservative member. And that 

private member’s Bill suggests or states that the long-gun 

registry, just the long-gun registry part of the firearms 

legislation, would be repealed. 

 

Now in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, it is very, very, very 

common to own a long gun. And I think it’s really unfair that 

you would have had to pay to register it in the first place. So a 

lot of money is being spent and having absolutely no effect. 

There’s absolutely no research to indicate that the long-gun 

registry has succeeded in crime prevention. 

 

What it does do is it allows you to run the firearm model and 

serial number and find out who owned the gun. However, that’s 

not very helpful because that’s usually after the fact, after the 

offence has occurred. And so to say that it’s helpful in policing, 

I don’t agree with that statement because the fact that someone 



April 29, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5277 

owns a firearm does not change how you would respond to a 

call unless the firearm was being used. 

 

Lots of people have firearms in their home. You respond to a 

call, maybe an unknown problem, a disturbance call. You’re not 

going to deal with it any differently if they own a firearm or 

don’t own a firearm. You are going to respond differently if a 

firearm is suggested in the call, for instance someone’s pointing 

a rifle in a yard or in an alley. You would attend that call with, 

you know, safety in mind that there is a firearm there. So to say 

that it is safer for police, I don’t agree with that. 

 

When police do search warrants, drug raids, it’s standard 

procedure to do the entry in a dynamic fashion because you 

would expect there to be firearms. If the information you have 

is that the drug dealer does in fact have a firearm, and your 

informant says that he has one, he’s seen it there recently, then 

we would use, police would use the SWAT [special weapons 

and tactics] team or ERT [emergency response team] team to do 

the entry for the search warrant. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this has been a long-standing mistake by 

government to make this law, especially the long-gun registry. I 

think that we need to recognize as legislators that sometimes 

when we make legislation it doesn’t always work like it’s 

supposed to. And I think this wasn’t thought out well enough 

and 15 years ago, you know . . . We’re still here in 

Saskatchewan saying, you know, just a minute here. This 

doesn’t make sense. 

 

And so I would ask the members opposite to support my 

motion. They are on record, both Mr. Quennell and . . . Oh, 

pardon me. The member from Meewasin and the former 

minister of Justice, Chris Axworthy, is in Hansard as being 

opposed to the long-gun registry as well. 

 

So I think today what this is about is taking a long-time, bad 

decision and saying no more and ask that this legislation be 

repealed and that we send a very strong, clear, united message 

to Ottawa encouraging the members of parliament to support 

Bill C-391. So I so move the motion: 

 

That this Assembly encourages all Members of 

Parliament to support C-391, a private member’s bill that 

seeks to abolish the expensive and ineffective long-gun 

registry, which unfairly penalizes law-abiding firearm 

owners, but fails to provide further protection for 

Canadians against crimes committed with firearms. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the member from Saskatoon Sutherland: 

 

That this Assembly encourages all Members of 

Parliament to support Bill C-391, a private member’s Bill 

that seeks to abolish the expensive and ineffective 

long-gun registry, which unfairly penalizes law-abiding 

firearm owners, but fails to provide for Canadians against 

crimes committed with firearms. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from Regina Dewdney. 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure 

why we’re in a debate about an issue — although relevant to 

Saskatchewan people and one that when we were in 

government took a very firm position on — but it is truly an 

issue that is before the Parliament of Canada, Mr. Speaker. And 

the issue won’t be determined by a debate in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. And this is an opportunity for the people of 

Saskatchewan to hear us talk about the issues that are in front of 

us and the responsibility of us provincially. 

 

And so we’re a little astounded that we’re today talking about 

an issue that will be decided in Ottawa, if ever decided, Mr. 

Speaker. But I am very happy to hear the members opposite 

with the concept of supporting private members’ legislation, 

and that I’m happy with because, Mr. Speaker, we have many 

pieces of private members’ legislation before this Assembly 

which we would hope they would support as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s kind of ironic to bring forward a motion 

talking about support for an issue where your opposition’s 

already made that very clear when they were the government 

and was very straightforward . . . let the people of 

Saskatchewan know where they stood. So why would we then 

debate an issue that really everyone’s position is understood. 

And where the issue is well understood by both parties, I don’t 

know why we would waste our time talking about something 

where we’re clearly, clearly already decided. Clearly already, 

when we were government, made a firm stand and they 

obviously have the same position. So why are we debating? 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a few minutes though and 

talk about some of the private members’ legislation we have 

before us in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

because we could have taken this opportunity to talk about 

private members’ legislation here, things that are important also 

to the people of Saskatchewan. And I’m not saying this issue 

isn’t important, but it’s outside our immediate control and 

outside our immediate ability. 

 

But we do have a number of pieces of legislation that we could 

have been debating today, and we could have been trying to 

move forward, Mr. Speaker. And they could have supported the 

opposition and moving forward one of these Bills today by 

making it their priority and helping move forward important 

private members’ legislation. We do appreciate that they 

believe private members’ legislation is important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a number of very important Bills before 

us today that are private members’ Bills, Mr. Speaker, the 

seniors’ bill of rights, The Autism Spectrum Disorder Strategy 

Act, The Earth Day Recognition Act, Mr. Speaker. Now these 

are Bills that are before the people of Saskatchewan, private 

members’ Bills. 

 

We also have, Mr. Speaker, The Public Safety, Security and 

Protection Act and The Whistleblower Protection Act, Mr. 

Speaker. So here in Saskatchewan we have before us six private 

members’ Bills that we could have had taken the opportunity to 

advance these private members’ Bill in the interest of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan and something that’s 

within our control and within our mandate and within our 

responsibility, Mr. Speaker, as well. 

 



5278 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2010 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I reflect upon the Bills that we have 

brought forward in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, there are Bills 

that are there for the protection of the public, in The Public 

Safety, Security and Protection Act, Mr. Speaker. That piece of 

legislation is about enhancing the security and protection of 

Saskatchewan citizens within our provincial boundaries, Mr. 

Speaker, within our jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s an important piece of legislation that the members 

opposite could’ve brought forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Or we could’ve been dealing with Bill No. 609, The 

Whistleblower Protection Act, Mr. Speaker, but no instead they 

want to talk about a piece of legislation that’s before the federal 

commons, House of Commons, Mr. Speaker. Also we have 

other Bills that, Mr. Speaker, that are before us, the seniors’ bill 

of rights, Mr. Speaker, a very important piece of legislation to 

enhance the seniors’ rights in the province of Saskatchewan. 

Something I would hope all members of this Assembly would 

support, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And these Bills are before this Assembly, but they’re also Bills 

within our immediate jurisdiction, within our responsibility, and 

things that I think, Mr. Speaker, that we should be spending our 

time dealing on, rather than issues that are before the Parliament 

of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also have, Mr. Speaker, I think a very important Bill 

dealing with The Autism Spectrum Disorder Strategy Act, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s a very important Bill to many families in 

Saskatchewan. There are many, many Saskatchewan families 

with autistic children that would love to have this Bill passed, 

Mr. Speaker. It would be an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to move 

a Bill on autism forward and provide hope for families with 

autistic children, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, those are 

things that are within our responsibility. Those are things that, 

Mr. Speaker, we should be willing to move forward on. And 

then, Mr. Speaker, we also moved forward a very simple Bill, 

recognizing Earth Day, Mr. Speaker. The Earth Day 

Recognition Act, Mr. Speaker, that’s also before this Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if the government truly wanted to work on private 

members’ legislation, Mr. Speaker, any one of these Bills 

would move to help and enhance the lives of Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker, which is what our primary responsibility 

is. Now, Mr. Speaker, we do appreciate, we very much 

appreciate the Bills that are before the House of Commons. We 

appreciate the work that federal members of parliament do on 

behalf of their constituents which include our constituents as 

well, Mr. Speaker. But we should be spending our time in the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, debating important 

legislation for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to once again just take a moment or 

two to talk about a couple of very important Bills. And, Mr. 

Speaker, probably, probably the most important piece of 

legislation before us here is a piece of legislation called The 

Public Safety, Security and Protection Act, Mr. Speaker, a Bill 

designed to help ensure the security and protection of 

Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker. And they don’t want to 

debate this Bill. They don’t want to vote on this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, and they don’t want to move it forward to help protect 

the security of Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker. And we 

should all want to enhance and protect the people of our 

province now. 

 

The Speaker: — Being now 4:30 and pursuant to order of this 

Assembly, we’ll recess until 6 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed until 18:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5247 

  Morin ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5247, 5254 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5247 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5247 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5248 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5248 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5248 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5248 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5248 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5248 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5249 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5249 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5253 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5254 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5263 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5249 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5249 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5249 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5249 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5250 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5250 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5250 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5250 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5250 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5251 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5251 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5251 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Catholic Women’s League Convention 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5251 

 Celebrating the Roughriders’ 100th Anniversary 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5251 

 Signs of Spring 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5252 

 Government’s Nursing Strategy 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5252 

 Resources for Francophone Students 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5252 

 Central Collegiate Institute’s 100th Anniversary 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5253 

 Checking Numbers 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5253 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Consultation on Interprovincial Agreement 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5254 

  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5254 

 Consultation on Changes to Legislation 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5256 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5256 

 Saskatchewan Communications Network 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5257 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5257 

 State of the Provincial Economy 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5258 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5258 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5259 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5260 



 

 Standing Committee on the Economy 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5261 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 137 — The Safer Communities and Neighbourhoods Amendment Act, 2010 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5259 

 Bill No. 119 — The Ticket Sales Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5260 

 Bill No. 143 — The Tobacco Tax Amendment Act, 2010 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5260 

 Bill No. 121 — The Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5261 

 Bill No. 123 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5262 

 Bill No. 131 — The Conservation Easements Amendment Act, 2009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5262 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 

 Bill No. 119 — The Ticket Sales Act 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5260 

 Bill No. 121 — The Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5261 

 Bill No. 123 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2009 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5261 

MOTIONS 

 Appointment of Conflict of Interest Commissioner 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5262 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5263 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5264 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 The People’s Trust 

  Broten ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5264, 5274 

  Hickie ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5266, 5274 

  Quennell ......................................................................................................................................................................... 5268, 5275 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5269 

  Iwanchuk ....................................................................................................................................................................... 5271, 5274 

  Michelson ....................................................................................................................................................................... 5272, 5275 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5273 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5274 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5274 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5275 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5275 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5275 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5275 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 4 — Support for Bill C-391 

  Schriemer ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5276 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5277 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


