




















































Hansard: May 12, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 60A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 12, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5501 

 May 12, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it‟s a pleasure to introduce some special guests to you 

and through you to every member of this Assembly who are 

seated in your gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the second annual Juvenile Diabetes Research 

Foundation annual Regina golf tournament, there was a prize 

that was used to raise some money. It was called Dinner with 

the Premier. I‟ll leave it to members to decide how much of a 

prize that really is, but we had that dinner with the recipients of 

the prize. 

 

A Regina businessman by the name of Dwayne Galloway was 

the successful entrant into that particular contest, and he had a 

great idea. He brought along his son and three of his son‟s 

friends from Luther to have dinner. We had it at a restaurant 

here at the end of March, at Memories. Memories donated it as 

part of the prize as well. And we had a great discussion that 

night about public affairs in politics, not just here in the 

province, in Canada, but all over the world frankly, the United 

States especially. We talked a little bit about sports. 

 

We had a great evening, and it was a great honour for me to 

share the evening with them. And I‟ve invited them to the 

Assembly today. I had a brief chance to meet with them in the 

Premier‟s office earlier on, but I‟d like to introduce them to all 

members if I can. Now maybe they‟ll give us a bit of a wave. 

 

First, Dwayne Galloway is here. Originally from Swift Current, 

an owner of Lawn Butler here in Regina, there‟s Dwayne. His 

son Jared is with him. We‟re missing one of the participants 

from, we‟re missing Lucas from that night at the restaurant, but 

his son Jared has joined him. And then two other friends, Matt 

Dangstorp and Sam Eggertson are also here, if they‟d give us a 

little wave. 

 

As I say, Mr. Speaker, these are fine young men who are 

attending Luther. They have different plans that for some will 

take them out of the province. We hope to get them back. 

Others are going to be staying here to pursue their 

post-secondary endeavours. And I would just say this, Mr. 

Speaker, if this is representative of the future of this province, 

we are in good hands indeed. I‟d ask all members to join with 

me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you an individual that 

doesn‟t need a whole lot of introduction to the Assembly, but 

it‟s really great to see him here today. Seated behind the bar, on 

the floor as is his right as a former member of this Legislative 

Assembly, I‟m speaking of course about Dale Flavel. 

 

He served as the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood from 

1991 to 1999 and continues in many different ways to serve the 

interests of the public in this fair province of ours, 

Saskatchewan. And when he‟s not out standing in his field, he‟s 

standing tall in the legislature, many different places. But it‟s 

good to see Dale here, and I‟d ask all members to join with me 

in welcoming Dale Flavel to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena, the Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I‟m delighted today to have two groups of people in the 

legislature that I‟d like to welcome. The first group is a group is 

a group of students from Porcupine Plain School in the west 

gallery. They‟re grade 8 students, 21 of them. They have their 

teacher Lawrence Schmidt with them and also chaperones Anita 

Harphan, Shelley Burghardt, and Grant Ziola. These students 

have been watching their new school being built beside them in 

the last year, and I know they‟re delighted to be looking 

forward to their new building. And I really would like everyone 

to welcome them to their legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while I‟m on my feet, I‟d also like to welcome 17 

members from the public service who are participating in the 

parliamentary program for public servants today. I‟d like to 

welcome them to their legislature. We have representatives 

from four government ministries: Advanced Education, 

Agriculture, Education, and as well as the Public Service 

Commission. 

 

And I‟m really pleased to welcome them to their building today. 

We all know that without their support and hard work that we 

wouldn‟t be able to get our work done in this building. We‟d 

like to publicly thank you and again welcome you to your 

Legislative Building. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition, I‟d like to join with the minister and 

welcome our civil servants today that are here with us in the 

gallery. And, Mr. Speaker, we all know and understand and 

appreciate the very valuable work that they do on behalf of all 

of us and on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. So we truly 

would like to thank you for your dedication and work on behalf 

of the people. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, I‟d like to 

introduce along with the Minister of the Public Service 

Commission, there was a few I ran into today. I‟m only seeing 

two that I can spot in the Assembly right now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One is Mr. Brian Pohorelic from Yorkton, a dedicated public 



5502 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2010 

servant, well-known in the community for his giving and 

caring. 

 

One I know much better, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Larry Wells, 

long-term resident of Yorkton, formerly with the RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] for many years, serving our federal 

government, and in that respect also serving our federal 

government through his public service positions he‟s held in 

Yorkton since. Also very instrumental in the Kinsmen Club in 

Yorkton, Mr. Speaker; he‟s given of himself time and time 

again for many years. And more better known, or much more 

widely known, is his involvement with Crime Stoppers, not 

only nationally, but bringing Crime Stoppers to this province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So I‟d ask all members to welcome Brian and Mr. Larry Wells 

to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like 

to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Assembly, a couple of people sitting in your gallery. Don 

Fletcher is a constituent of mine, and he got a ride down to 

Regina today with a friend, Janet Wiebe, who‟s also in your 

gallery. Travel is very difficult for Mr. Fletcher. It was quite a 

trip down and it will be quite a trip back. I hope all members 

will welcome him to his Assembly this afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you I would like to introduce to the Assembly a 

fine-looking group of very well-behaved students from 

Neilburg. These are grade 7 and 8 students; there‟s 23 in total 

today. And, Mr. Speaker, I know they‟ll be well-behaved 

because I note there are eight teachers and chaperones 

accompanying. The ratio is higher than we sometimes see in the 

legislature. So I would just like to welcome them all to their 

Legislative Assembly. And I look forward to meeting with them 

shortly after question period for another question period. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you to all members of the Legislative Assembly it gives me 

great pleasure to introduce in the west gallery, Heather Malek. 

Heather is a film and television editor here in Regina and is one 

of thousands of people who are concerned about this 

government‟s decision to privatize SCN, the Saskatchewan 

Communications Network, and the manner in which they‟ve 

done it. With that I‟d ask all my colleagues, all members, to 

welcome Heather to her Legislative Assembly today. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to 

join with the member from Elphinstone in welcoming a former 

member who represented Last Mountain-Touchwood, Mr. Dale 

Flavel. I‟m happy to see him seated behind the bar, and I 

certainly wish him a happy retirement. And it‟s good to see him 

here again today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Toth: — Members, it‟s a pleasure for me to 

introduce guests as well today. We have with us a group of 

people from Kipling Industries in Kipling. And I had the 

pleasure of enjoying lunch with this group of individuals and 

I‟d like to let you know who all‟s with us today. We have Darcy 

Brickley. We have John Darveau. We have Andrew Dixon. We 

have Justin DeRoos, Jack Rieder, Teresa Daku, Joleen Daku, 

Brenda Galbraith, and Brendan Gall. And with them staff, 

Joanne Weir, executive director; Daryl Savage who is the 

program coordinator; and Deb McDougall, activity director. 

Earlier today we were joined as well by Jack Rieder‟s brother 

and sister, Francis and Cecile. 

 

Ladies and gentlemen, when you have the opportunity of 

meeting individuals such as this and get to know them, and 

even as we were enjoying lunch together and just the 

camaraderie and the excitement as they were . . . First time as 

I‟m aware for most of them that they‟ve ever been in the 

Legislative Chamber. And I would ask the members to join with 

me in extending a warm welcome. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 

Saskatchewan that are concerned over the condition and the 

safety of our highways. This petition pertains to Highway 10 

between Fort Qu‟Appelle and the junction of Highway 1. The 

petition states that this highway is a main traffic route to a 

year-round tourist destination, as well it serves three major 

inland grain terminals. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway 10 between Fort Qu‟Appelle and the 

junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety of 

Saskatchewan‟s motoring public. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And this petition is signed by the good folks in Fort 

Qu‟Appelle, Lebret, Balcarres, and Regina, Saskatchewan. I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of the protection of wildlife habitat 

lands. Mr. Speaker, we know that wildlife habitat protection 

Act protects 3.4 million acres of uplands and wetlands, or 

one-third of all wildlife habitat lands in Saskatchewan in its 

natural state, and that there is a great deal of concern with the 



May 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5503 

government‟s proposed amendments repealing the schedule 

listing the designated lands. And the prayer reads, Mr. Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately and 

without delay recognize the importance of the protection 

of wildlife habitat lands and immediately withdraw 

proposed amendments that will negatively affect the 

protection of wildlife habitat lands; 

 

And in so doing cause the provincial government to 

commit to meaningful and adequate consultations with all 

stakeholders that will be affected by future legislative 

changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by citizens in Moose 

Jaw and Redvers. Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition in support of 

maintaining educational assistants in the province. And as we 

all know, educational assistants provide supports to students 

with special needs. And the Ministry of Education introduced a 

document in November of 2009 which indicated that there 

would be drastic reductions in the number of EAs [educational 

assistant] in the province and a replacement with a speech and 

language therapist and psychologist. This petition indicates that 

they want the following: 

 

To cause the government to provide funding for the 

required number of educational assistants to provide 

special needs students with the support they need and 

maintain a positive learning environment for all 

Saskatchewan students. 

 

And this petition is signed by people from Saskatoon as well as 

someone from Holbein, Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing in Saskatoon. And we know that there is a shrinking 

number of accommodations for rent in Saskatoon, and yet the 

rents are going up. I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to develop an affordable housing program 

that will result in a greater number of quality and 

affordable rental units to be made available to more 

people in Saskatoon and Saskatchewan and that the 

government also implement a process of rent review or 

rent control to better protect tenants in a non-competitive 

housing environment. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of Highway 915. This petition addresses the concerns 

of Saskatchewan people about the quality of the Stanley 

Mission road. I will read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to upgrade and repair Highway 915 as 

soon as possible. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Stanley Mission. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition in support of SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 

Applied Science and Technology] and students attending 

SIAST. In the recent budget that delivered some significant cuts 

to SIAST programming, there are a number of students that are 

voicing their concern about the Sask Party government‟s 

decision to shortchange SIAST. And the prayer reads: 

 

To change the Sask Party government to recognize the 

importance of the programs offered by SIAST campuses 

in ensuring that we develop a highly skilled and educated 

workforce in Saskatchewan, and in so doing to cause the 

Sask Party government to stop shortchanging SIAST 

which forces the institution to cut programs, and instead 

to immediately increase funding to SIAST to allow for the 

reinstatement of programs affected by recent budget cuts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this petition are from 

the city of Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise yet again today 

to present a petition in support of financial assistance for the 

town of Duck Lake water project. The petition is being 

circulated and signed by Saskatchewan residents. Due to the 

exorbitant amount of money that Duck Lake residents will pay 

for clean, safe water, it‟s causing them hardship and is forcing 

people to actually move away from their community. And the 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 



5504 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2010 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by good folks from the town 

of Duck Lake, the community of Spruce Home, and the city of 

Prince Albert. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise yet 

again today to present a petition on behalf of rural residents 

who are dealing with another water issue. A government 

ministry has directed that these customers may no longer treat 

non-potable water using methods approved by Sask Health, and 

that these Furdale residents, in dealing in good faith with 

SaskWater for over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their 

domestic systems and in-home treatment equipment. And the 

alternative water supply referred to by the government ministry 

is a private operator offering treated, non-pressurized water at 

great cost with no guarantee of quality, quantity, or availability 

of water. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Furdale and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again 

with a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan who had 

requested the government, even at this late date, withdraw its 

reference to the Court of Appeal in respect to legislation that 

would allow marriage commissioners to discriminate on the 

basis of race, religion or sexual orientation, Mr. Speaker. And 

the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligations to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon, Regina, and 

Moose Jaw, and I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 

here today to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 

from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They 

specifically allude to the two years and billions of dollars of 

deficits racked up by the Sask Party and the billions of dollars 

of debt growth projected to grow underneath the Sask Party. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of 

Preeceville, Buchanan, Pelly and Kamsack. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today with a petition in support of midwifery in Saskatchewan. 

This petition is signed by residents who are concerned that two 

years after the proclamation of The Midwifery Act there are still 

only seven registered midwives in Saskatchewan, and the only 

women who actually really have access to midwifery are those 

within the city limits of Saskatoon. I‟d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to keep its promise to broaden the options 

for women and their families and recognize that presently 

this promise remains unfulfilled, as many communities in 

Saskatchewan still do not have midwives employed by 

their respective health regions; 

 

And in doing so, your petitioners pray the honourable 

Legislative Assembly cause the government to support 

midwifery in Saskatchewan by making funding available 

for additional midwife positions in Saskatchewan‟s health 

regions as well as independent positions; 

 

And, furthermore, the honourable Legislative Assembly 

cause the government to encourage an increase in the 

number of licensed midwives in Saskatchewan by 

extending liability insurance, thereby making it possible 

for prospective midwives to achieve the number of births 

required to successfully apply for a licence with the newly 

formed College of Midwives. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Estevan, 

Southey, Wynyard, and Regina. I so submit. 

 



May 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5505 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Leader of the 

Opposition. 

 

26th Legislature Caps 26-Year Career 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

privilege this afternoon to rise today to pay tribute to one of our 

colleagues who announced this morning that this 26th 

legislature will cap off his 26-year career of public service to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The member for Regina Northeast served for a decade as a 

councillor in the rural municipality of Claydon, and for 16 years 

has represented his constituents as a member of this Assembly. 

Those constituents, and people throughout the province, know 

this member as a dedicated MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly], a conscientious public servant and a true friend of 

the ordinary working man and woman. Genuine and down to 

earth, people know this member‟s unassuming style truly 

embodies the philosophy he learned from one of his political 

mentors, Leonard Larson, a former member from Pelly who 

said you can push people an inch, but you can lead them a mile. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member has served the public just a few years 

longer than his beloved Montreal Canadiens have been without 

a Stanley Cup. But as he prepares to exit public life, both he and 

his Habs are enjoying an unbelievable winning streak. But it‟s 

the people of Regina Northeast, and indeed all of 

Saskatchewan, who have been the true winners, Mr. Speaker, to 

have this member as their champion in our Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

member of Regina Northeast, his wife Carol and family, and 

offering our best wishes for whatever adventures life may bring 

their way when retirement actually does become reality. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

National Nursing Week and International Nurses Day 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Anyone who 

has come in contact with the health system can attest to the 

important contributions that nurses make in delivering high 

quality health care. As the largest group of health care providers 

in the province, nurses are held in the highest esteem by the 

people of Saskatchewan who trust and rely on them. For this 

reason, Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize May 10th to 16th 

as National Nursing Week and May 12th as International 

Nurses Day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, two years ago our government signed a 

partnership agreement with the Saskatchewan union of nursing 

looking for more ways to recruit and retain nurses, and we 

committed $60 million to support this. Our goal was to add 800 

nurses to Saskatchewan‟s workforce and we wanted to take 

action to address the chronic shortage of nurses in our health 

care system, a shortage that is not unique to this province. But 

since we signed this partnership there are 650 more nurses 

working in Saskatchewan today. That‟s 81 per cent of the target 

set by our agreement. 

 

Now as Legislative Secretary for the Minister of Health, I‟ve 

had the opportunity to meet and talk to hundreds of nurses and I 

would personally like to recognize all nurses currently working 

in Saskatchewan‟s health care system for their hard work and 

their dedication. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Speech and Hearing Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

inform the House that our government has proclaimed the 

month of May as Speech and Hearing Awareness Month in 

Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan Deaf and Hard of Hearing 

Services has been providing services to people who are deaf or 

hard of hearing, since 1981. 

 

Our government supports the goal of a world without barriers 

for people who are deaf or hard of hearing. Promoting this 

objective is also the primary mission of Saskatchewan Deaf and 

Hard of Hearing Services. Mr. Speaker, we are pleased to 

support that organization and its important work with this 

proclamation. 

 

Throughout the month of May, Saskatchewan Deaf and Hard of 

Hearing Services will be striving to raise public awareness of 

the needs of deaf and the hard of hearing people, as well as 

providing information about the services being provided to 

them by a variety of agencies throughout the province. Raising 

awareness is one of the ways that we can help overcome 

barriers for people who are deaf or hard of hearing. 

 

We are therefore pleased to have proclaimed the month of May 

2010 as Speech and Hearing Awareness Month in 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I hope all members take some time 

this week and realize how fortunate people are and we should 

never take for granted the ability to speak and hear. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Fibromyalgia Awareness Day 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, today is Fibromyalgia 

Awareness Day. May 12th is chosen as Fibromyalgia 

Awareness Day because it coincides with birthdate of Florence 

Nightingale, the English army nurse who inspired the founding 

of international Red Cross. 

 

Fibromyalgia is a chronic condition producing a widespread 

musculoskeletal pain, disturbed sleep, and debilitating 

exhaustion from head to toe. One of my constituents with the 

condition states that, quote, “When you suffer from 

fibromyalgia, you judge every physical task that you have to 

accomplish by two criteria: how much pain is this going to 

cause me, and how long will it take to recover from this?” 

 

As we can tell from this statement, fibromyalgia has a 

devastating effect and impact on people‟s lives, people‟s work, 

and their families. Roughly a quarter of the people suffering 



5506 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2010 

from the condition are work-disabled. Fibromyalgia was widely 

misunderstood when it first came to the public‟s attention, just 

as multiple sclerosis was labelled hysterical paralysis before 

medical understanding and public awareness caught up with the 

disease. 

 

Unfortunately, finding treatment options for sufferers has been 

impeded by this diagnosis. Fibromyalgia requires the visionary 

support from health professionals, researchers, and our Ministry 

of Health. Today on Fibromyalgia Awareness Day I call on this 

government to commit to effective treatments for those who 

suffer from fibromyalgia. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Riderville Events in Yorkton 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 

Saturday I was able to attend the fourth annual football night in 

Yorkton which raises funds for the support of minor football. 

The banquet was also the final event of a week of events in 

Yorkton‟s bid to become Riderville. Events during the week 

included a Rider museum, classic games screenings, breakfasts, 

barbecues, performances by local bands, and football and 

cheerleader camps for youth, a best-dressed pet competition, 

and the first-born baby after high noon Saturday was declared 

Riderville baby by the business improvement district. 

 

This year‟s event had a Rider “paride” almost one hour long 

which featured Jim Hopson and George Reed and several 

Riders including Gene Makowsky, Weston Dressler, Stu Ford, 

and Hamilton Ti-Cat local boy, Jordan Matechuk, and yes, Mr. 

Speaker, Gainer the Gopher. 

 

This weekend ended with a dinner featuring guest speakers 

Ti-Cat Jordan Matechuk, Rider Gene Makowsky and Weston 

Dressler. And a surprise guest to many, Mr. Speaker, was Troy 

Westwood, the former kicker with the Winnipeg Blue Bombers 

who helped rename the Labour Day Classic between our Riders 

and Bombers, now famous as the Banjo Bowl. 

 

Troy did a very admirable job, Mr. Speaker, at the banquet 

speaking highly of the Riders and their fans and humbly of the 

merits and benefits of minor football and its positive impact on 

youth. He gave accolades to Barry and Roby Sharpe and Jason 

Farrell, along with the many volunteers involved in this 

week-long initiative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was a great week and I thank all the volunteers, 

fans, and people of our community for their contributions and 

participation and literally painting the town green, and a special 

thanks to the Riders for coming out and supporting Yorkton 

minor football year after year. And, Mr. Speaker, Yorkton‟s 

Riderville. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

A Spelling Lesson 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan are 

coming to understand that a Sask Party government spells 

t-r-o-u-b-l-e. No matter where they look, Mr. Speaker, they see 

an alphabet soup of incompetence and broken trust. 

 

The Premier‟s off to promote the New West Partnership or 

NWP, which everyone knows is really spelled T-I-L-M-A. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Or take the Health minister, Mr. Speaker, who started this 

session ready to sign an MOU [memorandum of understanding] 

with BC [British Columbia] on premium surgeries and ended up 

as the second minister told to mind his Ps & Qs after he failed 

to consult over H-I-P-A. 

 

G, D, and P gave the Finance minister grief, Mr. Speaker, and 

his budget calculations earned him a solid F. That meant the 

government‟s PST [provincial sales tax] cheque to the cities 

came back NSF [not sufficient funds], so they had to write them 

a $54 million IOU [I owe you]. 

 

When they saw the poster for the Environment minister‟s pig 

roast BBQ [barbecue], Mr. Speaker, nearly everyone thought 

b-a-d. And she hasn‟t done any better with W-H-P-A, Mr. 

Speaker, with a plan to sell off Crown land with a mere OC 

[order in council] without scrutiny by MLAs. The one word she 

can‟t seem to spell is c-o-n-s-u-l-t. 

 

It‟s literally a jumble of incompetence and broken trust over 

there, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s why the people of Saskatchewan 

are ready to spell the end of that government in 2011 when they 

write the letter X next to the letters NDP [New Democratic 

Party]. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Moose Jaw Health Foundation Radiothon 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, last week the Moose Jaw 

Health Foundation held its 4th annual Family First Radiothon. 

The 36-hour radiothon began Thursday at 6 a.m. and went till 

Friday at 6 p.m. All funds raised will go toward the women‟s 

health unit of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital for the purchase of 

new equipment such as Panda Beds, hydraulic birth beds, an 

advanced ultrasound transducer, new infant warmers, and a fetal 

heart monitor. 

 

The event concluded with a dramatic finale as radio host Craig 

Hemingway was set to announce the total amount raised just 

before 6 p.m. on Friday, an impressive total of just over 

$125,000, but a last-minute donation of $50,000 by Bernice and 

Al Fox of Moose Jaw raised the grand total to $175,796.  

 

Kelly McElree, the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Moose 

Jaw Health Foundation, spent the entire 36 hours overseeing the 

successful fundraiser. While we can‟t be sure if it was 

exhaustion or just sheer joy, Mr. McElree became quite 

emotional as the grand total was announced. 

 

At this time, I ask all the Assembly to join me in congratulating 

CEO Kelly McElree and the Moose Jaw Health Foundation 

Board, all the volunteers and donors, and radio station CHAB 

for another successful radiothon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



May 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5507 

The Speaker: — Just a reminder because it could come back to 

haunt us, members are not to use public displays in the 

Assembly, I remind, even including members‟ statements. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Proposed Long-Term Care Facility 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health has 

confirmed the government and the Saskatchewan health region 

have received a proposal from Amicus Health Care Inc. to build 

a 100-bed long-term care facility in Saskatoon. And that 

proposal is being discussed by the health region as we speak. 

 

To the minister: who‟s building the facility? Which contractor 

has been lined up to construct this 100-bed facility? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I would say that the 

member is right this time. She is right that the Saskatoon 

Regional Health Authority will be looking at a proposal put 

forward by the Catholic Health Ministry, Mr. Speaker. That 

proposal is a innovative way to look at funding long-term care 

in our province, Mr. Speaker. The health region is looking at 

that. 

 

But what the proposal does talk about, the details that I do 

know, is that it would be the Catholic Health Ministry that 

would be building it. As far as contractors, that is up to them. If 

there are overruns, that is up to them, Mr. Speaker. We would 

simply be using this as a venue to rent or lease long-term care 

beds, Mr. Speaker, which are desperately needed in the 

Saskatoon area. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that the public 

is going to be paying for this $27 million project, and we know 

that the project has been discussed by the Saskatoon Health 

Region on a number of occasions and an announcement is 

imminent. It stands to reason therefore that the board has 

discussed the issue of who will be contracted to build this 

facility and the process by which that contractor will be 

selected. 

 

So to the minister: who is being contracted with to build this 

$27 million facility? And was this contract tendered? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, what the member 

doesn‟t understand is that this is a contract that will be entered 

into between the health region and the Catholic Health 

Ministry. The Catholic Health Ministry is responsible for 

construction, design. What we are looking at, Mr. Speaker, 

because this is an innovative way . . . Right now, Mr. Speaker, 

the member I think is concerned that there may be . . . it may 

cost too much. 

When we took over, Mr. Speaker, there weren‟t enough 

long-term care beds in Saskatoon. So what we have right now is 

long-term care residents living in acute care settings at 

extremely high cost — about $9,000 a day, Mr. Speaker, 

absolutely unacceptable. We‟re looking at innovative ways to 

make sure that long-term care, or our seniors can live in dignity 

in the facilities that they‟re living in near the end of their life, 

Mr. Speaker. It would be only the NDP that would be rejecting 

that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this is a $27 million project, 

and it‟s important that we ensure, as legislators, that taxpayers 

get value for their money. Now the higher the winning 

contractors bid, the higher the debt that Amicus will have to 

incur and the higher the premium that Saskatchewan taxpayers 

will have to pay to build this facility.  

 

So to the minister: how much of a premium will taxpayers and 

patients be forced to pay to cover the debt-servicing costs on 

this project? And is it $25,000 per year per bed, or $2.5 million 

a year? 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Just before I ask the minister to 

respond, most members have been really paying close attention, 

but there were a couple of members that really were interjecting 

from their seats. I would ask them to allow the minister to 

respond without interference. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, this project is very exciting, Mr. Speaker, because 

what we‟re doing is looking at an innovative way, first of all to 

look at the capital, but more importantly the care that our 

seniors that will be receiving in a facility like this such as aging 

in place, Mr. Speaker, such as aging with dignity, Mr. Speaker, 

such as aging with their spouse in the same location. Mr. 

Speaker, that is something different than what we‟ve looked at 

for many, many years. 

 

This facility has an awful lot of positives, Mr. Speaker, and 

none of them, Mr. Speaker, is the whole care that our seniors 

will be receiving in this facility. Mr. Speaker, there will be an 

agreement between the Saskatoon Health Region and the 

Catholic Health Ministry that will not see the cost any higher 

than what we‟re seeing in other locations, Mr. Speaker, with a 

facility fee tacked on to cover some of the capital as we move 

forward, Mr. Speaker. But it is the Catholic Health Ministry that 

is responsible for construction, operations, all of those issues, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Consultation on Changes to Legislation 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation and the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations] called on the government to pull back its 

changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and conduct 

more consultation. Today Nature Saskatchewan added their 



5508 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2010 

voices to the growing chorus of people calling on the 

government to slow down the process. 

 

To the minister: will the government withdraw its changes to 

The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act and instead conduct the 

meaningful consultations that Saskatchewan people so far have 

been denied? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, our government is 

committed to this legislation. We believe in the principle of 

land ownership and we are committed to moving forward with 

this legislation. Mr. Speaker, I would like to read into the record 

a part of a letter that I received from the Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities. It says, “Thank you for the 

opportunity to participate in the consultation meeting on May 

6.” It goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, and I quote, “SARM 

supports the passage of the proposed changes to The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act as found in Bill no. 132.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities represents 296 RMs [rural municipality]. They 

represent hundreds of thousands of people, Mr. Speaker, and 

they are in full support of what we are doing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Well, Mr. Speaker, one day she calls . . . now 

she calls it a consultation on May 6th. The other time she called 

it a workshop and said it wasn‟t necessary for the FSIN to be 

there and express the voices on behalf of the 74 First Nations of 

this province. 

 

The minister claims that she‟s held consultations, but we know 

that this minister‟s definition of consultation, indeed this 

government‟s definition of consultation, is radically different 

from that of most people. Most people define consultation as 

something more than a passing mention that the government 

might be doing something in a letter or asking for input when 

the final decision has already been made. 

 

To the minister: will she table in this legislature today the 

agenda for the consultations that she claims to have conducted 

along with the letter of invitation to those meetings and a list of 

the stakeholders who were invited? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll read this again 

for the member opposite. It was the Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities who thanked me for inviting them to be 

part of our consultation meeting. And, Mr. Speaker, coming out 

of that meeting were suggestions that the stakeholder groups 

had brought forward. I discussed these with my cabinet 

colleagues this morning, and they are things that we were going 

to be moving forward on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These include using a portion of the revenues from the sale of 

these lands. It will go to the Fish and Wildlife Development 

Fund for land conservation. We will be setting up a 

conservation land committee which continued . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I would ask the member from 

Regina Walsh Acres to allow the minister to respond to the 

question that was placed. Order. Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, we are also committed to 

setting up the Crown land conservation committee which will 

give stakeholders an ongoing voice in the conservation of lands 

in this province. We are also going to be using the assessment 

tool, the science-based assessment tool that was developed 

within my ministry to be used on other lands such as 

unoccupied Crown lands to see if there‟s other properties that 

we can put under wildlife habitat protection, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Agreement Between Colleges 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, St. Peter‟s College, a private 

institution, plans to merge with Carlton Trail Regional College, 

a public institution. The institutions already share a CEO; board 

members already play dual roles. A call was put out at the end 

of March for board members for the new entity. A new senate 

has already been appointed of which the minister is a member, 

and a joint syllabus has already been prepared for the fall. But 

the minister claimed yesterday that he didn‟t know what was 

going on. Does the minister really expect Saskatchewan people 

to believe that he was, that he was entirely unaware of this 

merger? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker, for the 

opportunity to provide an update about the significance that 

regional colleges play to the people of this province. Mr. 

Speaker, what we know is that 24,000 students are offered 

full-time, part-time, and a variety of other programs. 

 

Regarding, regarding this arrangement, I‟ll just go back to a 

news release that was issued last July 10th. We were there. 

There were federal representatives there and representatives 

from across the community at St. Peter‟s, as well the Carlton 

Trail Regional College. And Professor Glen Kobussen said, and 

I quote, “This new partnership . . . will enable us to be more 

responsive and innovative, allowing us to better fulfill the needs 

of all of our stakeholders.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, this builds on over 10 years of these colleges 

working together. It‟s up to the colleges to actually map out a 

future, Mr. Speaker. As far as the ministry‟s concerned, we‟ll 

do and undertake our due diligence as required, and our key 

criterion will be what‟s in the best interest of the students of this 

province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 



May 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5509 

Mr. Broten: — Let‟s remember the taxpayers in that thinking 

as well, Mr. Speaker. Let me get this straight, Mr. Speaker, a 

joint CEO, board members that serve double duty, a 

full-fledged plan for one entity, and yet the minister claims that 

it‟s just an idea, just a thought right now. But it gets worse, Mr. 

Speaker. Here‟s what the winter-spring edition of the St. Peter‟s 

Newsletter had to say, “The provincial government is 

encouraging the merger and the legislation is expected to be in 

place this fall to confirm the merger.” 

 

To the minister: will he admit that he is encouraging the merger 

and plans to introduce legislation this fall to remove Carlton 

Trail Regional College from public control? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, what we certainly do 

encourage are grassroots ideas about finding new ways to find 

innovative cost savings and efficiencies to ensure that more 

taxpayer dollars, those dollars that the member opposite made 

reference to, so that more of those can be directed towards 

students and student services, Mr. Speaker. As far as the idea of 

working more closely together, this has been in development 

over the course of the last 10 years. At the secret announcement 

last July, Mr. Speaker, secret where hundreds of people were 

there, there was . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I‟m having difficulty hearing 

the minister‟s response to the question. I ask the minister to 

complete his answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. As I was 

saying, as we see these two organizations working more closely 

together, building on a decade of experience, what we have said 

is, as they undertake their innovations and their consultations, 

certainly we‟ll be doing our due diligence. We approach this 

with an open mind, with a sole criterion overriding all other 

considerations — ensuring that we‟re serving the interests of 

the students of this province. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister claims that nothing 

has been decided and that he plans to consult on this, but all the 

evidence suggests the opposite. Millions and millions of dollars 

of public assets are about to be handed over to a private 

institution, and this minister pretends he‟s going to engage in 

meaningful consultations this summer. 

 

To the minister: why won‟t he just be straight with 

Saskatchewan people, admit that it‟s a done deal and that the 

public assets are being handed over to a private institution with 

no consultation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m happy to speak about 

taxpayer dollars because in this case we‟re very proud of our 

track record. In fact what we were able to do is to reach out to 

St. Peter‟s. When they came forward with a proposal that was 

over $12 million we said, can you help raise some money and 

we‟ll have a look at it. St. Peter‟s helped to raise more than $3 

million. Mr. Speaker, the provincial government then matched 

that. 

 

Fortuitously that occurred just as the federal government came 

out with the knowledge infrastructure program. We were able to 

move forward with a $12 million project there. But more than 

that, Mr. Speaker, just down the road, working in conjunction 

with the Ministry of Education, we were able to move together 

in a $4 million facility, an educational facility in Humboldt. We 

opened that, made the announcement of that construction, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟re investing in the students of this province and 

certainly in and around Humboldt. And we‟re proud of our 

track record. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — WEPA [Western Economic Partnership 

Agreement], WHPA [The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act], 

PST, SCN, EAs chiropractors, Bill 5, Bill 6, Bill 80 — that‟s 

just the start of this government‟s record on failed consultation. 

And now you can add St. Peter‟s and Carlton Trail to that pile. 

This government clearly does not understand that consultation 

should occur before major decisions are made, not after the 

train has left the station. 

 

To the minister: when it comes to honest consultation, will the 

minister admit that he‟s as much of a failure as the Health 

minister, the Education minister, the Minister of Municipal 

Affairs, and the Premier? Will he admit that he has failed in 

proper consultation with Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, to quote from today‟s 

StarPhoenix, Professor Kobussen: “It‟s a process, it‟s not a 

done deal.” In fact our consultations are just beginning. But 

what we won‟t do is we won‟t take lessons on failure from the 

member opposite. We‟re investing in young people in this 

province. What they used to do is encourage them to leave the 

province. 

 

Our track record on population growth and investing in 

post-secondary education offers the opportunity for our young 

people to see a bright future here in the province and a bright 

future that includes post-secondary education. Investments 

including more than $120 million, Mr. Speaker, in a broad 

variety of programs that we‟ve partnered with the federal 

government, with the private sector and other partners to ensure 

that the educational infrastructure deficit that we inherited from 

the members opposite is starting to be addressed. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 



5510 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2010 

Funding for Foster Homes 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last fall the 

government approved up to $350,000 in funding for the Rising 

Stars Children‟s Ranch in the RM of Prince Albert. To the 

minister: what is the purpose of this funding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the purpose of the 

funding was to have a group home for foster children that are in 

our care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well the 

government news release dated September 24th, 2009 makes it 

clear that the funding is for up to 10 residential care spaces for 

children at risk — in other words, a group home. 

 

But an agreement between Rising Stars Children‟s Ranch and 

the RM of Prince Albert dated November 23rd, 2009 indicates 

that the development permit is for a single-family residence. As 

such it will be limited to four foster care spaces, and it will not 

be staffed as a group home. 

 

To the minister: why is the government providing $344,000 to 

build a single-family residence? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, there has been some 

concerns brought forward by some residents in the rural 

municipality with the Rising Star proposal. They are trying to 

work through it with the RM councillors, and until that is 

indeed agreed upon, the project is on hold. 

 

But it is . . . We thought that Rising Star quite frankly is a group 

that we have a record with in doing great work for our 

vulnerable children. They thought that they had an agreement 

with the rural municipality. And in fact there was some 

concerns raised, so Rising Star is working with the rural 

municipality. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Speaker, many foster families 

throughout the province struggle to make ends meet even as 

they take in some of the most vulnerable and, in many cases, 

troubled children in our province into their homes. And that 

struggle to make ends meet happens for many families, has led 

to a chronic shortage for foster homes in this province. 

 

Now we learn that the government has provided $344,000 in 

capital funding to build a single foster home. To the minister: is 

it now the policy of the Government of Saskatchewan to 

provide capital funding to foster homes? And if it‟s not, how 

does this minister intend to explain to other foster families why 

they‟re not getting the same deal? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, should this home, should 

the agreement work out with the rural municipality, the home 

will be a group home. It‟ll be a youth group home for foster 

children. It is for very young children, quite frankly, that are in 

the foster care system. 

 

What we are doing is expanding capacity quite considerably to 

house foster children in this province, unlike the members 

opposite who absolutely ignored the problem, even though it 

was pointed out by the Children‟s Advocate and the 

Ombudsman and the Provincial Auditor year over year over 

year. They absolutely ignored the problem until homes were 

crowded to up to 21 children. 

 

I am very, very proud to say, although there is a lot more work 

to do, we have reduced overcrowding in our foster homes by 

one-third in less than one year, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t think that‟s 

ever been done across our entire country where we have taken 

the pressure off the foster families in such a short period of 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Coverage for Fibromyalgia 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My constituent, 

Don Fletcher, suffers from fibromyalgia. Mr. Fletcher is in the 

gallery today to ask the Minister of Health for coverage for 

Lyrica. Mr. Fletcher and his general practitioner have written to 

the minister and Saskatchewan drug plan on several occasions 

advising that Lyrica is the only medication that provides Don 

with pain relief. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister provide exceptional drug status 

for Lyrica so Mr. Fletcher can get relief from the pain he lives 

with daily? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, our thoughts 

certainly go out to Don and any other person in Saskatchewan, 

which there are an increasing number of people in 

Saskatchewan suffering from fibromyalgia. It is a very difficult 

disease to live with or condition to live with, Mr. Speaker, and 

certainly we know some of the challenges that they face. 

 

The drug that was mentioned by the opposition member is a 

drug that is covered by exceptional drug status here in 

Saskatchewan, but only for neuropathic pain or nerve pain, Mr. 

Speaker. It isn‟t covered for fibromyalgia. And that regulation 

and how a drug is determined to be covered for a certain 

ailment such as fibromyalgia, it goes through a common drug 

review, a national process, and then it goes through a provincial 

process, Mr. Speaker. This drug hasn‟t been approved 

nationally nor has it been approved provincially for 

fibromyalgia, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Saskatoon Meewasin. 

 



May 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5511 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Fletcher has heard the 

minister‟s excuses several times before. And with the greatest 

respect to the Minister of Health, Mr. Fletcher might be more of 

an expert of the procedures that the minister described than the 

minister is himself. Lyrica is the only medication that provides 

Mr. Fletcher with any pain relief, and now Lyrica is $4 less 

expensive per month than his current prescribed medication, 

Gabapentin.  

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister meet with Mr. Fletcher today so 

Mr. Fletcher can outline his case to him? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m certainly no expert 

when it comes to the efficacy of certain drugs. I don‟t think 

anybody in this Chamber could ever claim to be that. That‟s 

why we have a process that these drugs have to go through, 

whether it‟s a national drug review or whether it‟s a provincial 

drug review, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member opposite from Prince Albert yells about Avastin. 

Avastin was approved by the Canadian cancer agency and the 

provincial cancer agency. It was the only drug approved by the 

provincial cancer agency that that NDP government didn‟t fund. 

I don‟t think he really wants to go there. 

 

But what I will say about these drugs is Pfizer has to make a 

recommendation or application to the national common drug 

review. If it‟s approved there, it comes to our provincial drug 

review. If the efficacy is there, Mr. Speaker, the drug is 

approved and we‟ll certainly cover it for fibromyalgia. To this 

point, those hoops have not been jumped through, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, again to the Minister of Health 

my actual question: will the minister meet with Mr. Fletcher 

today so that Mr. Fletcher can outline his case to him? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, on December the 8th of 2009 was my last letter back 

to Mr. Fletcher. But I will be more than glad to meet with him 

once QP [question period] is done and any possible media 

scrum is done, Mr. Speaker. I‟d be more than glad to meet with 

him in my office. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the answer from 

the Minister of Health. I‟m sure Mr. Fletcher does as well, and I 

know he‟s looking forward to having that meeting. Again the 

cost of Lyrica has now changed, and I appreciate the 

government‟s reluctance to make the application to have the 

drug covered.  

 

Is the government‟s reluctance to have the drug covered now 

gone that the medication is $4 cheaper than the alternative for 

Mr. Fletcher, Gabapentin, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I outlined the process 

before, this drug has to go through the national common drug 

review. That organization will look at the efficacy, Mr. Speaker. 

I would say that very seldom is the price point the deciding 

factor, whether it‟s above the drugs that are available right now 

or whether it‟s below. What is looked at is the efficacy of the 

drug, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that it is effective for the 

population, that it is safe for the population, Mr. Speaker. I am 

certainly no one to make that call. I don‟t have the expertise. 

That‟s why we have processes and that‟s why we have drug 

review committees, Mr. Speaker, whether it‟s nationally or 

provincially. 

 

This drug has been — the one drug that was mentioned — has 

been granted exceptional drug status but not for fibromyalgia, 

Mr. Speaker, and that‟s what the member opposite is asking for. 

Let the process work. Let Pfizer make application. It isn‟t 

myself that makes application. Let Pfizer make the application 

and let it go through the process. I hope it does so that it can be 

covered. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Centre 

on his feet? 

 

Mr. Forbes: — I‟d like to ask leave to introduce guests, please. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. There‟s been a few 

people come down, travelled down from Prince Albert to 

witness the proceedings. And I didn‟t see them come in. If they 

could just give a wave. Rory and Joan Johnson, I believe are up 

there. Thank you. And Norma Sheldon, and Arnie and Judy 

Kuhn, thank you very much for coming. I ask all members to 

welcome them to their legislature. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the special committee 

on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 

and Justice 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

that it has considered certain estimates and to present its eighth 

report. I move: 

 

That the eighth report for the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 



5512 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2010 

[14:30] 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee: 

 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 

in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 1,627 through 1,644. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1,627 through 1,644 are tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 132 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 132 — The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment 

Act, 2009 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

rise today to speak to Bill No. 132, the wildlife habitat 

protection amendment Act, 2009. It‟s the Bill that has been 

under a great deal of scrutiny in this Assembly for the last 

several weeks. It is of great interest to a very large number of 

people throughout the province of Saskatchewan. And there are 

a very large number of organizations representing a very large 

number of people who are going to be affected by this who 

want a couple of things done to this Bill and with this Bill and 

that is, they want it off the table. They want it stopped so that 

the government can do something that it is abysmal at. Its track 

record is absolutely ridiculous. 

 

We‟ve read a long list, just today, of the Bills and issues that 

they have absolutely refused to consult with Saskatchewan 

people on — WEPA, or TILMA [Trade, Investment and Labour 

Mobility Agreement], PST, SCN, educational assistants, 

chiropractors, Bill 5, Bill 6, Bill 80, WHPA. So that‟s the list in 

short. 

 

Now this Bill, unfortunately, is not a good deal different than 

many of the other Bills that I‟ve listed and issues that I just 

listed. But a body that‟s that large of issues and Bills that affect 

Saskatchewan people where there has effectively been no 

consultation is something that people are becoming alarmed at. 

 

That they wanted to force through Bill 80 without consultation 

because it‟s unpopular is not surprising to a lot of people. But 

when they do it with Bills like The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act, it surprises some people, and they begin to wonder why 

when you are moving to do something without consultation 

what your motivation is. Why is it you don‟t want 

Saskatchewan people to have input on decisions that you‟re 

making on their behalf. Why do you do it behind closed doors? 

And what‟s the motivation? What are you trying to hide? 

What‟s the motivation for doing it in that way? 

 

Because if you have confidence that what you‟re doing is right 

for Saskatchewan people, then you feel pretty open to take it to 

them and consult and ask them questions and get their input. 

Because that‟s what good government does. They allow for 

input. They will enlist the ideas and thoughts of their 

constituents because that‟s what we‟re elected to do. 

 

And quite clearly now, we have a case where there are a great 

number of their members who haven‟t consulted with their own 

constituents on this Bill. And so if they want to do their jobs as 

MLAs, there‟s many different ways to go about doing that job. 

But I think a vital part of it, a most base element of being an 

MLA is consulting with your constituents about legislation that 

directly affects them. 

 

And so to have the massive failure of consultation on WEPA, 

WHPA, PST, SCN, EAs, chiropractors, Bills 5, 6, and 80, I 

think it speaks to the arrogance that this government seems to 

carry with them. And one of the political columnists for 

Saskatchewan said in a recent column that he‟s surprised that a 

government could be so arrogant so early in their tenure as 

government. But I think it speaks to sort of what‟s going on 

with this, with Bill No. 132. Because it would appear that 

they‟re going to continue with this Bill and do everything they 

can to pass it as soon as possible, without consultation, because 

they‟re just arrogant enough to think that they can get away 

with it and that it won‟t matter to Saskatchewan people. 

 

But what we‟re finding out more and more each day is that 

there‟s greater and greater opposition to this legislation. And we 

find out from individuals. We find out from our constituents, 

which I‟m hopeful members opposite aren‟t ignoring. We‟re 

finding out from representative groups — wildlife federations, 

Ducks Unlimited, the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations, Pheasants Forever — groups that are opposed to this 

legislation who represent a very large number of people in 

Saskatchewan. And so I find it unfortunate that we continue to 

debate this legislation in the Assembly when it appears clear 

that there is enormous opposition to it and the government 

won‟t simply pull the Bill, consult with Saskatchewan people, 

and make necessary changes. 

 



May 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5513 

Now I do find some of the comments from the minister 

responsible, especially in what I believe on March 8th with her 

second reading speech, because she says a few things that 

appear contradictory. She says: “This Act will allow the 

government to protect sensitive land more efficiently, more 

effectively, and more sustainably than ever before.” 

 

So it‟s curious to me how we‟re moving over 3 million acres of 

land from the protection of the Government of Saskatchewan, 

how that will make the government more efficiently able to 

protect the sensitive land. I‟m not sure if the members opposite 

have referred this to the efficiency secretariat. But I can assure 

the members of the government, the Saskatchewan Party, that if 

the government wants to more efficiently protect sensitive land, 

they should have some control over it. They should have some 

idea what goes on on that land. 

 

Now additionally they say that they want to do it more 

effectively and more sustainably. Well I don‟t know how 

removing 3.3 million acres allows you to protect land more 

sustainably. I think it would be impossible to understand how 

that could take place. 

 

Now it‟s a bit strange that that‟s her first paragraph in her 

second reading speech because logic dictates that it‟s 

impossible to accomplish those goals with this legislation, but 

it‟s set out in her speech anyway. Now the speech goes on to 

say two paragraphs later, that this Act: 

 

. . . has been developed in consultation with a . . . variety of 

stakeholders such as the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation, the Nature Conservancy . . . Nature 

Saskatchewan, Ducks Unlimited . . . The Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations, Saskatchewan Cattlemen‟s 

Association, and the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities. 

 

That‟s what she said on March 8th. But we have received, as 

opposition members, a very large number of letters from 

individuals and organizations, including many of these listed. In 

fact well maybe not entirely the whole list but very close to, 

including every group on that list who argue vehemently that 

they were not consulted, not properly consulted. They say that 

in some cases that the minister making passing reference to the 

fact that this could possibly happen, to her, constituted 

consultation. They argue that that‟s not true, that they don‟t 

believe that it‟s proper consultation and that they‟ve been 

genuinely consulted on this legislation. 

 

And so when it comes to the issues that directly affect these 

organizations and the word of the minister, I will choose to 

believe the word of these many organizations ahead of the 

minister in this case. Because clearly with the campaigns that 

they‟ve got going, with the people who have shown up in the 

legislature to protest, with all of the correspondence that we 

receive at our offices — I‟m hopeful that the members opposite 

who are receiving them aren‟t ignoring them, that they‟re 

raising their voice in their own caucus meetings and cabinet 

meetings — it‟s clear, it‟s crystal clear that these organizations 

and individuals in Saskatchewan believe that they have not, 

have not been properly consulted on this. 

 

And so in the first paragraph of her second reading speech she 

says that they‟ll be able to protect the lands more efficiently by 

removing them entirely, more effectively and more sustainably 

than ever before by removing them entirely. And in her third 

paragraph of her own speech, she says that this legislation has 

been developed in consultation with a great number of these 

groups who, almost to a group, argue that that has not taken 

place. 

 

So that is one of the most unbelievable beginnings to a second 

reading speech, I think, that this legislature has seen in a very 

long time because clearly it contradicts the facts. It contradicts 

reason and logic to believe that the Act would be able to protect 

lands more efficiently, effectively, and sustainably when you 

remove over 3 million acres from government protection. 

 

And so as a part of the body of my speech, I will be reading 

onto the record some of the correspondence that we‟ve received 

as individuals, as caucus members, from interested parties. And 

I know from some of these letters that are addressed to the 

minister that she‟s aware that these groups are each in 

opposition to what she‟s doing. But it seems like they 

absolutely plan to proceed in spite of that fact, in spite of the 

fact that there are many organizations and individuals who are 

vehemently opposed to what she‟s doing. 

 

Now as a politician, as a legislator, one of the things that you 

value most is third party validation. Because given the nature of 

parliamentary democracy and politics, individuals might, and 

the minister might, try to make people believe that certain 

things are happening that would put the government in a better 

light. And so one of the best tools that you‟ve got as a member 

of the legislature, be it the minister or any member, is to have 

third party validation, to have individuals who are not partisan 

come forward and provide commentary on what you‟re doing.  

 

And in this case it‟s happened very frequently by a very wide 

variety of sources, including the organizations and individuals. 

But it‟s not limited to those groups. It also includes newspaper 

columnists. It includes reporters. So it includes a wide variety 

of people who believe that the way this is being done is not the 

proper way. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Now to provide further proof of that point, I would, if I could, 

read a column written by a Leader-Post journalist on May 1st of 

2010 where he says, but as a former minister responsible for the 

portfolio, and he‟s speaking of Colin Maxwell: 

 

. . . as a former Saskatchewan minister responsible for the 

portfolio (whose crowning achievement might very well 

have been the aforementioned, then-groundbreaking 

environmental stewardship legislation) and as the 17-year 

executive director of the Canadian Wildlife Federation, 

Maxwell speaks to this specific issue with some authority. 

And as someone who knows a little about where a young 

conservative government can be successful and where it 

can slide off the rails, Maxwell may be someone from 

whom Environment Minister Nancy Heppner or Premier 

Brad Wall can learn a lot. 

 

Maxwell‟s purgatory in the PC caucus overflow was 

short-lived. The former Spiritwood principal would be 



5514 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2010 

elevated to advanced education minister in July 1983. 

However, it was as minister of parks and renewable 

resources a year and a half later — a portfolio that 

became a perfect fit for him until 1990 when he left 

politics to take on a job with the CWF in Ottawa — that 

Maxwell really made his mark. 

 

It was also a struggle to pass the legislation back in the 

early 1980s — especially given the concern from ranchers 

that land would be expropriated. But aided by a large 

rural caucus (including backbench MLAs like Harold 

Martens) the PC government convinced the ranchers that 

they could easily work with government. 

 

Now contrast that with what we‟re hearing from Heppner, 

who is struggling to explain why it would be 

environmentally beneficial to sell 10 per cent of the three 

million acres of protected land “with a low ecological 

value.” 

 

Instead, Heppner has seemed intent on pitting ranchers 

against environmentalists when it‟s been the ranchers who 

have clearly been the environmental stewards of the land. 

(In fact, the only one [in fact, the only one] who seems to 

be suggesting that the ranchers won‟t be — or haven‟t 

been — good environmental stewards is Heppner, who 

seems rather intent on driving in that political wedge.) 

 

Maxwell argues that the issue isn‟t those ranchers taking 

care of the land now, but what might happen . . . if that 

land changes hands. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

But as someone who loves wildlife and who owned a 

SWF card (an organization that made him a life-time 

member) long before he owned a PC card, Maxwell 

believes some issues have always been viewed outside the 

partisan politics filter. 

 

The Sask. Party government needs to adopt this approach. 

 

One big knock on the Wall government that is common to 

conservative-minded administrations is that their 

ministers aren‟t always advocates for softer issue 

portfolios . . . And one of the worst is Heppner, who 

doesn‟t seem to have championed an issue beyond 

subsidizing low-flush toilets. 

 

So perhaps it‟s time for the government to take a step 

back and stop looking at every issue from an economic 

development filter. 

 

Talk to the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation about this 

bill. Heck, talk to some hunters who surely can‟t be happy 

about a potential loss of resources. 

 

And maybe even talk to Colin Maxwell. He‟s been there 

before. 

 

Again, third party validation, Mr. Speaker. The headline of the 

article was “Environment portfolio bigger than politics.” And so 

when you have third party validation that comes out that 

strongly against this legislation, it should send a signal. It 

should send a clear signal to you that you should stop, pull the 

legislation, consult with Saskatchewan people, and make 

changes that are needed and that are asked for by Saskatchewan 

people in order to accomplish whatever goal the government 

intends. 

 

I think it‟s fundamental to work as a government to consult with 

the people who are going to be affected by this. And in this 

case, because every person who resides in Saskatchewan is 

going to be affected because they own the land, I think the 

consultations need to be broad-based. People need to 

understand what the implications are, what the motivation is, 

and what the possible outcomes might be when you introduce 

this legislation, when it‟s passed, and when it‟s implemented. 

 

Now the minister has on many occasions suggested that well 

it‟s just a very small portion of the over 3 million acres that are 

going to be affected by this and that you should trust her that 

that‟s the case. 

 

Well I took some pains to read the explanatory notes on this 

Bill and found it to say something very interesting and in fact 

very much like her second reading speech where she suggested 

that the legislation was developed in consultation with the 

stakeholder groups and that the Act would allow government to 

protect sensitive land more efficiently, effectively, and 

sustainably. She couldn‟t have been more wrong about that. 

 

What she has been saying in this legislature and outside, about 

10 per cent or so of the land being affected by this, seems to be 

contradicted in the notes to her own Bill. In the same way that 

when the Premier spoke to The Globe and Mail this week about 

getting rid of Saskatchewan debt, when his own document 

suggests that the debt of the province of Saskatchewan is going 

to go from 7.7 billion to 11.9 billion by 2014. People can find it 

ironic or illogical, overtly political or plain foolish. But I think 

that that‟s the case with the Premier. It‟s the same case with the 

Environment minister when she talked about stakeholders and 

when she spoke about being able to protect these lands more 

efficiently, effectively, and sustainably. 

 

Now in her own explanatory notes on Bill No. 132 it says: 

 

This amendment repeals the Schedule listing designated 

lands. The province is positioned to adopt a new strategic 

approach to evaluate and manage ecological, social and 

economic values on Crown land in the surveyed area of 

Saskatchewan and ensure protection of critical features 

while enabling sale of the land. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

This new approach includes assessing [so the new 

approach, the entire new approach that they‟re taking with 

Bill No. 132 includes assessing] the ecological attributes 

of all Crown land with an initial focus on . . . The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act (WHPA). 

 

So it says in her own explanatory notes that not only is the 3 

million acres vulnerable, not only are the 3 million acres 

vulnerable to sale but so is any other land that the government 

currently is assessing. It says that “This new approach includes 



May 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5515 

assessing the ecological attributes of all Crown land . . .” and it 

only has an initial focus on WHPA. And “This information will 

be used to determine which lands may be sold, sold with a 

conservation easement or retained by the Crown.” So quite 

clearly in her own explanatory notes every bit of land that the 

government currently owns is being evaluated for sale. That‟s 

what it says in her document. 

 

Her washing machine outside that‟s constantly set on the spin 

cycle says something different, but her own document says 

exactly that. It says that every bit of land that‟s owned by the 

Crown is being evaluated and only the initial focus is on The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. So why would anybody trust 

the minister when she says that it‟s only a very small portion 

and it‟s only a small portion that‟s owned by ranchers who are 

already good stewards when her own literature, her own Bill 

explanatory notes suggest that every acre of land owned by the 

province of Saskatchewan, by the people of Saskatchewan, by 

every resident of this province is open to sale. It‟s information 

that will be used to determine which Crown lands may be sold, 

sold with an easement, or retained by the Crown. So how would 

anybody believe her when she says that there‟s only a small 

portion that will be affected by the legislation? 

 

I know not everybody in Saskatchewan will read the 

explanatory notes and find this out, but I think the people 

deserve a genuine answer to the question of why it is that her 

explanatory notes say something vastly different than what she 

says in this Assembly and to reporters just outside. Why is it 

that the legislation itself says exactly the opposite of what she‟s 

saying in here and outside? 

 

There‟s a tremendous opportunity in your explanatory notes to 

put in that it‟s roughly 10 per cent of the land. She could have 

put that in here, but it‟s not in here. Additionally the legislation 

could be limited to those lands, but it‟s not. And it‟s not for a 

very obvious reason, I think, because they‟re not going to stop 

at WHPA lands. Their own explanatory notes suggest that. And 

so certainly one would question the value of believing her when 

she says that it‟s going to be 10 per cent. 

 

Now her second reading speech went on to say a couple of 

other things that are puzzling and contradictory. It says that 

these changes will allow the Crown to sell land with permanent 

easements attached. Now the question might be, how is it that 

when you can make changes to this legislation, when you can 

bring forward changes to sell over $3 million of Crown land, 

who many people, I would argue, believed that that was 

permanent. 

 

We have heard stories of a gentleman from Saskatoon who 

donated land to the Crown because he believed that that land 

would be permanently protected by the government. And so 

when she uses the term permanent, I find it ironic because the 

person who donated the land to the Crown in the Saskatoon 

example donated it and found out later that it is likely to fall 

under the WHPA legislation. It‟s likely to fall under Bill 132 

and be sold to a jurisdiction who wants to create a landfill on 

that land. And so he donated the land thinking it would become 

permanent wildlife habitat and is finding out that there is a 

strong possibility that if this goes through that it will be turned 

into a dump. 

 

Now I think we could all argue that landfills are essential in 

Saskatchewan for environmental reasons and management. But 

when it comes to permanence, this person thought that this land 

would be permanently designated. And so when the minister 

says that the easements that are attached will be permanent, it‟s 

my understanding that the minister, because it‟s under 

regulations, can simply make that change. So there‟s no 

assurance that these changes with the easements attached will 

be permanent, absolutely no guarantee at all. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And so here we have her speech. First paragraph they said 

they‟d be able to, by selling the land, would be able to protect it 

more efficiently, effectively, and sustainably. And in her third 

paragraph suggests that there‟d been consultation and then goes 

on to suggest that the easements that would be placed on these 

lands would be permanent. So that‟s three paragraphs, the first 

three paragraphs of her second reading speech, and it contains 

information that is ironic at best. That‟s the first three 

paragraphs. It‟s a very difficult start to a second reading of a 

Bill, but at this point seemingly fitting. 

 

And so I will continue with the third party validation because, 

as I‟d said, it‟s one of the greatest tools a member of the 

legislature has. And in another column . . . sorry, article written 

in the Leader-Post on May 11th, the headline of this article is 

that “First Nations and conservation groups are calling for delay 

in changes to [the] Wildlife Habitat Protection Act.” And it 

reads: 

 

The Saskatchewan government faced new calls from First 

Nations and conservation groups Tuesday to delay 

legislation that will allow for the sale of some protected 

wildlife land. 

 

Despite the government's recent attempts to placate 

concerns over proposed changes to the Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act [and sorry], the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation said there are still too many issues — such a 

lack of transparency on what protected lands could be 

removed from the act in the future. 

 

The group also wants a “no net loss” agreement so the 

overall amount of land protected doesn't decline. 

 

And so that has been the subject of debate in this legislature as 

well because for the last, I believe, over 20 years, the policy of a 

number of different governments of different political stripe, the 

policy has been that any amount of land taken out of The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act is replaced so that there is no 

net loss of land for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I think it‟s unfortunate because if it‟s such a small amount 

of land as the minister suggests, then it can‟t be all that difficult 

to make a no net loss policy. It would seem obvious to me that 

if there are only a few ranchers, as she has suggested, who want 

to purchase this land, then it wouldn‟t be all that difficult for the 

government to support a no net loss agreement so that the same 

amount of land that‟s taken out of The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act would be put back in so that there‟s always the 

same amount of acres under protection in Saskatchewan. 

 



5516 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2010 

Now the article goes on to say: 

 

“The combination of a lack of consultation and aggressive 

time line on this bill has effectively made it impossible to 

address our concerns and left many important questions 

unanswered,” [the Saskatchewan Wildlife] federation 

executive director Darrell Crabbe said in a statement. 

 

Now again the minister asserts in her second reading speech 

that “This [Act] has been developed in consultation with a wide 

variety of stakeholders such as the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation . . . ” That‟s the first group she lists. And yet we 

have a quote from the federation‟s executive director who says 

that the combination of a lack of consultation and the 

aggressive timeline on this Bill has done some things that are 

undesirable. So how is it, in the third paragraph of her second 

reading speech, she says that this legislation has been designed 

in consultation with the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, 

when some two months later the director of the organization 

that she quoted she consulted with comes out and says that there 

was a lack of consultation, and that‟s a part of the reason why 

they want this Bill pulled? 

 

I think it speaks to credibility. I think it speaks to the minister‟s 

credibility sadly, sadly for the government and the people of 

Saskatchewan. I think it also speaks to her motivation. We‟re 

still wondering what exactly is the motivation for doing this, for 

introducing this legislation and for forcing it through this spring 

session, if they‟re intent on doing that. The same article goes on 

to say: 

 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations Vice-Chief 

Lyle Whitefish also urged the government to allow for 

further discussion before changing the act that protects 

more than three million acres of Crown land. 

 

“There is not a lot of land in this country now that‟s 

protected and we want to ensure that long-term 

sustainability for the future generations to enjoy these 

protected lands,” Whitefish said. 

 

Environment Minister Nancy Heppner told reporters that 

she was surprised by the wildlife federation‟s news 

release . . . 

 

Well I think that sums it up right there, Mr. Speaker. I think that 

sums it up right there. She doesn‟t consult; she says she 

consulted. They write hundreds and hundreds of letters to her 

— individuals, various groups. 

 

And she says that she‟s surprised that they don‟t like the Bill. I 

don‟t know how anybody could be surprised when they protest 

at the legislature, they come in support of the opposition asking 

questions to pull the Bill, they have a letter-writing campaign 

by individuals, by their organizations and the people they 

represent. And she‟s still surprised. She‟s still surprised. I don‟t 

know how that‟s even remotely possible. I don‟t know how 

anybody could be surprised. On May 11th, this is written May 

11th, and we‟ve had people in the legislature here protesting on 

a weekly basis. We‟ve received letters on a daily basis, and 

she‟s surprised that this organization would be in opposition to 

what she‟s doing. It‟s absolutely shocking to me that anybody 

would be surprised at this point. 

The same article goes on to say: 

 

Changes to the act . . . could see up to 10 per cent of the 

protected land sold outright and further parcels of land 

sold under protection of a conservation easement. An 

unspecified amount of acres with a high ecological value 

would remain under the act. 

 

That‟s her assertion, that‟s the minister‟s assertion. 

 

But a major criticism has been that the government could 

in the future take more land out of WHPA protection by 

making a regulatory change, rather than having to go 

through the legislature. Heppner said she is looking at the 

possibility of having the lands that will remain under 

WHPA listed in legislation to allay the concern that lands 

could be shifted out of the act without scrutiny of the 

legislature. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, she is looking at the possibility of having 

the lands listed in legislation. You know how you accomplish 

that in this legislature, Mr. Speaker? You pull the Bill. You pull 

the Bill, you make the necessary changes, and you bring it back. 

She should know that; she‟s a minister of the Crown and a 

member of the government. That‟s how you do it. 

 

So to say that on May 11th, in a May 11th story, that you are 

looking at the possibility of listing lands that will remain under 

WHPA, why wouldn‟t you do that in a genuine way? Why 

wouldn‟t you pull the Bill, make the necessary changes, and 

bring it back? Doesn‟t that seem like a logical way to go about 

things? 

 

It certainly is logical to the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, 

Ducks Unlimited, the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations that you pull the Bill. That‟s what logical. So again 

that‟s from one article written by a reporter that covers the 

legislature. And again third party validation is exceedingly 

important in politics and in designing legislation. And that‟s 

what this third party validation says in this case. 

 

There are a very, vast number of letters and releases and 

correspondence that we‟ve received about this legislation. And I 

think as part of the story that was written on May 11th, they got 

some of that information from a Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation media release that was put out on the same day. And 

it says: 

 

The Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation continues to have 

grave concerns surrounding the recent Legislation aimed 

at dismantling the Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, the 

legislation that was created almost 30 years ago and is 

still considered to be one of the most visionary 

conservation programs ever developed in North America. 

 

And so what do they do with visionary conservation programs? 

They blow them up. They blow them up for what purpose? The 

people of Saskatchewan are yet to understand. They do it in 

opposition to the many groups who are directly affected. They 

do it in opposition to the general public who is largely opposed. 

And they do it for what purpose? The release goes on to say that 

again: 

 



May 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5517 

“The combination of a lack of consulting and aggressive 

time line . . . [And it goes on to say that] We need the 

Minister to table this legislation [and I believe they mean 

to pull it] until all the variables can be properly 

addressed.” 

 

And so it‟s simple. She, the minister herself, says that she is 

looking at the possibility of having lands remain under WHPA 

listed in legislation. So she agrees that it should be pulled as 

well because the only way to do it is to pull the Bill, make the 

changes, and bring it back. So she‟s seemingly in agreement 

that the Bill should be pulled. So why are debating in on the 

floor of the legislature right now? Well it‟s because they 

haven‟t pulled the Bill. They refuse to pull it. They refuse to 

consult with the people of Saskatchewan on legislation that 

affects them on a daily basis, and I guess we should not be 

surprised that that‟s the case here as well. 

 

The Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation in this case, Mr. 

Speaker, the release goes on to say, that the Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation sees a “no net loss” agreement as being 

“The policy of every Provincial Government since The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act was introduced.” So that‟s that third 

party validation that I was speaking of a little earlier, Mr. 

Speaker, because it says quite clearly that it‟s “been the policy 

of every Provincial Government since the WHPA was 

introduced . . .” 

 

And it also says that it‟s prepared and interested in discussing 

these issues, and it‟s “prepared to work with the government 

towards this goal.” And I think each member of the legislature 

would be interested in working with the government to maintain 

the no net loss agreement because it‟s a 30-year-old agreement, 

and the Conservative government of Saskatchewan — the 

Progressive Conservatives, excuse me — and the NDP have 

each had this policy and it‟s been in place for 30 years. The 

Saskatchewan Party government‟s in office for two years, and 

they think that they should blow it up. 

 

The article goes on to say that, “„The SWF is a predominantly 

rural organization. A recent poll on our . . . [membership] base 

indicates that we have over 7,000 landowners and over 3,000 

livestock producers in our membership . . .‟”. So the minister 

asserts that all of the producers of Saskatchewan are in 

agreement with the legislation she brings forward. But the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation membership — there may be 

some overlap here — but the two groups, total 10,000 folks in 

their membership, beg to differ. They don‟t agree with the 

minister. And so there again, third party validation. 

 

[15:15] 

 

They don‟t agree with the minister that this legislation should 

continue. And they want to help. They want to work with the 

government to create legislation that will benefit the people of 

Saskatchewan. And they go on to say that we need the 

co-operation and commitment of the provincial government to 

make that happen. 

 

Now the Wildlife Federation has over 30,000 members and 121 

branches across Saskatchewan. It is, per capita, the largest 

wildlife conservation organization of its kind in the world, has 

the largest membership per capita of any wildlife conservation 

organization in the world. 

 

And the members of the Saskatchewan Party government 

choose to ignore what they say to try to use them in a second 

reading speech to corroborate what they‟re doing in spite of the 

fact that they say, the Wildlife Federation says something that 

directly contradicts what the minister‟s saying in her second 

reading speech. The minister tries to use this organization to 

prove a point, and then she gets called out on it later and many 

times on the many different things that she says. 

 

Again with the third party validation, Mr. Speaker, this one is 

from Nature Saskatchewan. The title of the article reads, “Too 

Many Unanswered Questions to Proceed with Changes to 

W.H.P.A.” 

 

After two meetings with Environment Minister Nancy 

Heppner, Nature Saskatchewan has not received concrete 

information that would alleviate our many concerns over 

the substantial changes to the Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act . . .  

 

Removing W.H.P.A. Crown lands from the Act and 

placing them in regulations is very disconcerting as it 

leaves the future of these important wildlife lands at the 

discretion of the Minister. 

 

The release goes on to say that “the conservation community‟s 

quarrel is not with farmers and ranchers, but rather with the 

provincial government for not consulting with us.” 

 

So here is Nature Saskatchewan saying that their quarrel is with 

the provincial government for “not consulting with us.” 

 

And again in the minister‟s second reading speech she says this 

Act “. . . has been developed in consultation with a wide variety 

of stakeholders such as . . . Nature Saskatchewan.” So again, 

absolutely contradicted in her second reading speech by Nature 

Saskatchewan is the Minister Responsible for the Environment 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

So what possible shred of credibility could she have left with 

Saskatchewan people when she would attempt to use these 

organizations to prove a point that there has been consultation 

on this Bill when they say exactly the opposite? They say 

exactly the opposite. The third paragraph of her second reading 

speech says that this Act “. . . has been developed in 

consultation with . . . Nature Saskatchewan.” 

 

Well why is it that on May 12th of 2010, Nature Saskatchewan 

would say that their “. . . quarrel is not with farmers and 

ranchers, but . . . with the provincial government for not 

consulting with us.” How is it possible that you have the 

minister on one hand saying that this legislation has been 

developed in consultation with Nature Saskatchewan, and 

Nature Saskatchewan comes out and says that they have not 

been consulted? How is it possible? 

 

There‟s only one reason that this might have happened. The 

minister has embellished in her second reading speech that 

she‟s met with these groups. She‟s embellished it to suit an end. 

Clearly they have not been properly consulted and they feel that 

way and that‟s the same feeling that the folks from the 



5518 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2010 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation have. They have the exact 

same feeling. 

 

And so the minister‟s credibility is obviously in question, and 

it‟s in question by a very large number of folks in 

Saskatchewan. More to the minister‟s credibility are comments 

that have been made by the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations, because she has alleged on a couple of different 

occasions that she has consulted with the FSIN on this Bill. But 

again, there‟s another group that disagrees with them, and it‟s 

the FSIN. In the release of April 29th of this year, the FSIN . . . 

It‟s actually, sorry, a letter to the minister on April 29th of this 

year, cc‟d to the Environment critic and the leader of the NDP 

opposition, and it says: 

 

I wish to sternly express that such programs hinder the 

First Nations people in Saskatchewan to exercise their 

treaty and constitutional right to hunt, fish, trap, and 

gather on such lands. 

 

It goes on to say that what is more perplexing is that such a 

program excludes First Nations who possess such rights to these 

lands from the natural resources transfer Act of 1930. So they 

obviously don‟t care about an agreement that happened 30 years 

ago for no net loss. They certainly don‟t care about an 

agreement that was signed in 1930 that is to protect the rights of 

Saskatchewan citizens. It goes on to say, the letter goes on to 

say that: 

 

It has come to my attention that you are informing your 

government colleagues and members of the Saskatchewan 

Legislature that your Ministry consulted and 

accommodated the First Nations people prior to initiating 

this program. I find these statements extremely troubling 

since no such undertakings have occurred. There has been 

no attempt by your Ministry to enter into a consultation 

process with First Nations people regarding the expansion 

of the sale of Crown lands protected under the Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, again I go to the minister‟s second 

reading speech, paragraph 3, where she says, “This [Act] has 

been developed in consultation with a . . . variety of 

stakeholders such as . . . the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations.” In her second reading speech she says that. In a letter 

to the minister, they say that, “There has been no attempt by 

your ministry to enter into a consultation process.” 

 

So who do you believe, Mr. Speaker? Do you believe the 

minister who has lost any shred of credibility on this issue or do 

you believe the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, Nature Saskatchewan? The 

list goes on and on. 

 

She states clearly that this legislation was developed in 

consultation with these groups. States it clearly in the third 

paragraph of her second reading speech. And letter after letter, 

after news release, after article in the newspaper says very 

clearly something directly opposite to that suggestion. Now I 

don‟t know what that‟s called where the Saskatchewan Party 

members come from, but I know what it‟s called where I come 

from. I know what it‟s called where I come from. 

 

The letter to the Minister goes on to say that: 

 

Judging from past experience I can only ascertain that 

your deliberate refusal to consult and accommodate First 

Nations people on your Ministry‟s initiatives, including 

the sale of Crown lands protected under the WHPA, as 

well as your Ministries “Results-based Regulatory 

Review”, is a reflection of the policy position that your 

government has taken with regard to the First Nations 

people in Saskatchewan. 

 

So the vice-chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations says that this legislation and refusal to consult is a 

reflection of the policy position that your government has taken 

with regard to First Nations people in Saskatchewan. And so 

what he‟s saying clearly is that this government has made a 

conscious and clear choice to ignore the rights of First Nations 

people in Saskatchewan. It‟s a shameful position that members 

opposite take. To ignore the rights of First Nations and Métis 

people in Saskatchewan on their duty to consult, it‟s a shameful 

position that they‟ve taken. And in this case, the FSIN states 

clearly that the government has refused to consult, which again 

is in direct opposition to the member‟s second reading speech. 

 

The letter goes on to say that: 

 

The province has no regard or respect for the interests, 

concerns and the inherent and Treaty rights of the First 

Nations people in Saskatchewan. Furthermore, it appears 

your government views the inherent and Treaty rights of 

First Nations people as a hindrance to Premier Wall‟s 

“growth agenda” . . . 

 

So again, very important third party validation against this Bill 

and against all of the actions taken by the Sask Party 

government with respect to First Nations people. They don‟t 

seem to care at all about what the citizens of Saskatchewan 

think about a Bill, about regulations, about any policy that they 

might make. They don‟t care. And it‟s demonstrated very 

clearly in this legislation, demonstrated very clearly. They‟re 

going forward with it in spite of all the people speaking against 

it. 

 

The letter goes on to say that: 

 

Since the FSIN was not involved in any consultations, I 

am requesting a detailed explanation of how your 

Ministry purportedly undertook to consult with First 

Nations [people] prior to the decision being made to 

expand the sale of Crown lands protected under The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act . . . I am seeking a 

response that includes a listing of all the meetings your 

Ministry held with the First Nations and the dates such 

were held . . . 

 

It also says that it‟s asking: 

 

. . . which First Nations and their leaders or 

representatives who attended such meetings, what their 

responses were, how these were incorporated into the 

report your Ministry used to make the decision, and how 

your Ministry reported back to the First Nations of your 

decision. I also request a copy of such report. 



May 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5519 

And so I‟ll ask the minister today how she has replied to the 

question asked by the vice-chief of the Federation of 

Saskatchewan Indian Nations. How has she responded to that 

request to provide the information to an elected member of the 

FSIN? I challenge her today to produce the information to the 

legislature, to table it, to write a letter to the Assembly to 

inform the members of the Assembly just how she has 

answered the vice-chief‟s questions in this instance. 

 

Clearly in this case, the minister responsible has, for whatever 

reason, suggested that there has been consultation and that the 

legislation has been developed specifically in consultation with 

these groups. I find that to be ironic at best and extremely 

disappointing because the groups affected come out and say 

something exactly the opposite of that. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Now here we have something else that‟s ironic. I believe it is a 

printout from the Government of Saskatchewan, the 

Environment department, from their government website. It has 

all rights reserved, copyright 2010, Government of 

Saskatchewan, so we know it‟s current. And it says this about 

the environment, about the Fish and Wildlife Development 

Fund, about special land provisions, and about Prairie Farm 

Rehabilitation Administration, Saskatchewan pasture programs, 

The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act lands. It says this, that 

“You can help conserve wildlife habitat in many ways . . .” one 

of which is the Fish and Wildlife Development Fund. 

 

But it also says: “Other ways you can help support the 

sustainable management and use . . . [is by] supporting 

legislation that conserves wildlife habitat; joining or supporting 

your local conservation group or wildlife federation; planting 

shelterbelts . . . protecting wetlands and sloughs . . . and 

maintaining natural areas, large or small.” 

 

So in a part of their website, they suggest that other ways to 

support sustainable environment in Saskatchewan is to join an 

environmental group. I would assume that they mean Nature 

Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, Nature 

Conservancy — all groups who have come out opposed to this 

legislation. So how is it that you can join one of the groups who 

has no voice with this government? You can join a group. We 

recommend that you join a group that we‟re going to ignore. 

Please come out. Spend money and join a group that we don‟t 

care about their opinion of. 

 

It‟s unbelievable to me that this is on their own website. So 

again we have irony when the minister suggests that the Act has 

been developed in consultation with these groups, when they all 

come out and say that it hasn‟t taken place. And we have more 

irony when the minister‟s own website suggests that individuals 

of Saskatchewan should support legislation that conserves 

wildlife habitat. That‟s on her website. That‟s on the minister‟s 

website — support legislation that conserves wildlife habitat. 

 

Well we‟re waiting to see the legislation that actually conserves 

wildlife habitat. Not legislation being brought forward where 

the explanatory notes suggest clearly that this new approach 

includes assessing the ecological attributes of all Crown land 

and that only the initial focus on the land will be The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act and that the information gathered by 

evaluating all Crown land will be used to determine which 

lands may be sold, sold with a conservation easement, or 

retained by the Crown. 

 

They say that and they introduce legislation to remove up to 3 

million acres or more, depending on whether or not you believe 

the minister or her own explanatory notes. So there‟s irony with 

the minister and her comments in the legislature and outside the 

Assembly where she suggests that less than 10 per cent of the 3 

million acres is at risk here, when her own explanatory notes 

suggest exactly the opposite of that. 

 

There‟s irony in that she suggests that the Act has been 

developed in consultation with a number of groups who say that 

they haven‟t been consulted. And there‟s more irony on her 

own website where she says that individuals of Saskatchewan 

should support legislation that conserves wildlife habitat in 

Saskatchewan — unbelievable to me. And it goes further. It 

suggests that you should join a group or wildlife federation that 

supports these principles. And then they go on to ignore them. 

 

So the irony in this government and with the minister 

responsible is absolutely shocking. It‟s absolutely shocking. 

And it‟s unfortunate because the people of Saskatchewan 

deserve better. They deserve legislation that reflects what they 

want, what they need. They deserve legislation that they‟re 

consulted on. They deserve a minister who won‟t make 

statements that are entirely ironic, and that‟s the best term I 

think you can use for these statements. 

 

That‟s the best term you can use for statements wherein her 

own second reading speech suggests that groups have been 

consulted. The first paragraph of her second reading speech 

suggests in some manner that to remove these sensitive lands 

will allow the government to protect more efficiently, more 

effectively, and more sustainably these lands than ever before. 

That‟s ironic. It‟s ironic and the people of Saskatchewan 

deserve more than irony when it comes to legislation put 

forward in this Assembly on their behalf. They deserve more 

than irony from members of the Saskatchewan Party 

government, especially a minister who introduces legislation 

that removes land and then on her own website suggest that she 

should join a group that she ignores and that the people of 

Saskatchewan should support legislation that enhances and . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — Order. Order. This is an 

interesting conversation, but the member from Prince Albert has 

the floor. And if you‟d like to carry the conversation on, you 

can do so behind the bar. I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to take this 

opportunity to put on the record more third party validation 

because, as I had suggested before, it‟s one of the most useful 

tools a member of the Assembly has, given the parliamentary 

democracy under which we work. And in this case it is a letter 

written to members of the opposition. And I‟ll read the letter: 

 

We write concerning the government‟s statement that 

conservation stakeholder organizations were consulted 

about the Crown land sale program, in particular the sale 



5520 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2010 

of land designated under The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act. Both the ministers of Agriculture and Food and 

Environment have publicly stated [that] WHPA lands will 

not be sold. We can assure you that no meaningful 

consultation regarding the sale of Crown lands has 

occurred with Nature Saskatchewan. 

 

On occasion we were told some details of the land sale 

program, but this is not consultation. 

 

It goes on to say that: 

 

We request that you urge the government to delay the 

passing of the amendments to The Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, which would see these lands removed 

from the Act and placed under regulation where they 

could be sold at the discretion of the minister. The 

government has not properly consulted with the public on 

this very important issue which has the potential to cause 

significant consequence to biodiversity in Saskatchewan. 

 

So again people that are following at home might ask, is Nature 

Saskatchewan one of the organizations that the minister listed in 

her second reading speech in that important third chapter where 

she tried to insinuate that they . . . was third party validation on 

her behalf and on the government‟s behalf with respect to the 

development of the changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act? And if you will look at page 4004 in Hansard on March 

8th, 2010, the last paragraph on the page, Nature Saskatchewan 

is indeed — as you may well be aware, Mr. Speaker — is 

indeed listed as one of the groups that the Minister alleges was 

consulted and that this legislation was developed in consultation 

with. She suggests that Nature Saskatchewan was one of those 

groups. 

 

The letter written to opposition members on April 27th says that 

the government has not properly consulted with the public on 

this issue and that “We can assure you that no meaningful 

consultation regarding the sale of Crown lands has occurred 

with Nature Saskatchewan.” So again Nature Saskatchewan, 

another group coming out and denying that what the minister 

said was true. The FSIN, the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, 

all denying that what the minister said was true in her second 

reading speech. They‟re denying it was true, so more third party 

validation for the opposition and for the people of 

Saskatchewan with respect to this legislation. 

 

Again on the 29th of April, on the 29th of April in The 

StarPhoenix, the editorial board who is a group of folks that 

edit The StarPhoenix in Saskatoon came out and said this. The 

headline of the article is “Short-sighted of gov‟t to sell 

protected land,” and the article says a few things that are 

interesting. It says: 

 

The provincial government‟s plan to remove from under 

the protective umbrella of the Wildlife Protection Act 

nearly three million acres of Crown land smacks of 

short-term thinking and political expediency that‟s 

detrimental to all citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

It‟s a very important first line in a column written by the 

editorial board because it encompasses a lot of things. As I had 

suggested, there must be some motivation when this many folks 

in Saskatchewan are opposed to a Bill. There must be some 

motivation for government to ram it through. The editorial 

board of The StarPhoenix seems to believe that it‟s political 

expediency that‟s the motivation. We might come to find at 

some later date what the actual motivation was, but I think 

political expediency is at the start of it. 

 

It also says that it smacks of short-term thinking. Not a small 

claim as you might well recognize, Mr. Speaker. It goes on to 

say: 

 

And despite Environment Minister Nancy Heppner‟s 

claim that the move, which she wants to make by the end 

of May and would see about 10 per cent of the land sold 

to ranchers whose families have leased it for generations 

“isn‟t about monetary things,” her decision remains 

puzzling. 

 

Even in a large province that boasts 43 per cent of 

Canada‟s arable land, the removal from wildlife habitat 

protection chunks of land that amounts to twice the size 

of Prince Edward Island is cause for consternation. 

 

At a time when the entire world is becoming increasingly 

aware of the value of preserving natural habitat for 

wildlife for the sake of future generations as well as our 

own, the government demonstrates a breathtakingly 

short-sighted approach to its duty and obligation to act as 

a responsible steward of the public interest. 

 

Now I‟m not sure I‟ve heard the editorial board of The 

StarPhoenix say anything that was more negative about a 

government, since I have taken an interest in reading The 

StarPhoenix, than the line used in this article right there: “. . . 

the government demonstrates a breathtakingly short-sighted 

approach to its duty and obligation to act as a responsible 

steward of the public interest.” 

 

[15:45] 

 

That is about as bad as it gets for a government, to be accused 

of being short-sighted and failing in its duty to act as a steward 

of the public interest. Not of a private interest, not of an 

individual interest, but of the public interest, of the interest of 

the people of Saskatchewan, they are breathtakingly 

short-sighted in their approach and duty and obligation — a 

statement that I think members opposite should take very 

seriously, should take to heart, and should act on. 

 

And the way that they can act on it is to pull the Bill, make the 

reasonable changes, the changes that would benefit all the 

people of Saskatchewan, and reintroduce the Bill. Reintroduce 

the Bill in this Assembly so that it can have its proper scrutiny. 

It goes on to say that: 

 

However, wildlife protection and conservation groups, 

First Nations leaders and others are quite right to be 

concerned that, once private buyers acquire Crown land, 

there are no restrictions on the further resale of the land or 

any guarantees that the habitat will remain protected in 

the long run. 

 

So what the editorial board is suggesting is that, while for any 



May 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5521 

number of years — in some cases generations — the ranchers 

and landowners have been wonderful stewards of this land, 

there is nothing in this legislation that prevents sale of that land. 

And then while they were tremendous stewards while they 

owned the land, virtually anything could happen to the land 

after it‟s sold. And I think the editorial board makes a good 

point there. They make a good point that once you give up 

control of the land — in spite of the fact that the people who 

have utilized the land, some cases for generations, have been 

wonderful stewards — that there might be a negative effect 

after that land changes hands. 

 

For instance, if there is a dispersal sale after a steward is 

deceased, somebody else will get that land, and they might take 

a vastly different approach than the landowner currently or the 

lessee currently who would become a landowner. And so I think 

it‟s an important point that the editorial board has made here. It 

goes on to say that: 

 

It simply isn‟t acceptable that Ms. Heppner seems 

determined to push through changes to three-decade-old 

legislation without properly discussing them with groups 

other than the ranchers who have a stake in protected 

land. 

 

As Darrell Crabbe, executive director of the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation aptly notes: “We just 

think that the future generations of Saskatchewan would 

be better served if there was full consultation with 

everybody and the original protection was left in place. 

 

“This is a huge issue for us. We‟re talking about millions 

of acres of land that we consider to be a jewel in the 

crown of Saskatchewan.” 

 

Again the article goes on to say: 

 

For a government that‟s heading into an election next year 

in a province whose economy shrank by 6.3 per cent in 

2009 [and actually, Mr. Speaker, amounts to the economy 

of Saskatchewan contracting back to 2005 levels] and is 

struggling to keep its spending in line with its diminished 

revenues, any source of revenue — especially when it‟s 

tied closely to making some of its rural support base 

happy — might seem attractive. 

 

So again it‟s insinuating that one of the further motivations of 

the Saskatchewan Party might be because they can‟t manage the 

budget that they, in this case, took an ostrich approach to an 

export-based economy. We export more than 80 per cent of 

what we produce. The Finance minister comes to Prince Albert 

and says that we‟re not going to take part in the global 

recession. The Premier says many of the same things while 

we‟re in the throes of a global recession. And anybody that 

knows anything about the economy would understand that 

when there‟s a global recession and when you export over 80 

per cent of what you produce, you‟re going to take part whether 

you like it or not. 

 

The editorial board suggests that, because the Premier and 

Finance minister ignored the fact that we would enter and take 

part in the global recession, that the economy shrunk by 6.3 per 

cent, that that‟s a part of the motivation for bringing forward 

this legislation because they might make a quick buck because 

they can‟t manage the budget of the province of Saskatchewan. 

They don‟t understand that you‟re going to take part in a global 

recession whether you want to or not, as an exporting 

jurisdiction, that they need the money. 

 

Now that they increased spending by 32 per cent over two years 

has a great deal to do with it as well. But again that is the 

editorial board, of the province of Saskatchewan making the 

assertion that the reason this legislation is brought forward is 

because of the money. They need the money. The article, the 

editorial goes on to say that: 

 

It‟s easy to understand why groups such as Ducks 

Unlimited are concerned about putting in place 

conservation easements before any protected land is sold, 

so that subsequent owners are prevented from draining 

wetlands or breaking it up, and about the mechanisms the 

government is putting in place to assess the value of 

property that Ms. Heppner thinks “no longer has to be 

under wildlife habitat protection.” 

 

“We‟re not convinced that they have the means to be able 

to accurately define which lands have greater or which 

lands have lesser ecological value,” suggests Brent 

Kennedy, DU‟s manager of provincial operations. 

 

So the program that‟s being touted by the Minister of the 

Environment that will assess all of the lands in Saskatchewan, 

the piece that she alludes to in her explanatory notes where she 

says that “This new approach includes assessing the ecological 

attributes of all Crown land with an initial focus on . . . The 

Wildlife Habitat Protection Act.” That‟s what she says in her 

explanatory notes. Ducks Unlimited manager of provincial 

operations says that “We‟re not convinced that they have the 

means to be able to accurately define which lands have greater 

or which lands have lesser ecological value.” So again the 

minister‟s contradicted in her assertions that they‟re able to do 

that and do it accurately and properly. And she‟s contradicted 

by a provincial manager, a manager of provincial operations for 

Ducks Unlimited. 

 

And so it would seem at every turn the assertions made by the 

minister, the website that she is responsible for as a minister, 

the words that she says in this Assembly are all contradicted by 

people that are directly affected. She suggests again that there 

was consultation that took place, and many groups in 

Saskatchewan say exactly the opposite. They say exactly the 

opposite of what the minister asserts. 

 

Now the article of April 29th goes on to say, “Given the steady 

loss of wetlands in Saskatchewan through drainage, with 

farmers making economically rational decisions that are at odds 

with the needs of wildlife, it‟s easy to understand from where 

Mr. Kennedy is coming.” So the editorial board and the 

manager of provincial operations for Ducks Unlimited each 

contradict what the minister says in terms of their ability to 

assess Crown lands in Saskatchewan. The article goes on to say 

that: 

 

The call by DU and other conservation groups for the 

Saskatchewan government to develop a wetland policy to 

conserve and restore wetlands in the province has gone 



5522 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2010 

unheeded. This even though wetlands are crucial to 

protecting water supplies, reducing effluents from 

washing into lakes and rivers, and recharging 

groundwater supplies. 

 

Instead, the Environment minister is acting to further 

erode the protective legislation already in place. No 

wonder those who take a longer view of the province 

beyond its four-year election cycles are concerned. 

 

So there you have it, Mr. Speaker. There you have it. The 

editorial board of The StarPhoenix says that “. . . the 

Environment minister is acting to further erode the protective 

legislation already in place” for land in Saskatchewan. And so 

again, this entire speech has been about irony — irony that on 

her own website she suggests joining a group that she‟s 

ignoring in this legislation; irony that she says in her second 

reading speech, these groups are consulted, quite clearly they 

say they‟re not; and irony with the very fact that she is the 

Environment minister in Saskatchewan when she‟s further 

eroding the protective legislation in place for designated lands 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

It‟s absolutely shocking and sad that that is the Environment 

minister‟s position and the position that she finds herself in 

where she is further eroding protective legislation because I 

would suggest, as I‟m sure most anybody else in Saskatchewan 

would suggest and assert, that it is the Environment minister‟s 

responsibility to do exactly the opposite of what she‟s accused 

of doing by the editorial board in Saskatoon at The StarPhoenix 

in this case. Because I would argue, and I‟m sure Saskatchewan 

residents would also, that it is the Environment minister‟s 

responsibility to protect the land that we have and to enhance 

legislation or change legislation that enhances that protection, to 

create and design legislation that comes into this Assembly that 

benefits the environment in Saskatchewan. And the editorial 

board at The StarPhoenix suggests that she‟s doing something 

exactly the opposite of that. 

 

And so there is no question in my mind that people in 

Saskatchewan would disagree with the approach that‟s being 

taken and do disagree with the approach that‟s being taken by 

the Environment minister in the province of Saskatchewan, the 

member from Martensville. 

 

In another article, or sorry, another letter that‟s written by a 

resident of Saskatchewan to an opposition member, it says . . . 

Well first I‟ll read what these folks were sent by their member 

organization, in reference to how the Saskatchewan Party 

government consults. It says: 

 

We write concerning the governments statements that 

conservation stakeholder organizations were consulted 

about the Crown land sale program, in particular the sale 

of land designated under the Wildlife Habitat Protection 

Act (WHPA).  

 

Both the Ministers of Agriculture & Food and 

Environment have publicly stated WHPA lands will not 

be sold. We can assure you that no meaningful 

consultation regarding the sale of Crown lands has 

occurred with Nature Saskatchewan . . . Nature 

Saskatchewan was never asked for an opinion about the 

sale of Crown lands. The Crown Lands Stakeholder 

Forum, which did provide an opportunity for discussion 

about the management of future Crown lands was 

abolished by the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

We request you to urge the government to delay the 

passing of the amendments to the Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act which would see these lands removed 

from the Act and placed under regulation where they 

could be sold at the discretion of the Minister.  

 

The Government has not properly consulted with the 

public on this very important issue which has the potential 

to cause significant consequence to biodiversity in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

[16:00] 

 

If we do nothing, the legislation will pass, and we‟ll have to 

explain to our children and grandchildren how we let this 

happen. The letter to the member of the opposition says this. It 

says, then as a member of Nature Saskatchewan . . . The 

organization which wrote to their members the article that I‟d 

just written, they contacted their members with those words. 

The individual says this: 

 

Then as a member of Nature Saskatchewan, I was 

horrified to receive this email. And I urge you and all 

opposition members to please do your utmost to stop this 

legislation which would allow the sale of designated 

wildlife habitat protection Act protected land to be sold at 

the discretion of the minister. 

 

And so that note that I had written is indicative of many 

different letters that the NDP opposition members have 

received about the government and this misguided legislation. 

And they simply ask that we do all we can to stop it.  

 

The minister suggests that she wants to make changes to it, and 

the only way to make those changes is to pull the Bill, do some 

meaningful consultation for a change, and make the changes, 

resubmit the Bill, and we‟ll move forward. In light of the fact 

that they refuse to do that and many other things, I will take my 

seat to allow another member of the legislature to express his 

opinion and the opinion of people he‟s been contacted by on 

this debate. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Acting Speaker (Mr. Elhard): — I recognize the member 

from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased to 

weigh in on debate here today, not because of the nature of the 

debate and the fact that we have a Bill before us that‟s been 

derived without any consultation with the public, but because 

it‟s a matter that‟s very important to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and important to my constituents, important to many, many, 

many across this province. And it‟s our job and our role as 

legislators to take that opportunity to weigh in on these matters, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I‟ll take the opportunity to do so because this is a major 

failure of the Sask Party government to put forward legislation 

that has no reflection of the groups for whom it reflects, who 



May 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5523 

puts forth legislation without any consultation with the groups 

for whom it impacts, and to expect to simply ram this through 

in this spring setting without the public being engaged the way 

that they should have been from day one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we‟re talking about this Bill, we need to understand 

what‟s at stake here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and not only what‟s 

at stake, but what we‟re speaking of. And of course we‟re 

talking about protected habitat of environmentally sensitive 

lands, Mr. Speaker. And what we need to recognize is that these 

lands have been invested, have been purchased by the people of 

this province through many, many different mechanisms and 

through many different ways — some of which have been 

bequests from someone‟s estate given upon death to the 

province, to the people of this province to protect them, and to 

hold for the purpose of habitat preservation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we have land that‟s been purchased by the people of the 

province. We have land that‟s been bequested by many across 

this province, Mr. Speaker. We have land that‟s been purchased 

by hunters and fishers, Mr. Speaker, by wildlife branches across 

this province, Mr. Speaker, who have worked tirelessly to 

ensure that this kind of protection in land has occurred, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

And it‟s all for naught it would appear, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Those efforts for years and years and years and years, the 

stewardship by so many groups — environmentalists, hunters, 

fishers, and trappers — all for naught, Mr. Speaker, to advance 

an agenda that‟s misunderstood at this point, and certainly the 

interested partners have not been a part of developing this piece 

of legislation. 

 

We see that as it relates to First Nations, Mr. Speaker. At one 

point there was discussion and it seemed to be recognition by 

this government — and we pushed and urged for that — was to 

be a duty to consult which is expected by governments at this 

point in time, recognizing our history, Mr. Speaker. And that 

duty to consult has turned into a shameful duty to insult on so 

many fronts, Mr. Speaker. And we see that with our First 

Nations people, and we see that in a complete lack of 

consideration for treaty rights, treaty considerations, Mr. 

Speaker. So this is many, many, many groups that this affects. 

 

And when we‟re talking about basically our jewels here in our 

province being our wildlife and our flora and our fauna, Mr. 

Speaker, our natural environment, our biodiversity, we‟re all 

seeing that being sacrificed and compromised and put at risk by 

very deliberate actions of this Sask Party government and this 

Sask Party Premier who are intent on advancing an agenda that 

we‟re not certain who the benefactors of this agenda is, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But we would ask them to slow down. We would ask them 

simply to slow down, Mr. Speaker, and have the discussion in 

this legislature and to have the discussion with the public and 

the groups for whom this is of huge interest to — the groups for 

whom have worked to put this land in place. 

 

Now one of the goofiest justifications that we heard from this 

minister, who‟s made many silly statements on this front, many 

damaging statements on this front, but one of the goofiest had 

to be that this was being advanced because, as she suggested, 

her government believed in land ownership. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

that just doesn‟t make any sense. This land is owned. It‟s owned 

by the people of this province, across this province, Mr. 

Speaker, and it‟s been put there by their dollars, by their hard 

work, and with their work towards the goals that have been 

achieved through this sort of protection, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And we see it all for naught at this point in time, all for naught. 

 

And I think that when you look at well over 100 wildlife 

branches across this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that work 

year-round . . . And you would know this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

because certainly you have active branches in your own 

constituency, and across this province we have branches in 

every one of our constituencies. And they do good work, Mr. 

Speaker, for the preservation of the land, for the enhancement 

of habitat, for the promotion of hunting best practice, for 

introducing individuals and young people into the sport. 

 

And it‟s all about land and wildlife management, Mr. Speaker. 

And they‟ve played a major, major and significant role in 

protecting habitat. So when they speak and they say, we‟re 

concerned, and they say, we haven‟t been consulted — even 

though the minister pretends that they have — we listen to those 

groups, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We stand with those groups and 

we say, let‟s slow this process down. 

 

They‟re not asking for anything too wild as far as a 

consideration here right now, Mr. Speaker. They‟re asking for 

this process to be stopped at this point in time, for this Bill to be 

pulled, for the considerations to be granted that haven‟t up until 

this point in time, and for those groups to be consulted, those 

that haven‟t been consulted on this important matter. We‟re 

talking about something that this government has the power to 

do on any given day. They could choose to do that immediately. 

They could‟ve done it two weeks ago. And we hope that they 

will do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are hearing across this province the public weighing in on 

this in a major way as well. We‟re getting many, many calls to 

our offices. We‟re getting many calls into, I know into my own 

office as well that are coming from constituencies that aren‟t 

my constituency, Mr. Speaker, that are individuals who are 

feeling that they‟re not being represented in this debate, Mr. 

Speaker, individuals who are removing politics from the 

equation, Mr. Speaker, and are saying . . . In fact many, many 

individuals who are stating that they had voted for this Sask 

Party government in the last election and that they are 

absolutely dismayed on many fronts, but on this front which is 

very important and actually a fundamental issue to many, many 

people across this province. 

 

Now they‟re trying to get a hold of the individual that they 

elected. And in the case of the Sask Party MLAs, they can‟t 

have that conversation. They won‟t even meet with their 

constituents on these matters. And so they‟re coming in through 

our offices by email, by letter, in person. And I know our 

Environment critic has been working so diligently on this file 

and is, I would assume and I know, basically encumbered with 

an absolute pile of information and requests for meetings 

coming in and a rather overwhelming . . . And it‟s a sad 

statement about how this government is going about creating 

legislation and how they think that they can simply force 

through their agenda on top of the people of Saskatchewan 



5524 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2010 

without any of the considerations and conversations with the 

groups for whom it affects the greatest. 

 

Many of those groups that we talk about here have been the key 

contributors to ensuring that these lands have been protected. 

And that something so vital to these groups, to have that ripped 

away from them, to be driven — driven and advanced — 

despite all their pleas otherwise is of huge concern to those 

groups and to the broad public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I reference a StarPhoenix editorial from April 29th, 2010, 

just to speak to what the editorial board from The StarPhoenix 

is stating in Saskatoon, the title being “Short-sighted of gov‟t to 

sell protected land.” And I‟ll just make a few statements out of 

this telling editorial. And of course this is printed in Saskatoon, 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

The provincial government‟s plan to remove from under 

the protective umbrella of the Wildlife Protection Act 

nearly three million acres of Crown lands smacks of 

short-term thinking and political expediency that‟s 

detrimental to . . . citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

I‟ll move on: 

 

At a time when the entire world is becoming increasingly 

aware of the value of preserving natural habitat for 

wildlife for the sake of future generations as well as our 

own, the government demonstrates a breathtakingly 

short-sighted approach to its duty and obligation to act as 

a responsible steward of the public interest. 

 

I‟ll repeat that: “. . . a breathtakingly short-sighted approach to 

its duty and obligation to act as a responsible steward of the 

public interest.” 

 

Now that‟s a scathing statement, Mr. Speaker. And it‟s fair, and 

it‟s bang on. It‟s a direct statement, and it‟s a statement that is 

attributed to this Sask Party government that has lost their way 

on so many other fronts, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

[16:15] 

 

When we think about a government that has no willingness to 

listen to the public and the groups that have expertise, that have 

interest in the matters that affect them most, this government 

advances their agenda despite any of the objective and 

considerate pleas of groups. 

 

And we think of a government that rams home legislation with 

no consultation and major changes with no consultation. And 

there‟s no wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why so many across 

this province are speaking about the Sask Party breaking trust 

with the people who have elected them so early on in their 

mandate. 

 

And this is a very interesting development in Saskatchewan 

politics, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to see a government that‟s 

basically set aside the people who have elected them and said, 

this is our agenda and we‟re going to advance it all costs and 

without any consultation. And it‟s an arrogant state. It‟s an 

arrogant state and it‟s one of self-righteous . . . it‟s a 

self-righteous position, and it disregards the objective 

information available to governments, the excellent groups 

available to governments in helping to make good policy 

decisions. 

 

And we see that on so many different fronts. We see the no 

consultation here with so many groups that this affects, Mr. 

Speaker, and who would be authorities on this matter. We see 

that on so many other issues. We see that as it relates to our film 

industry that‟s been under attack under this government, with 

no consultation, making massive cuts of SCN. And that has a 

dramatic impact on our economy and our film industry, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We see that in the torn-up agreement, the torn-up agreement 

with no consultations, just ripped up an agreement that had been 

ratified with chiropractors in this province. Unbelievable, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to go through a process and have the 

chiropractors ratify an agreement that affects over 100,000 

patients in this province, and then to rip that agreement up. 

 

And then we hear the Premier wondering, oh you know, where 

has he lost his trust. It‟s a question that he‟s asking. You know, 

where has that happened? Well it‟s these direct, these direct 

broken promises, a lack of consultation, and the arrogant ways 

of this government that has cost this government the people‟s 

trust. 

 

A government without trust, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is one that‟s 

without roots. It‟s one that‟s not representative of the people. 

And they can spend — because we know that they spend most 

of their money on marketing and spin, photo opportunities — 

when you‟ve broken trust, none of that matters, Mr. Speaker, 

and people don‟t buy it. They don‟t trust it, Mr. Speaker. They 

see through it. They feel like they‟re getting a slick ad sales job 

on them, Mr. Speaker, and that‟s not how they should be 

consulted. 

 

It doesn‟t mean that every single group at all times, Mr. 

Speaker, are going to be in agreement with the agenda of a 

government. That‟s not the reality, Mr. Speaker, but the point is 

that they‟re brought to the table with the respect and dignity that 

they deserve and that their voice is heard and their input is 

brought forward. And that through public debate the various 

perspectives can be exposed, a dialogue can occur, and that a 

government can explain why they‟re advancing an agenda that 

in this case seems to be hugely ill-advised and certainly, 

certainly is greeted with huge opposition across this province — 

rightfully so — by some incredibly strong groups, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We look at why that we should expect anything different. You 

know, I mentioned the chiropractors — no consultation, a 

ripped up agreement, broken trust. I reference that with respect 

to the film industry as well and the damage done to our 

economy as a result, and the damage done to that industry by 

this Sask Party government — no consultation. 

 

We see that by the closure of a very important kidney transplant 

program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a program where we have 

individuals, over 100 in this province right now waiting for 

kidney transplants needed for their life, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

who are having . . . that opportunity has basically, the door has 

been shut by having that program closed down by this 

government, by this Sask Party government. So we see it on so 



May 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5525 

many fronts. And we have the resources to get that program 

going. 

 

We have a government that‟s not willing to consult on this front 

and to put forward a plan to open those doors. And that‟s a 

shame, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a shame that this government isn‟t 

prepared to do the hard work, to do the consultation, and to find 

the solutions that Saskatchewan people are requiring of their 

government. And yet this Premier wonders where did he break 

the trust. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we look at the labour legislation, the regressive 

attack on the working people of this province who do the heavy 

lifting within our economy, Mr. Speaker, and we see them 

being set back in a major way by this government, having their 

feet absolutely kicked out from underneath them, Mr. Speaker. 

Pieces of legislation, Bill 5, Bill 6, 43, and 80 that take away 

their livelihood, Mr. Speaker, take away the prosperity and the 

well being of their family for the advancement of whom, Mr. 

Speaker, for the advancement of whom, with no consultation, 

Mr. Speaker. In fact being told something else, being told 

before an election that no, no, you‟ll be fine, we‟re not going to 

touch that legislation. And then we see a government come to 

office and in a hugely two-faced manner go and do the exact 

opposite of what they said. And then the Premier wonders, well 

where did I lose the trust. I‟m explaining it to him here right 

now, Mr. Speaker. I‟m explaining it. 

 

And I know Saskatchewan people can cite these examples for 

that Premier if he‟d spend more time, Mr. Speaker, with the 

people of this province instead of out ripping around the United 

States with high-priced contracts to get him good press in the 

United States of America, Mr. Speaker, hanging out with 

Republicans down south. He needs to start listening to the 

people here in Saskatchewan because we see a government‟s 

that out of touch. It‟s out of touch. It‟s arrogant and it‟s not 

listening to the people of this province. 

 

We see it in education with the advancement of a plan to 

eliminate educational assistants. A government that is saying 

one thing, doing another, then trying to cover up something else 

and trying to in fact then have someone else take the blame for 

their decisions, Mr. Speaker. Running and hiding, Mr. Speaker. 

And the Premier wonders, well where did I lose the trust. 

Where did he lose the trust? 

 

We look at the health privacy of patients, Mr. Speaker, 

something that is absolutely vital to individuals, something 

that‟s important to individuals to be protected, to be protected, 

Mr. Speaker, being put forward by this government to be shared 

by this government, Mr. Speaker, without any consultation. 

Without any consultation. In fact they didn‟t even consult, Mr. 

Speaker — and you might find this surprising, Mr. Speaker — 

they didn‟t even consult with the Privacy Commissioner on this 

matter. Something that has a huge consequence for 

Saskatchewan people and that something that Saskatchewan 

people are hugely opposed to, no consultation. 

 

We see that when this government goes out and signs a new 

agreement with municipalities last year, as it relates to revenue 

sharing. They do a lot of fanfare, they do the photo 

opportunities, Mr. Speaker. But then when we come around to 

the year, and it‟s time for them to honour that contract, what do 

they do, Mr. Speaker? They rip it up. They rip it up and with no 

consultation. 

 

And an agreement . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And now 

there‟s a member that‟s shouting across here and she‟s 

recognizing and she‟s highlighting some of the decisions in 

years past. And I know she‟s probably referencing the 

circumstances and context of a debt-laden province after the last 

Conservative government that was in office, Mr. Speaker. 

Because I think she‟s referencing decisions at a point in time 

where this province could barely make payroll, Mr. Speaker, 

and basically the bankers in New York were calling us on our 

debt and we were in a bankrupt circumstance, Mr. Speaker. And 

that‟s a member opposite . . . I‟m glad that they still remember 

the debt that was put upon us by their party back in the 1980s. 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is a huge concern to Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

We look here now too, and these are the other consequences 

where we now are selling public land, protected and put in 

place by the hunters, fishers, individuals across this province, 

Mr. Speaker, landowners, all people of this province. We see a 

government that gets himself into such a financial mess, one of 

Grant Devine proportions, Mr. Speaker. And now they‟re 

looking for quick and easy solutions, Mr. Speaker. And the fact 

that there‟s monetary considerations when you‟re talking about 

habitat lands, Mr. Speaker, is an absolute shame. When you‟re 

looking at something that‟s been protected and placed in 

protection for a very specific purpose by the people of this 

province, to be now be attacked by the lack of financial 

management of this Premier and the Sask Party is a major 

problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we stand opposed to this kind of reckless management, this 

kind of knee-jerk response. The deficit that they‟ve created is 

something that they need to get under control, but they don‟t 

need to be having a fire sale on habitat lands, environmentally 

sensitive lands, Mr. Speaker. We need to be making sure our 

flora, our fauna, our biodiversity are enhanced, Mr. Speaker, for 

generations to come, not going in the other direction. 

 

And I can‟t, I can‟t fathom that. Well no government in any 

jurisdiction would get away with what this government is doing 

here right now. And this government‟s not going to either. And 

we see that with the groups that have come out, that have 

expressed their concern and their opposition. And they‟re very 

upset that they weren‟t included in the consultation process 

because there wasn‟t one. 

 

And when we‟re talking about groups such as the Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation, Mr. Speaker, that play a vital role in our 

communities, the health of our, the well-being of our 

communities with over 30,000 members in this province. Mr. 

Speaker, when they‟re coming out so strongly opposed to this 

piece of legislation and with a very simple request — let‟s pull 

this Bill, let‟s sit down, let‟s consult, let‟s get this right — that‟s 

a very fair request, Mr. Speaker. For this Premier and the Sask 

Party to push their agenda ahead against the will — and I‟ll list 

the other groups here, Mr. Deputy Speaker — but against the 

will of the one group, being Saskatchewan‟s Wildlife 

Federation and its 30,000 members, that is hugely 

disconcerting, Mr. Speaker. 

 



5526 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2010 

So it questions, who is this Premier actually representing? Who 

does this Premier represent? And we know there‟s some special 

interests, Mr. Speaker, that drive this Premier‟s decisions. 

That‟s what we know, Mr. Speaker. And that we understand 

that those close to the Premier have great influence over the 

Premier, and we suspect that‟s where this piece of legislation 

comes from. But the point is, it hasn‟t gone to the people who 

should be involved in those consultations. We need to make 

sure this is in the best interests of Saskatchewan people. And as 

it relates to reducing habitat lands, that certainly isn‟t the 

direction to be going, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We think of groups like Saskatchewan Environmental Society, 

a strong legacy in this province and good work, stand opposed 

to this Bill and the way it‟s advancing. We think of groups like 

Nature Saskatchewan who have stated their opposition with this 

Bill, who have simply said, let‟s pull this Bill. Let‟s get it right. 

Let‟s get it right. And we think of groups like Ducks Unlimited 

that have said, we weren‟t consulted through this process and 

we have concerns. This is something that needs to be addressed, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we have the First Nations of our province, the FSIN stating 

their opposition and their huge frustration, like many of the 

other groups, that despite the minister‟s claims that they were 

consulted with, nothing could be further from the truth. Nothing 

could be further from the truth. 

 

Well just think about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that we have 

a minister of the Crown who suggests that she consulted with 

many of the groups I just listed off. Now you have those groups 

coming out and their spokespeople stating, you know, that 

never happened. And then the Premier wonders why are his 

numbers crumbling as it relates to support in this province and 

why has he lost the trust of Saskatchewan people. Why has he 

lost the trust of Saskatchewan people? 

 

And I hear it right now. Members opposite, I see the arrogant 

state of members opposite right at this point in time who just 

want this Bill passed. They want to get this session done. It‟s 

not been a good session for them, and they want to get back to 

their respective communities, and they want to just advance this 

Bill. 

 

But I might say this Bill has huge opposition in each and every 

one of those members‟ constituencies. Wildlife branches across 

this province stand opposed to this piece of legislation. Wildlife 

groups across this province stand opposed to this legislation, yet 

that Premier and the Sask Party will simply ram this ahead. 

Simply ram it ahead. That‟s disappointing, Mr. Speaker, and 

Saskatchewan people expect more and should expect more from 

their government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] — who is up in the 

boreal forest, in many ways the gateway to a beautiful North, 

Mr. Speaker, a precious resource is both south of there and 

north of there, Mr. Speaker — and the member from P.A. says 

well we just simply are getting things done, Mr. Speaker; he 

shouts across to me here. Yes, well he sure is, Mr. Speaker. He 

sure is just getting things done, Mr. Speaker. He sure is. He‟s 

selling off land that‟s been put there by the hunters and fishers 

of this province. He‟s getting things done by removing 

protected lands that are there for our wildlife, for our flora, for 

our fauna, Mr. Speaker, for generations to come. He‟s getting 

things done by increasing debt to the tune of . . . basically a 

scope and scale that we haven‟t seen in a generation, back to the 

last time Conservatives ran this province into the ground. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is, you bet this government‟s getting things 

done. They‟re getting them done quickly, and that‟s the concern 

because there‟s some important areas that do require their 

attention, like the broken promises as it relates to rural health 

care, the doctor shortage that‟s grown under this government, 

the doctor shortage that‟s grown under this province in a huge 

way under the Sask Party‟s government, Mr. Speaker, and the 

surgical wait times that aren‟t getting shorter under this 

government but that are getting longer, in fact 100 per cent 

longer, doubled in Swift Current, the Premier‟s own health 

riding. 

 

And the Premier wonders, the Premier wonders why don‟t 

people trust me? These are the prime examples. These are the 

areas that this government should be putting its interest into, its 

attention to in a consultative fashion and getting things done as 

the member likes to say. That‟s where they should be getting 

things done — not by selling off protected habitat lands, not by 

growing our debt and deficit, Mr. Speaker, so that it encumbers 

generations to come, limits the opportunity and prosperity that‟s 

deserved by Saskatchewan people, by the entrepreneurs who 

work so hard within our economy, for the working people who 

toil every day to bring home a paycheque, Mr. Speaker, all put 

at risk by this government. 

 

The article that I was referencing before, The StarPhoenix 

editorial goes on to highlight, and this is on April 29th, 2010: 

“It simply isn‟t acceptable that Ms. Heppner seems determined 

to push through changes to three-decade-old legislation without 

properly discussing them with groups other than the ranchers 

who have a stake in protected land.” No consultation. It goes 

on: 

 

As Darrell Crabbe, executive director of the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation aptly notes: “We just 

think that the future generations of Saskatchewan would 

be better served if there was full consultation with 

everybody and the original protection was left in place. 

 

“This is a huge . . . [concern] for us. We‟re talking about 

millions of acres of land that we consider to be a [crown] 

jewel . . . of Saskatchewan.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I agree with Mr. Crabbe wholeheartedly, 

absolutely. Our land in this province, our wildlife, our flora, our 

fauna, is a jewel, Mr. Speaker, without a doubt. To see it being 

put at risk by this government is a major, major shame. And it 

speaks as well to the lack of understanding of this government 

as it relates to very basic understanding of the interconnection 

of our wildlife and the food chain and life cycles, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we see a major gopher problem within this province, Mr. 

Speaker. And you‟re from the Southwest, and so you would 

certainly know that, and it‟s not just within the Southwest. But 

at the same time, we‟re going to take habitat lands, a natural 

environment that‟s very conducive to animals such as hawks, 



May 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5527 

Mr. Speaker, and we‟re going to reduce and eliminate that land. 

We‟re going to till that land, and we eliminate the hawks further 

from the food chain. And we haven‟t done enough on this front 

to be honest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is something that we should be working on if we want to 

be effectively balancing our natural environment and addressing 

our gopher issue. We need to be addressing the number of 

hawks within this province. To see a move like this that is 

completely going in the other direction and it hinders and hurts 

the population of hawks, thus it allows gophers to flourish 

across this province, something that is a huge consequence to 

producers, farmers and ranchers across our province, as you 

would know, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we‟re going to take land away? We should be doing the 

opposite. We should be protecting more land. We should be 

protecting more habitat. We should be putting forward common 

sense solutions that make sense. 

 

We see a Premier, the Sask Party Premier who puts forward a 

plan to shoot every last coyote in the province. Broad brush — 

every last coyote has to go. Without a doubt, coyotes are a 

major issue in some parts of the province, and RMs and 

communities need mechanisms to be able to address those 

problems and individuals, landowners. But solutions could be 

had. Compromises can be found. But not this Premier who 

doesn‟t get what‟s going on within the natural environment; he 

says every last coyote‟s got to go. So he puts a bounty on 

coyotes, Mr. Speaker, that goes right across this entire province. 

 

Well what do we know is that we eliminate all coyotes in this 

province. We have a major problem again with gophers as I 

speak to. We take away a natural predator. And we see rats 

flourish, Mr. Speaker, from farmyard to farmyard, from town to 

town, something that‟s a huge concern for Saskatchewan people 

if and when that occurs. And if you take away the predators in 

our natural environment, just wait. 

 

And I know the Premier knows a little bit about seeing 

something like a rat infestation take over because they‟ve had 

some challenges within his own home community. He should 

have an interest in making sure that communities and families 

are protected from those sort of circumstances, Mr. Speaker. 

And by taking land away from natural predators such as hawks, 

by eliminating indigenous species and indigenous plant life, this 

is the wrong direction to be going. 

 

To be putting forward ill-fated coyote programs where a bounty 

is put on every single last coyote in the province to deal with 

the problem in a broad brush, Mr. Speaker, it‟s a poor program. 

And what we know as well — and it‟s a major problem, and we 

need to get the bottom of this — is that we‟re paying many, 

many, many individuals for coyotes from outside of our 

province because they‟re hauling the hooves into the province 

and that they‟re cashing them in, picking up the cheque. And 

this is something that we need to look at because it‟s a loss of 

public dollars that are flowing back for another purpose to 

another jurisdiction. That just shows again the failure in setting 

this program up. 

 

So when we look at this land that‟s been worked at by many 

different governments, Mr. Speaker, of different political 

persuasions, by individuals and groups across this province to 

protect this habitat that‟s a Crown jewel here in Saskatchewan 

there for a very important purpose, by groups such as the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, Ducks Unlimited, Nature 

Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan Environmental Society, 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations, and we deprive 

them the right to engage in debate over the lands for which 

they‟ve directly been involved in contributing and protecting, 

that‟s an absolute shame. 

 

And we see the flurries of emails, of letters coming into the 

office. And we see the letters of opposition inside the 

newspapers across our province. I‟ll cite, from the same article 

that I cited before, a quote here from Ducks Unlimited. I quote: 

 

“We‟re not convinced that they have the means [they 

meaning the Sask Party government] to be able to 

accurately define which lands have greater or which lands 

have lesser ecological value,” suggests Brent Kennedy, 

DU‟s [Ducks Unlimited] manager of provincial 

operations. 

 

There‟s concerns, Mr. Speaker, not only that the consultation 

hasn‟t been adequate, but there‟s concerns by very important 

groups that the evaluation and the assessments, Mr. Speaker, 

the capacity to conduct those is not where it should be, Mr. 

Speaker. And these are the kinds of discussions that need to go 

on as we go through consultations. 

 

I‟ll reference another article here, Mr. Speaker. “Sask. habitat 

protection proposal raises furor.” Says it raises furor. This is 

from the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] on April 

28th, 2010. And I‟ll quote from it: “Wildlife groups and 

environmentalists in Saskatchewan are upset with the 

government plan to remove more than 1.2 million hectares of 

land from the Wildlife Habitat Protection Act.” 

 

1.2 million hectares, so we have environmental groups, and we 

have wildlife groups coming together to stand opposed to the 

poor policies of this Sask Party government. I go on in the 

quote here: “„Those properties are owned by the people of 

Saskatchewan, and I just don‟t think most people would want to 

see them sold off,‟ said Darrell Crabbe, executive director of the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation.” 

 

I go on: “It‟s a very sad day when the dollar plays a bigger role 

than our future generations.” This is the Saskatchewan Wildlife 

Federation, Mr. Speaker, making a statement that “It‟s a sad day 

when the dollar plays a bigger role than our future generations.” 

 

And I concur, Mr. Speaker. I concur wholeheartedly, and I 

thank the Wildlife Federation for their leadership on this front, 

proud to be a member of the Wildlife Federation to see the 

work that they‟re doing in making sure that the proper 

consultation occurs on a Bill that has a very significant impact 

on Saskatchewan‟s environment and our landscape and wildlife. 

 

We go on to see further in other pieces of news media here. We 

see that in May 1st, Murray Mandryk of the Leader-Post cites 

by title “Environment portfolio bigger than politics.” He cites 

some of the work done by, in fact, the PC [Progressive 

Conservative] government in the 1980s as it related to 

protection of lands and talks about basically the process that‟s 



5528 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2010 

before us here at this point in time, and then makes a statement 

about the current Environment minister. I quote: 

 

Instead, Heppner has seemed intent on pitting ranchers 

against environmentalists when it‟s been the ranchers who 

have clearly been the environmental stewards of the land. 

(In fact, the only one who seems to be suggesting that 

ranchers won‟t be — or haven‟t been — good 

environmental stewards is Heppner, who seems rather 

intent on driving that political wedge.) 

 

And one of the members, just as important that they could hear 

there, the member from Regina Qu‟Appelle, I‟ll repeat that last 

phrase there again: “In fact, the only one who seems to be 

suggesting that the ranchers won‟t be — or haven‟t been — 

good environmental stewards is Heppner, who seems rather 

intent on driving in that political wedge.” The article goes on 

and I quote, “And one of the worst is Heppner, who doesn‟t 

seem to have championed an issue beyond subsidizing 

low-flush toilets.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, there‟s I guess a bit of advice coming from this 

same article, from Mr. Mandryk‟s article. I quote, “Talk to the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation about this Bill. Heck, talk to 

some hunters who surely can‟t be a happy about a potential loss 

of resources.” It‟s pretty common sense advice coming there, 

Mr. Speaker. And it‟s something that‟s falling on deaf ears, 

something that hasn‟t happened. 

 

This government‟s advancing this agenda at all costs. For the 

benefit of whom, I‟m not sure, Mr. Speaker, because what‟s the 

rush? Why can‟t this Bill simply be retracted as the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation and their 30,000 members 

across Saskatchewan are calling for and to have the consultation 

that never occurred and make sure we get this right? Why can‟t 

it simply be retracted like Nature Saskatchewan is 

recommending and the discussion and the dialogue that has to 

occur in a meaningful way has the opportunity then to occur 

and we can make sure we get this process right? 

 

And why, Mr. Speaker, is this Premier and the Sask Party so 

intent on reducing the size and amount of protected wildlife 

lands — habitat lands — in our province? Doesn‟t make any 

sense to me, Mr. Speaker, and I know that Saskatchewan people 

will stand opposed to that principle and that position, (a) the 

position that he doesn‟t need to consult with anyone, Mr. 

Speaker, and that he can simply advance his agenda even when 

it‟s hugely not in the best interests of Saskatchewan people. 

And they‟ll stand opposed to the idea of losing protected lands, 

Mr. Speaker, something that Saskatchewan people value, 

something that‟s a jewel to our province, has a major impact on 

our tourism, Mr. Speaker — our natural environment. 

 

As a hunter myself and a fisher myself, Mr. Speaker, I certainly 

sympathize with the Wildlife Federation and the hunters and 

fishers that are organizing across this province — writing 

letters, coming together, standing in protest of this Sask Party 

Premier‟s reckless abandon to put forward policies that don‟t 

reflect their needs — and stand up with those groups, Mr. 

Speaker, calling for that consultation to occur. 

 

[16:45] 

 

I go on and quote another article here, in the Leader-Post on 

May 11th. It‟s not just the hunters and fishers and their wildlife 

groups, Mr. Speaker, that are calling for this Bill to be shelved, 

consultation to occur. And I quote, “First Nations and 

conservation groups calling for delay in changes to Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act.” Calling for delay in changes. This isn‟t 

a radical request. There‟s no reason, Mr. Speaker, to rush this 

Bill through as this government is doing at this point in time. 

And we need to stop that process. 

 

The Saskatchewan government faced, I quote here: 

 

The Saskatchewan government faced new calls from First 

Nations and conservation groups Tuesday to delay 

legislation that will allow for the sale of some protected 

wildlife land. 

 

Despite the government‟s recent attempts to placate 

concerns over proposed changes to the Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act, the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation 

said there are still too many issues — such as lack of 

transparency on what protected lands could be removed 

from the Act in the future. 

 

The group also wants a “no net loss” agreement so the 

overall amount of land protected doesn‟t decline. 

 

I quote from the article, and I quote Darrell Crabbe with the 

Wildlife Federation, “The combination of a lack of consultation 

and the aggressive timeline on this bill has effectively made it 

impossible to address our concerns and left many important 

questions unanswered.” 

 

And that‟s Darrell Crabbe, the executive director of the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation that represents over 30,000 

hunters and fishers and wildlife enthusiasts across this province 

— 30,000. Over 100 wildlife branches across our beautiful 

province, Mr. Speaker, are standing up for the Saskatchewan 

they believe in, standing against and opposed to the Sask Party 

Premier and his plan to sell off protected habitat, to sell off 

lands that serve our population well and to sell off lands that are 

owned by Saskatchewan people, put there by their hard work, 

without any consultation. 

 

And it‟s not just this sale that‟s a concern, Mr. Speaker. The 

fact is that these changes make a significant difference into the 

future. With the changes in this legislation, the minister on her 

whim, or in the future, whoever‟s the Environment minister on 

their whim and whimsy, they can sell protected, 

environmentally sensitive habitat lands, Mr. Speaker. I look at 

members opposite, and I can‟t even imagine that they think this 

is the right way to go, can‟t imagine it because Saskatchewan 

communities, Saskatchewan people stand opposed to the Sask 

Party‟s plan on this front. 

 

And they don‟t trust the Premier to consult, Mr. Speaker, 

because they‟ve learned on so many other fronts that they can‟t 

trust this Premier to consult or to get the plan right. They‟re 

saying, pull the legislation. Let‟s get this, let‟s get this right. 

 

The article goes on: 

 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations Vice-Chief 



May 12, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5529 

Lyle Whitefish also urged the government to allow for 

further discussion before changing the act that protects 

more than three million acres of Crown land. 

 

“There is not a lot of land in this country now that‟s 

protected and we want to ensure that long-term 

sustainability for the future generations to enjoy these 

protected lands,” Whitefish said. 

 

This is Vice-chief Lyle Whitefish, FSIN. You have hunters, you 

have fishers, you have the Wildlife Federation standing 

opposed. You have the Assembly of First Nations, representing 

the over 70 First Nations in this province, opposed. And yet this 

government, this Premier‟s so arrogant to proceed, Mr. Speaker. 

He disregards the very request, the humble request of 

Saskatchewan people and organizations to sit down, to discuss 

this legislation, to understand this legislation and to build it 

together in a co-operative environment that meets the needs of 

all. It‟s an arrogant position, Mr. Speaker, put forward by a 

Premier Saskatchewan people are learning they can‟t trust, Mr. 

Speaker, as it relates to consulting with Saskatchewan people. 

 

They‟ve learned they can‟t trust this Premier as it relates to 

health care delivery in this province, the massive shortage of 

doctors in this province, surgical wait times. They know they‟ve 

learned they can‟t trust this Premier as it relates to the cost of 

living that burdens so many, Mr. Speaker, across this province. 

And they certainly know they can‟t trust this Premier as it 

relates to the management of our finances, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now we have a Bill before us that multiple governments, 

multiple governments have presided over, Mr. Speaker, of 

different political persuasions — the PC government from the 

1980s, the New Democrats through the ‟90s and into the 2000s 

— that ensured that that legislation stood strong and that it was 

improved to ensure that there was no net loss of 

environmentally sensitive lands. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the kinds of people who are 

caring about this piece of legislation, they‟re the kind of people 

that put together fish fries, Mr. Speaker, to organize for 

programs within their communities to give new opportunities to 

youth within those communities. 

 

Wildlife branches across this province, individuals who work 

incredibly hard to the benefit of Saskatchewan people, to the 

management of our wildlife, management of our environment. 

To be disregarded the way they are by this Premier, this Sask 

Party Premier, is a huge slap in the face of hard-working, good 

people. Mr. Speaker, a huge slap in the face. 

 

So we‟ve seen the opposition from group after group with a 

request that‟s incredibly simple, incredibly simple. They say to 

the Premier, and they‟ve been saying this from day one is, just 

pull this legislation back, Mr. Premier. Just pull it back. And 

they did so quietly and they did so modestly and they put 

forward those humble requests. Not this Premier who‟s too 

arrogant to listen, Mr. Speaker. Not this Premier who‟s lost the 

trust of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. He advances his 

agenda because it benefits someone, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The point is there should be no rush in this legislation. It‟s a 

simple request. Let‟s pull that piece of legislation. This 

government needs to sit down with the groups for whom it 

affects who care about the matter at hand and to get this right. 

The fact that this Premier somehow disregards that sort of a 

request is hugely telling, Mr. Speaker. It‟s telling of how we got 

into the financial mess that we‟re in. It‟s telling of how we have 

a Premier who can‟t respond to the pressures in health care, Mr. 

Speaker, and we see huge compromises on those fronts. 

 

It‟s telling, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the lack of consultation, 

the no consultation that‟s gone on, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s 

representative of so many other decisions of this government, 

Mr. Speaker. And it‟s unfortunate this government won‟t 

consult. 

 

Now I think maybe one of the gravest concerns out of all of 

this, Mr. Speaker, is that the Environment minister has actually 

stated, the minister of the Crown has stated that she has 

consulted and that this Premier has consulted with 

Saskatchewan people and with the groups that I stated here. But 

now all the groups put out their press releases — the Wildlife 

Federation, the FSIN, Nature Saskatchewan — and they say no, 

that‟s not correct. We haven‟t been consulted. So you have a 

minister of the Crown, Mr. Speaker, with a Sask Party 

government that‟s been discredited as it relates to putting 

forward information, who‟s saying one thing. And you have 

groups, Mr. Speaker, good people from across this province 

who are saying that never happened, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to Saskatchewan people is, who are you going to 

believe? Are you going to believe one of the most partisan and 

political members of this Assembly, the Minister Responsible 

for the Environment who puts forward political interests far 

ahead of the actual portfolio that she presides over? Or are you 

going to believe the groups that care about the issues that 

they‟re weighing in on, the good people from across this 

province? Who are you going to believe? 

 

I know who I‟m believing, Mr. Speaker, and I know who I 

stand with — Saskatchewan people. The individuals, the 

groups, the organizations that are there to protect and enhance 

our natural environment, our wildlife; I know who I‟m going to 

believe, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker? As I look over here right 

now and I look at the members opposite, I don‟t believe for a 

second that 50 per cent of that caucus actually believes the 

Environment minister themselves. I don‟t believe it. I don‟t 

believe that they believe when the Environment minister says, I 

consulted with those groups. I think there‟s a few of them that 

know that that never happened. 

 

I think and I know a couple of those individuals over there who 

would, actually would like their Environment minister to put 

their portfolio ahead of politics. And you have one of the most 

important portfolios as it relates to Saskatchewan, as it relates to 

the world. And we have a minister of the Crown who is 

completely partisan and puts political agendas far ahead of her 

portfolio, the people of Saskatchewan who they‟re supposed to 

be representing. 

 

I don‟t believe it for a moment, Mr. Speaker, that the members 

opposite believe what that member‟s saying. And I guess I ask 

the members opposite, do you believe your Environment 



5530 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2010 

minister? Do you believe your Environment minister? Do you 

believe your Environment minister? I don‟t have a single, I 

don‟t have a single response over there that suggests that they 

support their Environment minister, Mr. Speaker. I have one. I 

have one out of 38 that believes their Environment minister, 

Mr. Speaker. I see two. I see three. So three of them believe 

their Environment minister, Mr. Speaker. Unbelievable, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I can understand why it‟s difficult to believe because you 

have an Environment minister who stands up here as one of the 

most partisan individuals in this Assembly, who puts forward 

politics ahead of the well being of our environment and their 

portfolio on a daily basis, who says I consulted with the 

Wildlife Federation, who says I consulted with the First 

Nations. And then those groups, Mr. Speaker, who many of us 

know on both sides of this Assembly, for whom we believe and 

we trust, say no, that never happened. 

 

Well who are you going to believe, Mr. Speaker? I can‟t bring 

the Speaker into the debate, I realize that, but who are they 

going to believe? I don‟t know, Mr. Speaker, but for me it‟s 

plain and simple. I‟m going to stand with the Wildlife 

Federation members of 30,000 strong across this province. I‟m 

going to stand with the First Nations who say they haven‟t been 

consulted. I‟m going to stand with Nature Saskatchewan when 

they say that they haven‟t been consulted. And I‟m going to 

believe that far ahead, Mr. Speaker, ahead of this Environment 

minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A government, a government . . . Oh, and I‟m going to go back 

here to, the member here makes a statement here and makes a 

statement about, because I tell you one thing, Mr. Speaker, we 

stand behind ranchers in this province in a major way. 

 

And I‟m just going to state here back to Murray Mandryk‟s 

article here from May 1st. And this is for the benefit of the 

Minister of Social Services who‟s, I can‟t hear exactly, but 

saying something, it sounds not helpful towards ranchers. And I 

tell you, the ranchers in our province have been exceptional 

environmental stewards, Mr. Speaker, exceptional 

environmental stewards. And that has nothing to do with this 

debate, Mr. Speaker, because the ranchers should be a full part 

of this consultation and full part of this debate because they 

have played an exceptional role in protecting wildlife in this 

province. 

 

So I‟m going to read this quote here:  

 

(In fact the only one who seems to be suggesting that 

ranchers won‟t be — or haven‟t been — good environmental 

stewards is Heppner, who seems rather intent on driving in 

that political wedge.)  

 

Mr. Speaker, the title of that article was, “Environment 

portfolio bigger than politics.” And, Mr. Speaker, I agree. The 

Environment portfolio is bigger than politics. And to see the 

games being played by that Environment minister and by that 

Premier, who Saskatchewan people have learned they can‟t 

trust on so many different issues that matter to them, is of huge 

concern, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see a Premier that has lost the trust of Saskatchewan people, 

who‟s willing to arrogantly force this agenda forward against 

the will of Saskatchewan hunters and fishers, against those who 

care about the environment, Mr. Speaker, against the First 

Nations and a complete disregard for treaty considerations, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s a huge shame, when you have a Premier who‟s 

so willing to advance his arrogant position against the will of 

others when you have a simple solution. And it‟s put forward 

by the important groups that I believe and that I trust and that I 

stand with, Mr. Speaker, and those are the people that say let‟s 

pull . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Being now 5 p.m. the Assembly will 

adjourn until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 

 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5501 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5501 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5501 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5501 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5501 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5502 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5502 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5502 

  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5502 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5502 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5511 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5502 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5502 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5503 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5503 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5503 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5503 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5503 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5504 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5504 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5504 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5504 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 26th Legislature Caps 26-Year Career 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5505 

 National Nursing Week and International Nurses Day 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5505 

 Speech and Hearing Awareness Month 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5505 

 Fibromyalgia Awareness Day 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5505 

 Riderville Events in Yorkton 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5506 

 A Spelling Lesson 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5506 

 Moose Jaw Health Foundation Radiothon 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5506 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Proposed Long-Term Care Facility 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5507 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5507 

 Consultation on Changes to Legislation 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5507 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5508 

 Agreement Between Colleges 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5508 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5508 

 Funding for Foster Homes 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5510 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5510 

 Coverage for Fibromyalgia 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5510 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5510 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5511 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5512 

 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 132 — The Wildlife Habitat Protection (Land Designation) Amendment Act, 2009 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5512 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5522 

 

 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


