




















































Hansard: May 06, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 57A  THURSDAY, MAY 6, 2010, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5401 

 May 6, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly, or 

Kelvington-Wadena, pardon me. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 

you and through you, I’d like to introduce to my colleagues 26 

grade 4 students in the west gallery from the great town of 

Wadena. These students are accompanied today by Bertha 

Harvey and Lindsey Harvey, the teachers. And the chaperones 

are Candace Smoke, Bobbie Flandares, and Crystal Miller. I’m 

absolutely delighted they made it today. I was a little worried 

that maybe the weather would keep them home. But I’m 

looking forward to a chance to meet with them later on, and I’m 

pleased you’re here, and I want to welcome you to your 

Legislative Building. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a true pleasure to 

be able to introduce a family member to you and, through you, 

to all members of this Assembly. Seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, is Curtis Wiebe. Curtis, if you could stand. Curtis is 

my brother-in-law, married to Rachael, my wife’s sister, Ruth. 

 

And Curtis is from Swift Current, lives in Swift Current, 

originally from Rosetown. He practises law with Kanuka 

Thuringer in Swift Current. And Curtis always looks good, but 

if he looks a little tired it’s because they just welcomed their 

second son into the family, Karsten. So it’s been a busy few 

weeks for the Wiebe household. I should also mention that 

Curtis recently began a term as president of the Swift Current 

Chamber of Commerce. So I’d ask all members to join me in 

welcoming Curtis Wiebe to the gallery. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 

pleased to introduce, in the west gallery, Heather Malek who is 

a film and television editor here in Regina, who is working very 

diligently to find out more details about the privatization of 

Saskatchewan Communications Network and is disappointed 

with this government’s policy decision. I’d like everyone to 

welcome her to her Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned 

over the safety of our highways. This petition pertains to 

Highway 135 which runs through the community of Pelican 

Narrows. Presently, Mr. Speaker, that highway is a gravel road, 

but the upgrading of that road would be an excellent investment 

in the safety and well-being of the people of Pelican Narrows. 

The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to pave 7 kilometres of Highway 135 

through the community of Pelican Narrows as committed 

to on August 24th, 2007. 

 

And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Pelican Narrows, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of marriage commissioners 

upholding the law. Mr. Speaker, there are many citizens 

concerned about this issue across the province. And I would 

read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I present on behalf of concerned citizens in Moose 

Jaw. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on behalf 

of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned that many 

seniors live on fixed incomes and are victims of physical, 

emotional, and financial abuse. And they understand that 

seniors or believe that seniors have a right to social and 

economic security and a right to live free from poverty and that 

seniors have a right to protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. The new prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 

enact a Saskatchewan seniors’ Bill of Rights, which 

would provide Saskatchewan seniors with social and 

economic security and protection from abuse, neglect, and 

exploitation. 

 

The petition is signed by the citizens from Glentworth, Fir 

Mountain, and Lafleche. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



5402 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2010 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today and present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing for Saskatoon. We know this is a serious issue for 

seniors who have seen huge rent increases, some 30, 40 per 

cent, and yet the number of rental accommodation is continuing 

to shrink. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to call upon the Government of 

Saskatchewan to develop an affordable housing program 

that will result in a greater number of quality and 

affordable rental units to be made available to more 

people in Saskatoon and Saskatchewan and that the 

government also implement a process of rent review or 

rent control to better protect tenants in a non-competitive 

housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

Saskatoon. I do so present, thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of the expansion of the graduate 

retention program and a call for fairness for university students 

here in Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of financial assistance for the Duck 

Lake water project. The petition is being circulated and signed 

by folks from Saskatchewan due to the exorbitant amount that 

the town of Duck Lake citizens are forced to pay for clean, safe 

water. And it’s causing them hardship up and to including 

forcing people to move from the town of Duck Lake to other 

communities. And the petition reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency and that this government fulfills a 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by folks from Duck 

Lake and Rosthern. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 

present yet another petition with respect to water issues in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

A government ministry has directed that the customers of 

Furdale may no longer treat non-potable water using methods 

approved by Sask Health. The Furdale residents, dealing in 

good faith with SaskWater for over 30 years, have paid large 

amounts for their domestic systems and in-home treatment 

equipment. The alternative water supply being referred to by the 

government ministry is a private operator offering treated, 

non-pressurized water at great cost with no guarantee of quality, 

quantity or availability of water. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Furdale. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Saskatoon Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to present a 

petition in support of maintaining quality health care services. 

Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that the Government of 

Saskatchewan’s heavy-handed essential services legislation is 

making a mockery of the collective bargaining system. The 

government must recognize the value of health care providers 

by having a commitment to adequate funding in the installation 

of good-faith bargaining. They also need to require that they 

care about the health care providers and that they provide an 

integral role as part of a health care team and for our province. 

And the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to commit to negotiating a fair and just 

collective bargaining agreement with health care workers 

in the province. 

 

This petition is signed by residents of Stoughton, and I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 



May 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5403 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise here 

again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 

from across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

financial mismanagement of the Sask Party. They allude to the 

two consecutive $1 billion deficit budgets put forward by the 

Sask Party and the billions of dollars of debt growth ongoing 

and projected by the Sask Party. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Now these concerned citizens on this petition are from Canora, 

Preeceville, Buchanan, Prince Albert, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

again today to present a petition in support of midwifery in 

Saskatchewan. This petition is signed by residents concerned 

that the Sask Party government was more than eager to take 

credit for proclaiming the last bits of The Midwifery Act, but 

aren’t so willing to put their money where their mouth is when 

it comes to funding and ensuring that all women — northern, 

rural, and urban women — have access to this important 

service. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to keep its promise to broaden the options 

for women and their families and recognize that presently 

this promise remains unfulfilled, as many communities in 

Saskatchewan still do not have midwives employed by 

their respective health regions; 

 

And in doing so, your petitioners pray the honourable 

Legislative Assembly cause the government to support 

midwifery in Saskatchewan by making funding available 

for additional midwife positions in Saskatchewan’s health 

regions as well as independent positions; 

 

And, furthermore, the honourable Legislative Assembly 

cause the government to encourage an increase in the 

number of licensed midwives in Saskatchewan by 

extending liability insurance, thereby making it possible 

for prospective midwives to achieve the number of births 

required to successfully apply for a licence with the newly 

formed College of Midwives. 

 

This petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon, Fort 

Qu’Appelle, and Regina. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, this week marks North 

American Occupational Safety and Health Week. This week 

provides an opportunity to not only heighten awareness of 

employers and employees but all of us on the importance of 

safety on the job. 

 

This week I had the opportunity to hear the tragic story of 

David Ellis from his father Rob. David was a young worker 

who was killed when he was working at a bakery and became 

entangled in an industrial mixer. According to his father, David 

had received only minimal training. But perhaps even more 

disturbing is the fact that his employer had ignored a mandatory 

order to install a low-cost safety device on the outside of the 

mixer. 

 

This is a clear testament, Mr. Speaker, to the important role that 

governments have in regulating occupational health and safety 

standards. Last year the Workers’ Compensation Board reports 

that 34 people were killed in the workplace. This is 34 too 

many. As Rob told the Leader-Post this morning: 

 

I don’t want you to ever . . . go through what I went 

through. It’s been really hard even just . . . to drive home. 

I wish David were here today instead of me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in marking North 

American Occupational Safety and Health Week and call on the 

Sask Party government to confirm their commitment to creating 

a culture of workplace safety so that no one is killed or injured 

on the job. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Youth Business Excellence Awards 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the privilege 

of attending the YBEX [Youth Business Excellence] Awards in 

Nipawin this past Saturday. This was the ninth annual Youth 

Business Excellence Awards ceremony, and the Legion Hall 

was filled to capacity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, YBEX is an event to engage youth in the world of 

entrepreneurship. The goal of this event is to provide an 

entrepreneurial experience for youth using business skills that 

will assist them with analyzing career choices. 

 

[10:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the awards are offered in two categories: the 

creation of a business idea and the development of a business 

plan; and the accomplishment and evaluation of an operating 

youth business venture. This is open to any student in grade 6 

through 12 attending school in the Newsask region or an 

out-of-school youth under the age of 30 living in the Newsask 

region. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was both surprised and delighted at the number 

of entries in all the different categories. These awards are a 

showcase of the entrepreneurial talents of our youth. The 

optimism of these young people is infectious. These young 



5404 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2010 

people are the future of our new Saskatchewan. No longer will 

the youth of our province be exported, now that they see there is 

ample opportunities right here in their home province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members of this Assembly to 

congratulate not just the winners, but all the participants of this 

year’s YBEX competition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Apologies 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what parent hasn’t told their 

children that they should only say sorry if they really mean it? 

Sadly it appears this life lesson didn’t really sink in when the 

Minister of Health and the Minister of Corrections, Public 

Safety and Policing received their early childhood instruction. 

As we’ve seen in this Assembly, these ministers only say sorry, 

or something like sorry, once they’re forced to. 

 

Last November when the Minister of Corrections, Public Safety 

and Policing made completely inappropriate comments in this 

Assembly, threatening the ability of another member to do his 

job, did he immediately retract his statement and apologize? 

No. Not until it was clear he was going to be embarrassed 

publicly and by this Assembly did the Premier twist his arm and 

force him to say sorry, sort of. 

 

And in recent days, when the Minister of Health made 

statements about consultation that were proven to be untrue, did 

he immediately correct them? No, not at all, Mr. Speaker. He 

and the Premier paraded out to the media and repeated them 

over and over. And the only time he finally gave a pseudo 

apology was once public opinion had turned. Sadly it appears 

all the Sask Party MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 

missed the childhood lesson on saying sorry and actually 

meaning it. 

 

Two evenings ago, the Sask Party used its majority to let the 

Health minister off the hook. Then the next day, the Health 

minister gets up and sort of apologizes for what his friends had 

absolved him of doing. Something doesn’t add up, Mr. Speaker. 

Well deathbed conversions may be enough for the members 

opposite, but they certainly aren’t enough to prove honesty, 

trust, or accountability to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Good News for Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

good news keeps rolling in for our province. Today in the 

business section of the Leader-Post, the headline was “Sask 

numbers lead nation.” The latest survey done by the Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business shows that once again 

Saskatchewan businesses are the most optimistic in Canada. 

 

The CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent Business] 

survey shows that on the optimism scale, Saskatchewan scored 

74.4 points — well above the national average of 66.4. The 

optimism scale is based on a system developed by the CFIB. 

 

Marilyn Braun-Pollon of the CFIB said, “It’s good to see that 

Saskatchewan is the leader . . . We’re still very optimistic.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, new building permit numbers also recently 

released, and again Saskatchewan is moving forward. Building 

permits were up 73.4 per cent in Saskatchewan from March ’09 

to March 2010, third highest in Canada. Residential permits, 

new homes were up a remarkable 134.4 per cent, second 

highest in Canada: Regina’s residential permits up 85.3 per 

cent, Saskatoon up 80.5 per cent over last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition are probably sitting there thinking, 

who cares? What does this mean to the people of 

Saskatchewan? Well, Mr. Speaker, this means that people want 

to move here, upgrade their homes, set up a life, start a family, 

and put down roots in Saskatchewan. 

 

In the new Saskatchewan, optimism reigns supreme. And the 

people of Saskatchewan will never apologize for being 

optimistic. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Efficiency 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve all seen the efforts 

of the members opposite on conservative conservation. And 

we’ve seen their best efforts to manage mismanagement. Now 

we’re seeing their best efforts on inefficient efficiency. 

 

The Premier claimed that there was too much red tape in the 

occupational health and safety regulations, despite the fact that 

34 workers were killed on the job last year and hundreds were 

injured. He thinks it would be much more efficient to get rid of 

those pesky OH & S [occupational health and safety] rules. The 

Premier thinks that by cutting the civil service, by laying off 

social workers, highway maintenance teams, and health care 

professionals that services provided to Saskatchewan families 

will become more efficient. 

 

The Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

insisted that by cutting funds, slashing programs, and removing 

training and skills development our post-secondary system will 

become more efficient. 

 

By the same logic the Minister of CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan] seems to think that our Crowns 

will be much more valuable if we increase their debt — 116 per 

cent increase as planned by the Sask Party even when it simply 

borrowed to transfer to the deficit GRF [General Revenue 

Fund]. By this efficient logic, when the total government debt 

hits $11.9 billion, a 55 per cent increase as planned by the Sask 

Party, maybe the Sask Party thinks the public, that will be 

paying far more, will also appreciate them that much more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have seen enough of this 

Tory inefficient efficiency. and for the sake of the province, 

they’re ready for an upgrade. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 



May 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5405 

Mother’s Day 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend will be 

a very special one for women across our province as we 

celebrate Mother’s Day. It is a time to thank those who brought 

us into this world and for all of their work and sacrifice. A 

mother’s work is never done and every day these women fill the 

most important job in the world. 

 

Mother’s Day traditionally falls on the second Sunday in May, 

the time of year when we see new life emerging all around us in 

this season of birth and renewal. Mother’s Day is the busiest 

time of year for SaskTel as people all across our province call 

home to speak with their mothers. We may be far away from 

our mothers, but they are still only one call away. 

 

As our province is growing again, it is important for people to 

remember where they came from. And days like these remind 

us to pause and give thanks to the people who are responsible 

for where we are today. As the old line goes, nobody would be 

where they are today if it weren’t for their mother. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all my colleagues to join me in 

recognizing the hard work and loving care that mothers provide 

to all of us. We will always appreciate your years of dedication 

to making us the best children we could be and citizens of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Member’s Whereabouts 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we know the track record 

of the Minister for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing is 

dismal. In fact, the first time he got up to answer questions in 

question period, he was written up in the Parliamentary Review 

for making threats to another MLA. 

 

Additionally under his watch, dangerous offenders have been 

allowed to escape from our jails. What’s his response? Keep it a 

secret. Don’t tell the public, and conduct a witch hunt on any 

whistle-blower that does.  

 

But we had no idea that this minister had such a chronic case of 

butterfingers that he couldn’t even keep track of his own 

legislative secretary. When the Premier personally recruited the 

member for Saskatoon Northwest and appointed him to work 

side by side with the member for Wood River on the 

Corrections, Public Safety and Policing file, the Premier had 

great expectations. With the minister’s unwavering disdain for 

social programs and the legislative secretary’s staunch hatred of 

the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, the Premier thought this 

was a match made in heaven. 

 

But now the Premier’s dream team has come to an abrupt end 

because the Corrections minister has lost track of the Premier’s 

hand-picked legislative secretary. And who knows where he is? 

So the question is, what are the Premier and his Corrections and 

Public Safety minister doing to track down their trusted 

advisor? The answer — as little as possible. 

 

Surely the people of Saskatoon Northwest deserve an MLA 

who’s actually working for them, and certainly the people of 

Saskatchewan deserve a Premier who will recognize this fact. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Habitat Protection and Sale of Crown Land 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Minister 

of Environment has said to the House that she consulted on the 

amendments to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act, but a 

number of organizations in the province including Nature 

Saskatchewan, the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations], Nature Conservancy of Canada and others, and many 

hundreds of individuals have stated something different, that 

they weren’t properly consulted before this Bill was brought to 

the Assembly. 

 

Many people are asking how can we trust this government to 

consult when they say one thing and do another. My question to 

the Premier is this: since the organizations say that the minister 

has not properly consulted, how can anyone trust the Premier 

when he says he will consult in the future? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, as the member will know, right now there’s about 

three and a half million acres under the WHPA [The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act] legislation. Under the amendments and 

the changes that are coming to that legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

there will be three categories. 

 

The one category, land will not change from the same position 

it’s in right now and will not be for sale. But as cattle ranchers 

and farmers across this province have asked, they would like 

the opportunity to purchase some of their lease land, Mr. 

Speaker. And that will be happening, but with a conservation 

easement, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, cattlemen and ranchers 

right across this province would like the opportunity to 

purchase some of the land that is presently under WHPA, but 

with a conservation easement. These same producers looked 

after this land for the last 100 years very well in this province, 

and I think the member opposite would know that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There will be a very small portion of this land that will be sold 

without encumbrances and, Mr. Speaker, I think this land will 

be protected as it has been in the past and will be on into the 

future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier, 

to the minister is this. The fact of the matter is this three and a 

half million acres is already owned by the people of the 



5406 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2010 

province. The men, the women, students, every family in this 

province owns the 3.5 million acres the same as they own 

SaskPower, the same as they own the university buildings. 

 

My question to the minister opposite is, why are you selling 

land that is owned by 1 million people? Why are you selling 

that land without proper consultation? It’s not the question of 

ownership, the land is already owned by 1 million people. Why 

are you selling it off without consulting with the public who 

owns it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 

member opposite for his question. I have to say that this is an 

issue of land ownership. We believe in the principle of land 

ownership, Mr. Speaker, and the principle of environmental 

protection. We believe those two things go hand in hand. 

 

But as to selling land that is under WHPA, Mr. Speaker, I have 

a press release issued by the NDP [New Democratic Party], 

June 20th, 1996 where then Environment Minister Lorne Scott 

was praising the government for selling over 25,000 acres of 

land for the purchase by farmers and ranchers, Mr. Speaker. 

The difference is, Mr. Speaker, there were no conservation 

easements attached to that land. It was sold outright from 

habitat protection, Mr. Speaker. Our government will be 

attaching conservation easements to that land for protection in 

perpetuity. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, someone should inform the 

minister that at that time land was being exchanged, that the 

information she’s given isn’t the whole answer to the question 

asked. The fact is there was no net loss in the amount of land 

that was contained under habitat management. 

 

The question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister opposite is this: why 

was there not proper consultation before the decision was made 

to sell 3.5 million acres of sensitive habitat land that is owned 

by every member of society in Saskatchewan? For the minister 

to say, well the ranch community wants the land is not the 

issue. Of course they’re good people; nobody argues with that. 

The land is already owned by 1 million people. Why was there 

not consultation with the present landowners before it was 

made, the decision to sell that land to friends and neighbours 

and people in the province who may want it? Why are you 

selling land you already own? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to have a 

discussion about this issue, but I think we need to do it based on 

proper information. The Leader of the Opposition just stood up 

and said that we’re selling three and a half million acres of land. 

Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely incorrect. And if they want to 

have a discussion, I think the facts of this matter should be put 

on the table, and not misinformation, Mr. Speaker, because that 

doesn’t make the debate any better. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as to who would be buying this land . . . 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Minister of the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana, in a debate in this House on April 29th, said 

that if we’re going to sell this land, it should go to, and I quote, 

“the highest bidder.” Not the person who’s actually using the 

land, Mr. Speaker, but the highest bidder. That is not our 

approach, Mr. Speaker. We will look to the lessees of that land, 

the people who are using that land, to see if they want to 

purchase it. If they do not, they remain lessees of that land, Mr. 

Speaker, and carry on with the activities, as opposed to the NDP 

who would like it being sold to the highest bidder. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

[10:30] 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, there have been many 

people across the province who are concerned about the lack of 

consultation on many issues with this government, this being 

the most recent — the wildlife habitat land, the three and a half 

million acres that the minister and this government is planning 

to sell without consultation. 

 

My question to the minister is this: based on that opinion of the 

public that there should be consultation, would it be in the best 

interest of the people of the province that this Bill be pulled for 

the time being, that proper consultation take place before the 

Bill is brought through the Assembly and rammed down the 

throats of 1 million people who presently own the land? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, later this afternoon I will 

be meeting with stakeholders to discuss their concerns and 

listen to their suggestions, Mr. Speaker. And I think that we 

should wait to see what they have to say and not preclude those 

discussions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Speaker’s trying to 

hear the response from the minister and . . . Order. I ask the 

member from Regina Rosemont to come to order. The members 

are, when the Speaker’s standing, the members are to be quiet. I 

recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I would also point out that 

Allan Blakeney, in a second reading speech on WHPA in 1984, 

said that the critical habitat “. . . could be increased [Mr. 

Speaker] without the necessity of the Crown necessarily 

acquiring the title.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, they apparently realized back in 1984 that the 

people who own the land and use the land are the best stewards 

of the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 



May 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5407 

The Speaker: — Order. There’s a couple other opposition 

members that obviously want to ask a question. If they wait, 

abide their time, they’ll have the opportunity. Minister 

Responsible for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, it was obvious then that 

the NDP believe that people who use the land and own the land 

could be the best stewards of that land, Mr. Speaker. We agree 

with that and look forward to the consultations that we’re 

having with stakeholders this afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, that’s the problem. This 

afternoon there’s a workshop being held with a group of 

organizations that are working hard to protect the land under the 

management of the government. They’re working hard to stop 

this Bill from being passed in its present form. 

 

A workshop after the Bill is introduced and in its final days in 

the House is not consultation — not internationally, not 

nationally, and not here in Saskatchewan. A workshop on 

implementation of a Bill is not consultation. And if the minister 

is so wrong in her thinking that she doesn’t understand the word 

consultation, I think she needs to take some training in the fact 

that a workshop is not consultation. 

 

I ask the minister again: will this government come to its 

senses, withdraw the Bill, do proper consultation, and bring the 

Bill back in a form that makes sense for the million people in 

this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for the 

Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as I stated earlier, we had 

notified groups back in June. There was meetings held last 

summer, and we will continue those discussions this afternoon, 

Mr. Speaker. And even Brent Kennedy from Ducks Unlimited 

said, and I quote, “Some of these lands have been wildlife 

protected lands for some time and they probably warrant a 

review as to whether they still provide that same level of 

habitat.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we’re doing through the 

science-based approach, through the assessment tool that the 

ministry is using. And again, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to the 

input from the groups this afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Health Care Provision 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Dale Regel is in the 

Assembly today looking for help from the Minister of Health 

who has continually turned his back on him. In June of 2009, 

Dale had an aggressive tumour in his jawbone which required 

the removal of part of his jaw or he would have lost the 

remainder of his teeth. 

 

He now needs reconstructive surgery and part of that 

reconstructive surgery includes dental implants. This will allow 

Dale to do what most of us take for granted — eat properly. 

Dale didn’t choose to have this procedure done. It’s a necessary 

procedure as a result of removing a tumour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is the minister going to continue to ignore Dale 

Regel’s call for help, or will he stand up today and admit that 

this is a non-elective surgery procedure and agree to cover the 

cost of the operation? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, our concerns definitely go out to Dale and his 

situation, and certainly we want to make sure that everything 

that we can do is done, is done properly. I don’t know the 

particulars at this time of the situation, Mr. Speaker, but I’d be 

certainly more than glad to meet with him after and talk about 

the situation and see what we can do as far as the Ministry of 

Health. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister has to read his 

material or get briefed properly on what he’s signing. A copy of 

the letter of support from Dale’s oral and maxillofacial surgeon, 

Dr. Frank Hohn was sent to the minister’s office. In the letter 

Dr. Hohn states: 

 

Part of the resection included multiple teeth and the 

current space is too large for conventional crowns or 

bridges. The current standard of care for reconstruction of 

a defect this size would be to place titanium implants. I 

would respectfully suggest to you that our provincial 

health care plan should provide coverage for this 

reconstructive effort. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he listen or will he read the 

material that has already come and have a look at this and listen 

to an oral and maxillofacial surgeon when he says that this 

operation should be covered? Or does he think he knows more 

than the specialist? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my earlier 

answer, I’d be more than willing to meet with this individual. It 

would not be appropriate for me to start discussing his situation 

that I don’t have much detail, or any detail on right now on the 

floor of the House, Mr. Speaker, but I’d be more than glad to 

talk to him after. 

 

I think that member should know though that it would not be 

appropriate for me to comment on personal details in this 

Chamber. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — I think Mr. Regel would be happy to hear that 

the minister is committing in this Chamber because he’s sitting 

here listening and implied his support for this. 

 



5408 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2010 

In August of 2008, the minister chose to cover a medical 

procedure that was not normally covered by Sask Health when 

he issued a $52,000 cheque to the Bonderud family. When he 

issued the cheque, the minister said it was a unique situation 

and “this family fell through the cracks and we felt their 

medical costs should have been covered.” 

 

Dale Regel is also falling through the cracks and needs his 

coverage, and his procedure will only cost $14,000. Mr. 

Speaker, to the minister: will he say today that he will cover 

Dale’s procedure just like he covered the Bonderud’s family 

medical costs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, I’m not 

going to comment on the particulars of this case. I’d be more 

than glad to meet with that individual after. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is going to be a pattern 

then. The minister ignores all the letters that are sent to him, all 

the specialists, and experts that say this should be done. And for 

people to get their situation dealt with by this minister they have 

to come here. And that’s what the minister is saying: come here 

and then I’ll pay attention. Obviously he hasn’t paid any 

attention to all the letters that have come to him from this issue 

and in the past, and is now going to have a look at it. 

 

Well that’s reassuring to Dale Regel that he’ll have an audience 

with the minister. But I don’t think that’s a good message to the 

people of Saskatchewan, that to get anything done, if they’re 

falling through the cracks or if they have a special situation, 

they’ve got to come here. And interestingly enough, Mr. 

Speaker, during the 2000 election the Sask Party used Crystal 

Bonderud to launch their health platform and in many of their 

election commercials. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: do people have to appear in 

Sask Party election commercials to receive coverage from this 

minister? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

cites the Bonderud case. The Bonderud situation was reviewed 

and ruled on and looked into by the Ombudsman. The 

Ombudsman said that the government, the former government, 

was liable, should have followed through on costs. Mr. Speaker, 

our government was able to do that. 

 

I will not take the assertions that we do not follow through on 

correspondence or returning calls to people, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s absolutely not true. Mr. Speaker, we follow through. We 

deal with people every day through my minister’s office, 

through the Ministry of Health, through health regions, Mr. 

Speaker. In some cases, people are happy with the decision; 

some people aren’t. But, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said earlier, we 

will look into this case and I have no problem meeting with the 

individual after. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Efficiency in Government 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier 

established the efficiency secretariat with the dubious claim that 

it would make his government more efficient and cost-efficient. 

My question is this: what advice has the efficiency secretariat 

provided to the Premier and has the Premier listened to that 

advice? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the work of the efficiency 

secretariat, which was formerly done under the Minister of 

Finance, has now moved over to the Public Service 

Commission. There is a number of issues that they’ve identified 

and I think we talked about it earlier in the House when we 

talked about things like accounts payable initiatives. They’re all 

work that we are looking at to make sure that our government is 

spending the money in a cost-effective manner, that we’re 

spending the money that belongs to the people of the province 

in a way that most benefits them. 

 

And there were a number of initiatives that are coming forward, 

and as we bring them forward . . . And you’ll notice that there 

was a couple of RFQs [request for quotation] out last week, as 

an example of some of the work they are doing. And we will 

continue to do those, bringing forward information. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m interested in 

knowing then what the efficiency secretariat thinks of the fact 

that Enterprise Saskatchewan effectively has two deputy 

ministers. The government continues to pay under contract its 

former deputy, Dale Botting $15,000 a month, but the 

government is also paying the interim deputy minister, Mr. 

Chris Dekker seemingly to do the same work. 

 

So to the minister: did the efficiency secretariat review and 

advise on this matter, or is this simply another example of the 

Premier saying one thing to the people of Saskatchewan and 

doing something entirely different behind closed doors? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

on behalf of the Minister Responsible for Enterprise 

Saskatchewan, I will take notice of that question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We really are talking 

about government efficiency and effectiveness and the 

mismanagement of taxpayers’ money and the Premier’s 

comments to the contrary, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another example of this mismanagement of taxpayers’ dollars 

is the Premier’s half million dollar scrum club, Mr. Speaker. 

The Premier pays large amounts of money to his friends to 

hover in the rotunda for every media scrum after question 



May 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5409 

period. Their job is to make sure that the Premier looks good 

and that his message gets spun correctly to the provincial 

media. 

 

So to the minister: has the efficiency secretariat reviewed this 

half million dollar scrum club, or is this yet another example of 

the Premier saying one thing and doing something completely 

different? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

as a number of members opposite, they’ve been here probably, 

some of them as long as I have, some of them even a little bit 

longer. And, Mr. Speaker, you know over the last number of 

years, I’ve had the opportunity to watch Executive Council 

members prepare the Premier, the premiers of the past and the 

Premier of today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the staff that is at the current government level is 

in fact smaller than the staff that was there under the NDP. Mr. 

Speaker, we have great people that provide advice to 

government. We have great people that are supporting the 

Premier. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re very pleased with the role 

that our government is playing because, Mr. Speaker, this 

province is growing. 

 

This province leads in so many things. This province leads in 

job creation. It leads in earnings per year, Mr. Speaker. This is a 

province that is moving forward after years and years of NDP 

planning for decline. We’re finally moving forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the minister 

says we’re moving forward and the economy is contracting by 6 

per cent, you have to wonder what he’s talking about, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And it is interesting the questions are about efficiency. And we 

now notice that we’ve got two ministers responsible for this 

efficiency secretariat. Mr. Speaker, paying two salaries, getting 

one job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the mismanagement goes beyond pots of money 

for his buddies in the half million dollar scrum club, Mr. 

Speaker. The Premier brought in one Kevin Doherty back to the 

province to run as a candidate in Regina Northeast. To entice 

Mr. Doherty to run for the Sask Party, the Premier gave him a 

job as vice-president of corporate relations at SaskPower. Kevin 

Doherty is now being paid by the Saskatchewan people through 

their power rates, Mr. Speaker, to actively campaign for the 

Saskatchewan Party. 

 

To the minister: did the efficiency . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The member 

from The Battlefords is not that far from the Chair, but I’d like 

to hear his question. I recognize the member from The 

Battlefords. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So to the minister: did 

the efficiency secretariat think it was a good idea for the 

Premier to use a vice-president position at SaskPower to recruit 

a Sask Party candidate, or is this yet another example of the 

Premier breaking trust with Saskatchewan people? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s 

time that the members opposite understand that the difference in 

the position of the NDP and the difference in the position of the 

Saskatchewan Party government . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — I acknowledge the Minister of Education’s 

voice carries, but even I’m having difficulty hearing his 

response to the member’s question. I recognize the Minister of 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

on November of 2007, in November of 2007, in Executive 

Council and ministerial assistant position, the NDP had 179 

people. Mr. Speaker, we’ve looked at efficiencies. We’ve 

looked at the ability to deliver services in a different fashion, 

Mr. Speaker. And as of, Mr. Speaker, as of May the 1st, 2010, 

there are 148 people within those same positions, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s a difference of well over 30 people. That’s efficiencies, 

Mr. Speaker. We are looking at ensuring that the services 

within this building are provided. 

 

I remember, Mr. Speaker, the former premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan, the NDP leader who said after questions that 

were given by opposition . . . And by the way, Mr. Speaker, this 

government has received over 1,500 written questions and, Mr. 

Speaker, we’re supplying those answers with the same staff 

rather than the increased staff that the NDP had to use. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Child Care Programs 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I see that the Sask Party 

government has enough money to pay for two deputy ministers 

over at Enterprise Saskatchewan. So my question’s to the 

Minister of Education: why is the government cutting the 

community solutions family support program at the end of 

June? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, a number of years ago, a number of years ago the 

member in fact from . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I’d ask the 

opposition members to allow the minister to respond to the 



5410 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2010 

question from the member from Saskatoon Nutana. I recognize 

the minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana implemented a number of initiatives. In fact 

there were 14 initiatives that were introduced. Mr. Speaker, the 

other night in estimates, the member asked for information 

about these programs and, Mr. Speaker, she asked for that 

information the next time we have an estimates. But I can tell 

her, I can her today that the grants to 10 of the 14 community 

solutions programs have been eliminated, and we have saved 

$447,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the same time, at the same time as we’ve looked 

at those programs that are no longer relevant, Mr. Speaker, we 

have added monies for 235 additional child care programs, Mr. 

Speaker, and 18 pre-K [pre-kindergarten] programs, Mr. 

Speaker. As I said before, we’re moving forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the community solutions 

program provides child daycare centres serving children at risk 

with funding for family support workers, family support 

workers to help support those children’s parents. 

 

Now what do these support workers do? They offer parenting 

support programs that help parents cope with challenging 

behaviours. They help parents to find respite care or housing or 

jobs or connect to other support services. So my question is 

this: why is this government, when they have enough money to 

pay for two deputy ministers over at Enterprise Saskatchewan, 

cutting a program that supports vulnerable children and their 

parents? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, last year we informed the 

CBOs [community-based organization] that the member asks 

about, we informed them that they were under review, and we 

wanted to see whether or not the services that these 

organizations provided were in fact delivered. And, Mr. 

Speaker, that is exactly what we found out. The previous 

government created these one-offs, they created these one-offs 

without policy. They had no guidelines and, Mr. Speaker, we 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask the members of the 

opposition to allow the minister to respond to the last question 

presented. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell the people of 

Saskatchewan that our ministry still provides over $3.8 million 

to these agencies to ensure that they still provide the services to 

the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased the 

number of child care spaces by nearly 3,000 spaces since we 

took over from that government. That’s a positive step and 

people appreciate those changes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member from 

Regina Rosemont, the member from Regina Rosemont will 

come to order. Order. Order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

Bill No. 144, The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of the Environment has moved 

that Bill No. 144, The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 be 

now read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

 

Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Crown and 

Central Agencies Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report 

that it has considered certain estimates and to present its 10th 

report. I move: 

 

That the 10th report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the Crown 

and Central Agencies Committee: 

 

That the 10th report of the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies be now concurred in. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 



May 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5411 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 1,590 through 1,619. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1,590 through 1,619 are tabled. I 

recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answer to question 1,620. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 1,620 is ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

questions 1,621 through 1,626. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1,621 through 1,626 are tabled. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

 

Children’s Hospital 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 

to speak to the children’s hospital in Saskatoon. It’s something 

that I know we take very . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Point of order. Point of order, Mr. 

Speaker. Point of order . . . [inaudible] . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Right. Right. Order. I remind the members 

that the member has to be in her chair to move the motion 

forward. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, in order for a motion before this 

Assembly to move forward when it’s called, the mover of the 

motion has to be in their seat and move the motion, Mr. 

Speaker, and enter the debate. At the time the motion was 

called, the member was not there. A second member stood and 

spoke, began to speak, Mr. Speaker. I rose on my feet to say 

that was out of order, Mr. Speaker. Subsequently the member 

came back into the House, Mr. Speaker. The rules would say 

that that motion should have been passed over, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — On the point of order, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m not in disagreement with the point of order that 

the member raises. But as we saw a couple of times in the past 

with the Opposition House Leader that errors were made and 

leave was given. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, while the point of 

order is proper, we will be asking for leave to revert back to the 

calling of that motion to allow the member to move her motion. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I thank the Opposition House Leader 

for his point of order, and I recognize the response made by the 

Government House Leader. And acknowledging that certainly 

there was an error, the government House . . . But I would ask 

the Assembly if the Assembly would grant leave to move to 

motion . . . rule 75, the motion presented by the member from 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 3 — Release of Intelligence File 

on Former Premier 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Lingenfelter.] 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

today to be able to join into the debate on what has been 

commonly referred to, Mr. Speaker, as the Tommy Douglas 

motion, here in the Assembly. There has been . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure 

today to join into the debate on the Tommy Douglas motion that 

has been commonly referred to here in the Assembly. And it’s a 

pleasure to join into the discussion, Mr. Speaker, after our 

leader, the member from Regina Douglas Park, has had the 

opportunity to speak to the motion. 

 

It’s an important motion, Mr. Speaker, because it speaks to a 

number of concerns that Saskatchewan people have, a number 

of priorities that Saskatchewan people have. This motion, Mr. 

Speaker, is not coming out of isolation only from Saskatchewan 

but it’s part of a larger push by people in the country from 

different provinces, from different walks of life, from different 

places — a push for individuals to want to have a greater 

understanding of the history, the accomplishments, the 

interactions that took place over a period of time many years 

ago. 

 



5412 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2010 

And, Mr. Speaker, the activities revolve around the role that a 

past premier of this province, Tommy Douglas, the role that he 

had in our country, in our province, and really internationally as 

well, Mr. Speaker, in shaping and guiding much of what we as 

Saskatchewan people and we as Canadians hold near and dear 

to our hearts. 

 

[11:00] 

 

The motion, Mr. Speaker, has a number of aspects to it in terms 

of the rationale as to why the motion should go forward. But the 

main part of the motion, which I’ll restate for individuals who 

might be tuning in today at home and haven’t had the 

opportunity to watch on the previous private members’ day 

when it was discussed and introduced by the Leader of the 

Official Opposition, the motion stated: 

 

That this Assembly calls upon the Government of Canada, 

the Canadian Security Intelligence Service, and the Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police to release the complete 

intelligence file on former Saskatchewan Premier Tommy 

Douglas; and further 

 

That in making this call, the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan asserts the following: 

 

And there’s a number of points, eight of them, Mr. Speaker, that 

states the rationale as to why this motion is an important one, 

why it has relevance for today, and why it has relevance for the 

future as well, Mr. Speaker. And I should say relevance for the 

past as well. 

 

And I will get into the eight points that are mentioned in the 

motion. I would like to state though, Mr. Speaker, that it’s a 

true honour for me to have this opportunity to speak to this 

motion and to bring a greater amount of clarity and truth and 

openness to the great history that Tommy Douglas has provided 

for our province and for our country. I say that, Mr. Speaker, 

because while I perhaps haven’t, while I certainly haven’t 

served the same length as some members of this Assembly on 

both sides of the House — this is my first term, being elected in 

the fall of 2007 — and while I never had the chance to meet 

Tommy Douglas face to face, he certainly is an important 

individual. 

 

Though I was just recently been elected, my grandfather, Hans 

Broten, did serve in the Legislative Assembly in the ’60s and 

served under Tommy Douglas. So I feel, in terms of every 

family has stories that are passed and shared with different . . . 

with each generation and shared with family members, 

relatives, and people, and so certainly in my family Tommy 

Douglas is an important person because of what he’s done for 

my own family, for my neighbours, my extended family, for the 

people of Saskatchewan, and the people of Canada. 

 

So to be able to have that connection, it’s a special one for me. 

And for that reason, it’s special that I am able to stand today 

and provide a few comments on the Tommy Douglas motion, a 

motion for clarity, a motion for transparency. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, it’s not only a special and an important 

motion because of whatever personal connection I may have, or 

any member of this Assembly on either side of the House may 

have, to Tommy Douglas. It’s important, Mr. Speaker, for 

reasons that go far beyond that. Because I think within the 

larger Saskatchewan community, within the larger Canadian 

community — and it’s recognized internationally as well by 

many individuals — there is an understanding of the 

significance that the role of Tommy Douglas and the legacy that 

he has left for the people of this country, there’s a recognition 

that it is significant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that this motion, as I alluded to in my 

opening comments, it is a motion that, while it’s being talked 

about today, while it’s being talked about with respect to a 

specific issue that we face right now as an Assembly, the 

question as to whether or not we as a group of elected 

representatives here in Saskatchewan will call for greater 

transparency and clarity and understanding for the history and 

the past of the actions of Tommy Douglas and the actions of a 

government that did a great amount of work, very positive 

work, I’d like to make a few comments, Mr. Speaker, why I 

think that this has relevance when considering the past. 

 

Mr. Speaker, anyone who works in this Legislative Assembly 

now or has worked here or it doesn’t . . . actually outside of the 

Legislative Assembly as well, anyone who is involved in any 

walk of life, we always know that there is a great deal to a 

story. And while stories may appear to be one way at face 

value, there’s many things that go on. 

 

So while there might be one issue where there’s a general 

statement or a news story written about an issue that we might 

be debating in this House, that story, there’s always a great deal 

of detail behind the actual story, the entire story. There’s 

different individuals that have been talking, different 

individuals that have been making decisions. There are different 

motives that these individuals may have had on any given 

circumstance and issue. And, Mr. Speaker, while we can’t 

always know everything going on, based on the reading of a 

story in The StarPhoenix or the Leader-Post, we can assume 

that there is always a greater amount of details — rich details, 

very telling details — in the basic facts of how the story came 

to be. 

 

And I think anyone, Mr. Speaker, who enjoys history on a 

recreational level in terms of reading history or following 

history or being a bit of a history buff, to colloquially put it, 

knows that by looking back to the past, looking back to 

instances that have been perhaps a watershed event or a turning 

point for any major decision that is made by any government, 

there is a great deal to be learned through looking back to the 

past situations. 

 

And now that appreciation for the past can occur on different 

levels. Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, it’s simply because individuals 

are curious. They know that an outcome has occurred for 

whatever reason, and they want to know more about how that 

situation came to pass, how it came to be. So on a basic level of 

curiosity, Mr. Speaker, it’s good to know what has happened in 

the past. 

 

But if it was simply curiosity, Mr. Speaker, that was the 

rationale for this Bill, or this motion rather, I don’t think that 

would be adequate. I don’t think that would be a sufficient 

reason as to why we would want to pass this motion. But, Mr. 



May 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5413 

Speaker, when we look at history not simply as someone who 

enjoys watching the History Channel or reading a biography of 

someone or just dabbling in historical books, if we look more at 

wanting to gain a better understanding and insight beyond 

simply a level of curiosity, if we want to look at what the 

complete story was, I think that can provide a great amount of 

value to us here in the present day. 

 

It’s through understanding what has happened in the past, what 

instances have occurred, that it allows us to gain a better 

understand of how something came to pass. And that’s 

information, Mr. Speaker, that we can take as individuals now 

today, in contemporary or modern day Saskatchewan, and learn 

lessons from those historical facts, learn lessons as to what 

approach we should take, what approach we shouldn’t take, 

what is needed to make something come to pass, what kind of 

work that as we as legislators, that we as the Saskatchewan 

public should be pursuing in order to ensure that we have the 

proper kinds of policies and decisions being made out of this 

Assembly, and the decisions being made by the larger, 

collective society we do live in. So I think, Mr. Speaker, when 

looking at it in a historical perspective, there are lessons to be 

learned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also think it’s important to look at it in a . . . I 

also think it’s important to gain a better understanding of the 

past because we owe it to the good work that Tommy Douglas 

accomplished, the good work that Tommy Douglas as premier 

of this province for a number of years and as a Member of 

Parliament on the federal scene, we owe it to that individual to 

gain a better understand of what were the facts. 

 

If there was surveillance, if there was oversight involved in the 

actions of Tommy Douglas’s governments, I think we owe it to 

Mr. Douglas. And I think if members or people watching at 

home say, well what do you mean? How do we owe it to Mr. 

Douglas? Well I think it’s part of, Mr. Speaker, the amount of 

respect that we show to any individual who has been 

significant. And while we as politicians in this Assembly and 

perhaps people that follow politics closely in the broader 

community, while we might feel the need to honour a politician, 

maybe not everyone understands why we would want to do that. 

 

But I would ask individuals considering this point to think of 

anyone who is special and anyone who has been significant in 

their own life and who has played a really significant and 

constructive role in their own life. You know, as a young 

person, I’m fortunate to have both my parents alive, and I hope 

that is the case for many, many years. But I can think of my 

grandparents, for example, who I value and respect a great deal 

because of the work that they did and the love that they showed 

to their entire family. Because of the actions that they’ve done, I 

feel, Mr. Speaker, a debt of gratitude to them. And the way that 

I can properly display that attitude is by treating their memory, 

their life, their historical record here on Earth with respect. 

 

And we as individuals and as families do this through a number 

of ways. We do this by telling the stories of people who have 

gone before us that we may love and may appreciate. We strive 

to not speak poorly of people. And we strive, Mr. Speaker, to 

simply treat the memories and the records of the people who’ve 

gone before us with respect. 

 

So on a personal level, Mr. Speaker, since we do this with 

people that we have affection for and a great amount of respect 

for in our daily lives, in our immediate families, if we take that 

to the political realm, Mr. Speaker, when there’s an individual 

who has played a very significant role in the programs they’ve 

introduced, the objectives and the achievements that they have 

made, when there is an individual that fits this bill and we are 

able to do something that honours them and shows respect to 

them, I think that’s something that we as elected members of 

this Legislative Assembly who value those who’ve gone before 

us in this Assembly . . . 

 

We often speak of the history and the tradition and the legacy 

and how we may be members who hold this seat for a period of 

time, but we certainly don’t hold that seat. We don’t own it. It’s 

not ours. We’re part of a bigger process here in this Legislative 

Assembly that’s carried on for many, many decades and, God 

willing, will carry on for many, many more decades. And I 

think if we can show respect and honour in our personal lives as 

professional politicians and members of this Assembly, I think 

it is also wise to show that respect to those who have gone 

before us. 

 

And I think that, Mr. Speaker, goes beyond partisan politics. 

It’s not about the fact that Tommy Douglas was the leader of 

CCF-NDP [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New 

Democratic Party] governments. It’s not about the fact that he 

was of a certain political persuasion or ideology. No one would 

refute, I think, any sound-thinking person would refute that 

Tommy Douglas accomplished a great deal of good work for 

the people of Saskatchewan and for the country as a whole. And 

the fact that he belonged to a political party, we can’t escape 

that reality because we’re part of a partisan system. We’re part 

of an adversarial parliamentary system that has political parties, 

so that is a reality that we all face. And I support the party 

system, and I think it is a good one. 

 

But surely as elected representatives of this Assembly, we can 

recognize that someone of any political persuasion, when they 

have done good work, when they have made significant 

accomplishments that go beyond our own provincial borders, 

east and west, north and south, when you’ve seen that kind of 

record, it’s appropriate that we as legislators honour that record. 

And, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, I think we can honour that 

record by doing the right thing, by having a better 

understanding of the historical record. 

 

It’s important too, Mr. Speaker, in a present sense because 

many of the things that we value here in the province come 

directly out of the work that Tommy Douglas accomplished as 

an opposition leader and as a premier here in the province. 

 

We can thank, Mr. Speaker . . . Everyone of course knows of 

the role of medicare and providing the proper medical care to 

all Saskatchewan people. That is something now that is not a 

partisan issue when it comes to the basic understanding — I 

hope — of the need for medicare in our country and in our 

province. This is something that people of most political 

persuasions . . . There’s always an outlier in a party here and 

there, and there are certainly different interpretations as to what 

medicare should look like according to right, left, and centre. 

And probably there certainly is that diversity within this 

Assembly here. But people understand that providing medicare, 



5414 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2010 

providing proper medical care to Saskatchewan families and 

people is something important, and it’s now become part of our 

fabric as Saskatchewan people and our fabric as Canadians. 

 

So for me, because of the great work that’s been done on 

medicare, we owe it to the record of how medicare came about. 

We owe it to the legacy of Tommy Douglas because of the 

work he has done. And we owe it to ourselves in order to 

understand how to make better decisions in the present day. We 

certainly owe it to ourselves to get to the full facts of the matter 

with respect to the past years where Tommy Douglas was active 

in politics in Canada. 

 

There’s a number of programs, and of course they go on and on, 

Mr. Speaker. The establishment of human rights in the province 

and at a national level . . . Everyone knows of Tommy 

Douglas’s stand on the War Measures Act, a very principled 

stand which did not allow . . . where he championed the rights 

of individuals — very important. 

 

[11:15] 

 

We can think of other examples like the role of pensions in our 

country and the work that Tommy Douglas and CCF-NDP 

governments made in the world of pensions and the need for 

them for Saskatchewan people and Canadians in order to ensure 

that individuals have a high standard of living and a high 

quality of life after they have worked hard for many years. 

 

We can think of other examples like the Arts Board, Mr. 

Speaker, that over the decades have proven to be so very 

effective in promoting arts and culture, promoting the things 

that really tell our story as Saskatchewan people, tell our story 

as Canadians — very important examples for us to remember as 

we think about the legacy that’s lasted. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, all of these examples — we as a province, 

we as a country, we as a group of people — we have improved 

collectively because of the progress we’ve made over 

generations, over different governments, over the years in 

improving the way the government operates and improving the 

types of services that can be provided. And it’s my hope, Mr. 

Speaker, that that trajectory of providing greater care, better 

care, working with Saskatchewan people more closely and more 

effectively, but that is something that improves and that there 

isn’t backsliding. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, if there are steps that we can take now by 

calling on the federal government and agencies to release 

information about how we can gain better understanding of the 

past, if that information allows us to make better decisions in 

the future as to how we want to improve programs, introduce 

programs, make a better quality of life for all Saskatchewan 

people, I think that’s a smart thing to do because the work of 

any government of any political persuasion of course is never 

complete. There is always more to do. There’s more to do on 

economic fronts, more to do on social fronts, more to do on 

cultural fronts. It’s important that the work always continues. 

So we can take decisions . . . If we can learn from lessons in the 

past as to how programs came to pass, as to how important 

steps and improvements in our province came to be, if we can 

learn those lessons — and as current members of this legislature 

who have a role in promoting the province, have a role in 

introducing new programs and making life better for 

Saskatchewan people — if we can learn from those lessons, Mr. 

Speaker, then I think that is a very positive thing. 

 

I’ve talked a bit about how this motion about Tommy Douglas 

and the release of information concerning Tommy Douglas is 

important to me on a personal level. I’ve talked about, Mr. 

Speaker, how the motion about Tommy Douglas is, I think, 

important to the province and the country and especially 

important to this Legislative Assembly because, as I have 

highlighted, it has I think a great deal of relevance for the 

historical record, what has happened in the past. It has a great 

deal of relevance, Mr. Speaker, for our current actions and the 

current programs that we appreciate and enjoy — like medicare, 

like pensions, like the Arts Board — and, Mr. Speaker, it has a 

great amount of relevance for the future as well because, as 

everyone in this Assembly would agree, our work in this 

province is certainly not completed, is certainly not done. And 

so if we can learn lessons from the past, if we can look at the 

programs that are running at present, Mr. Speaker, then that 

puts us in a better position to promote things in the future. And 

I think that’s important for all Saskatchewan people. 

 

So it has relevance, Mr. Speaker, for the past, for the present 

and for the future. And it has relevance for me, Mr. Speaker, as 

an individual. Certainly that’s not enough to pass a motion, but 

I think it speaks to the greater relevance that it has for all 

members of this Legislative Assembly. I think that’s something, 

Mr. Speaker, that we as legislators should certainly promote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, we live in a democratic country, and 

public access to information truly is at the heart of democracy. 

 

Time and time again in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we as an 

opposition and we as legislators in general understand that part 

of the process of having information publicly accessible, 

sharing information with the public, is that this is the people’s 

Assembly. This is the Legislative Assembly for the people of 

Saskatchewan, and it does not belong to any one member, any 

one party. It is their information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is a principle that we promote around the world through 

the work of peacekeeping, through the work of military action 

in countries such as in Afghanistan, Mr. Speaker, the work that 

development agencies, either CIDA [Canadian International 

Development Agency] or church, faith-based or individual, 

other humanitarian-based organizations pursue in other 

countries. It’s about improving the lives of people. 

 

And we, Mr. Speaker, as members of an elected system, as 

members of a democratic country, we value the principles that 

we believe in of the democratic process. We value that history. 

And every time we stand in this Assembly and ask a question or 

give an answer or sit in committee and ask a question, give an 

answer or write a written question and receive a written reply, 

every time we go into the media and ask questions about an 

issue, or a minister gives comments on an issue, it’s about the 

sharing of information. 

 

And clearly, Mr. Speaker, it’s in the public’s interest in a 

democratic country where the people are the individuals in 

charge of this Assembly — not any one individual, not any one 

party. It’s in the public’s interest to have information accessible 



May 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5415 

to all. That’s something we believe at the federal level, 

something we believe at the provincial level, the municipal 

level. It really cuts to the core and the heart of our democratic 

process and what we’re about as elected representatives in the 

Canadian parliamentary system. 

 

On this motion, Mr. Speaker, we know that, as I said, the 

motion calls for the release of information that may have been 

kept on Tommy Douglas and the work that he did while an 

elected representative in Canada. It’s known, Mr. Speaker, that 

the Canadian Security Intelligence Service routinely releases 

files on individuals 20 years after their deaths. So it’s an 

understanding, Mr. Speaker, that when a certain amount of time 

has passed, when a window has expired, it’s common practice, 

Mr. Speaker, for CSIS [Canadian Security Intelligence Service], 

as it’s commonly referred to, to release information. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that principle and guideline would be 

put in place because of the point that I just stated, that we live in 

an open and democratic process, Mr. Speaker, a democratic 

county that values the sharing of information because we know 

that that is at the heart, at the core of democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, CSIS, the Canadian Security Intelligence Service, 

does not operate independently from government in the sense 

that it’s not accountable to government. There’s certainly — 

I’m no expert on CSIS; I won’t pretend to be, Mr. Speaker — 

but my point is that CSIS falls under the authority of the federal 

government because it is a federal organization under the 

authority of a minister accountable to the Prime Minister, just as 

any other agency that is an arm or a branch or a department of 

government is. 

 

For that reason, Mr. Speaker, we have a policy in place because 

it makes good common sense that when a certain amount of 

time has passed, if there’s information that can be learned that 

has relevance to the past, has relevance to the present, and has 

relevance to the future, it makes good common sense to release 

that information because, Mr. Speaker, it strengthens and 

buttresses the democratic values that we have here in the 

country. It provides greater insight to actions of the past. It 

provides insight into actions where perhaps the government did 

not act appropriately. And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, it provides 

insight likely where a government acted appropriately, where 

they were acting in the public interest. 

 

But if the time has passed, if the actions have been made, if the 

individuals that may have been observed by CSIS, if that 

individual’s passed away, if the family members, Mr. Speaker, 

of that individual are in favour of the action, to me, Mr. 

Speaker, it makes good sense to release that information 

because it provides a better understanding of what happened. It 

allows us to learn from the incidents that happened, perhaps pro 

and con, good and bad actions. And, Mr. Speaker, it allows us 

to improve the situation for the future by hopefully building on 

the past successes and discarding the past mistakes. 

 

So my opinion, since we live in a democratic country, since 

CSIS falls under the authority of the federal government, since 

the family members of Tommy Douglas are in favour of this 

position, since Canadian people value Tommy Douglas and the 

record and want to pay amount of respect to him, I think, Mr. 

Speaker, it makes some good sense. 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas passed away 25 years 

ago, so the time threshold has been met, but CSIS steadfastly 

refuses to release about 30 per cent of the file. So there has been 

some release of the documentation but there is still, Mr. 

Speaker, a little under one-third of the information that is not 

available. And that’s a substantial amount. Now maybe that 

one-third of the information isn’t that telling or isn’t that 

informative, but that’s something, Mr. Speaker, that the people 

of Canada should decide through the release of that 

information. 

 

Since we live in a democratic country, since information is 

available, since the time has passed, let’s release, Mr. Speaker 

. . . let’s call on the federal government to release that last about 

third of information and see what in fact, what information is 

held in the documents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since the time has passed since most of the 

individuals that perhaps have been, I would assume, be in these 

documents have passed away or not actively involved in 

politics, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion I don’t see a legitimate 

security reason as to why this file should be kept secret, in my 

opinion. 

 

Because now, Mr. Speaker, as I said, we don’t exactly . . . We 

can’t predict with certainty what is, in fact, in the files. We 

don’t know what information might be provided, but, I think, 

Mr. Speaker, if . . . Well first of all, I’ll state if the actions in the 

last third of the information indicate the government acted 

correctly back in the day when Tommy Douglas was active as a 

politician, if the documents reveal that the actions of 

government were not inappropriate, that the things that were 

perhaps being done by CSIS or the RCMP [Royal Canadian 

Mounted Police], Mr. Speaker, if it’s revealed that this is 

completely fine and there were no problems with what they 

were doing, then, Mr. Speaker, the release of this information 

would allow us as Canadian and Saskatchewan people and as 

legislators in this province to say, well done. Thank you for 

releasing the information. The record has been cleared up. The 

record is now available and transparent to all Canadians through 

the release of this information. And that’s appropriate. 

 

The other side of the coin, Mr. Speaker, if actions weren’t 

appropriate, it’s important that we understand what 

inappropriate actions took place. And it’s not about a witch hunt 

or it’s not about going after someone in a vindictive way. But as 

I said before, since we are democrats, since we are people that 

value democracy and transparency, since this is something that 

our country espouses and something that our country values 

here at home and overseas, it only makes sense that if there has 

been inappropriate actions, that government would recognize 

those actions and take action in order to ensure that history does 

not repeat itself and that bad mistakes are not made once again. 

 

It’s not uncommon, Mr. Speaker, for governments to make 

mistakes. No one in this Assembly would say that they don’t 

make mistakes. We’re human beings and certainly we make 

mistakes. That happens on this side of the House. It happens on 

that side of the House. It happens in our daily lives. We’re 

flawed individuals who often stumble and don’t do things 

properly. But part of that process, Mr. Speaker, if we are 

making mistakes, it’s appropriate that we recognize when we 

make a mistake, show some contrition, show some heartfelt 



5416 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2010 

remorse for what we did, and then take actions that would 

indicate we have learned a lesson and we are sorry for what we 

have done. 

 

And governments do this from time to time, Mr. Speaker. I can 

think of, for example apologies about residential schools and 

the way that First Nations people were treated in our country 

through the residential school process. Our government has 

made an apology on that front, recognizing that the way things 

were done in the past were not appropriate. 

 

Other countries, Mr. Speaker, have done similar actions. I 

believe the Australian government has made an apology to 

Aboriginal people in their country for actions. I think, Mr. 

Speaker, I read in the paper not too long ago that the British 

government made an apology to children who were orphaned 

and sent off into Canada and other colonies to work on farms, 

as young children got cut off from existing family members that 

they may have. An apology was made in that instance. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see apologies or recognitions of wrongdoing 

when an individual is wrongfully convicted through the court 

system. If someone has inappropriately or wrongfully been 

convicted and has spent time in jail, it has been practice, Mr. 

Speaker, that when that is, in certain cases the government that 

is responsible will issue an apology and try to make amends for 

that action. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I can’t predict what is in that last third of 

information that has not been released by CSIS. But what I do 

know and what I do believe in my heart and to my core, is that 

that information belongs to or that information should be shared 

with the Canadian people because it is the Canadians’ 

information because it is information that was collected on their 

behalf by the government, by agencies of a different day. 

 

As I have talked about, Mr. Speaker, I think the actions, by 

releasing this information, it can increase the amount of 

accountability, the amount of transparency, and the safety for 

future politicians, members of parliament, members of the 

Legislative Assembly. And so while many of the motives that 

I’ve spoken about, Mr. Speaker, have been more on a level 

addressing how collectively we as people — past, present, and 

future — have an interest in having this information shared, I 

think, Mr. Speaker, as individuals in this Assembly, as an 

elected individual who may be doing things that are of interest 

to other individuals, we wouldn’t want to be spied on in an 

inappropriate way, Mr. Speaker.  

 

So I think it’s only fair that we also support this motion as 

individual MLAs, speaking probably on behalf of other MPs 

[Members of Parliament], or MPPs [Members of Provincial 

Parliament], or members of the National Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, who would want the same amount of respect shown to 

them as a legislator. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve made some remarks at length, I’ve 

talked about how this is important to me as an individual, but of 

course that’s not enough to support a motion, for all members 

of this Assembly to support a motion. I think, Mr. Speaker, this 

motion, this call for the release of information is important to 

people in Saskatchewan because it allows us to understand our 

pasts. It allows us to appreciate the institutions that are 

important to us now, and it allows us to build stronger 

institutions, stronger policies in the future. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve also spoken shortly on how I think we 

as elected officials would want this type of release of 

information because we would not want to be under 

surveillance in an inappropriate manner. The people of 

Saskatchewan, I believe, want the access to this information. 

The family members of Tommy Douglas want this information. 

I think the appropriate thing to do, Mr. Speaker, is for members 

of this Assembly to support this motion, and in so doing, Mr. 

Speaker, send a clear signal . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister for Crown Investments has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker and a thank you 

to the members across the floor for allowing me this 

opportunity to introduce to you and to my all colleagues 24 

grade 4 students from Robert Melrose Elementary School in my 

hometown of Kelvington, Saskatchewan. They have with them 

today their teachers, Monique Gollings, Tracy Ziola, and 

Shannon Murch. And we have chaperones. We have Michelle 

Bernier, Joanne Brownlee, Theresa Evans, Dawn Kennedy, 

Melissa Lockie, Kerri Polachek, Veronica Wilton, Karla Elmy, 

Ernest Swehla, Dianne Lund, and Tracey Fletcher. 

 

I am very pleased you’re here today, I know it wasn’t easy to 

make your way in this morning; I understand the roads weren’t 

that great. And, Mr. Speaker, I think most of my colleagues are 

noticing a number of the students and the teachers are wearing 

pink shirts, and I’m interested in talking to them about it later 

on. I’m really pleased you’re in your legislature today, and I’m 

asking all my colleagues to join with me in welcoming this 

wonderful Kelvington grade 4 class to their legislature. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 3 — Release of Intelligence File 

on Former Premier 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and of course 

welcome to the students. It’s always great to have visitors here, 

whether they’re school groups or family or members of 

organizations here in the province. 

 



May 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5417 

Mr. Speaker, I have been very honoured and pleased to be able 

to make a few remarks about the Tommy Douglas motion, a 

call for the release of information by the federal government 

and federal agencies. I’ve given my rationale as to why I think 

this is appropriate. Mr. Speaker, I would at this time, I’ll simply 

reread the motion along with the rationale for individuals who 

may have just tuned in today to get the full picture. And then, 

Mr. Speaker, following that I will close my remarks. 

 

The notice of motion reads: 

 

That this Assembly calls on the Government of Canada, 

the Canadian Security Intelligence Service, and the Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police to release the complete 

intelligence file on former Saskatchewan Premier Tommy 

Douglas. And further, that in making this call, the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan asserts the 

following: 

 

1. That public access to information is a core tenet of 

democracy; 

 

2. That the Canadian Security Intelligence Service, 

CSIS, should be consistent in that it routinely releases 

intelligence files on individuals 20 years after their 

death; 

 

3. That 24 years after Tommy Douglas’s death and 

several decades after the information on him was 

gathered, there is no legitimate security reason for 

keeping this information secret; 

 

4. That the release of this information is important to 

the legacy of Tommy Douglas and to the people of 

Saskatchewan and Canada; 

 

5. That this Assembly recognizes that Tommy Douglas 

served our province and our country with distinction as 

the first social democratic leader in North America; 

 

6. That this Assembly values Tommy Douglas’s legacy 

to Saskatchewan and Canada including medicare, old 

age pensions, family allowances, social programs, the 

central Bank of Canada, civil liberties and rights 

legislation, and our Crown corporations; 

 

7. That this Assembly recognizes the people of Canada 

voted Tommy Douglas as the greatest Canadian to 

mark his accomplishments; 

 

8. That this Assembly believes that Tommy Douglas’s 

family, friends, and all Canadians deserve to know the 

information contained in the intelligence file. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the state of the motion as it currently 

stands. And as I said before, I’ll be very honoured and pleased 

to support this motion based on the rationale that I’ve stated in 

my speech. I would call on all members of this Legislative 

Assembly to also support this motion because I think it’s very 

important. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Before I recognize the member 

from Weyburn, I just want to acknowledge that, earlier this 

afternoon, I erred when we moved forward to the adjourned 

debates. I automatically assumed we were into a different 

motion, and given the fact that we no longer have seconders, I 

recognized the member from Saskatoon Massey Place without 

making the effort to acknowledge that we should move to a 

government member. So my apologies for the error in that part. 

I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to rise in the Assembly to speak on this motion, one that 

I have a great deal of interest in, not just as a legislator or as a 

legislator from a constituency that represents the great city of 

Weyburn but also as somebody that has an interest in the 

history of the province and the people that have served this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think some of my colleagues and some of the members will 

know that I do have a great interest in history. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think one of the things that I would say immediately 

at the top of my speaking notes, if I could maybe take a page 

out of the member from Lakeview and just quote from one of 

my favourite historians, the historian and author David 

McCullough, who has written extensively on matters of 

American history. Mr. Speaker, David McCullough said in an 

interview and I quote: 

 

History is not about dates and quotes and obscure 

provisos. It’s life. About change. About consequences. 

Cause and effect. It’s about the mystery of human nature. 

The mystery of time . . . [Mr. Speaker]. 

 

I know of no other subject that interests me more than the 

history of this honourable body and of members that have 

served in it. And so I’m very pleased to take part in the debate 

on this motion. As I said, I’m honoured to speak on behalf of, I 

think, my colleagues on this side of the House and to speak on 

behalf of the people of the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency 

who have given me the honour of serving in this Chamber since 

2006, Mr. Speaker. And I thank them for that opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m so honoured to serve the Chamber and to 

serve a constituency that does include the city of Weyburn, Mr. 

Speaker. And anytime Weyburn is mentioned, I take great 

notice of it, Mr. Speaker. It’s a community that I live in and am 

very proud of, Mr. Speaker. And it’s one, when you look at the 

history of the province, obviously when you think of Weyburn 

and politics, T.C. Douglas does come to mind. But it’s one that 

has really great stories aside from T.C. Douglas, and if I could 

just share a few of those with the members and with people that 

are watching. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since the general election of 1908, there’s been a 

constituency on the provincial level that has had the name of 

Weyburn in its title. And we’ve certainly been served by a 

distinguished group of men and women over those years, 

obviously with T.C. Douglas filling a big part of that, Mr. 

Speaker, and his electoral success. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, if I could just talk a little bit about how we 

got to that point in our history, Mr. Speaker. There’s a number 

of very interesting elections that took place in a Weyburn 

constituency. And the one that comes to mind is the 1917 

general election, Mr. Speaker, that actually featured two 



5418 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2010 

candidates. And both their names were, last names were 

Mitchell even though they weren’t related, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But in fact, the Mitchell that lost that election was the father of 

the famed author W.O. Mitchell, Mr. Speaker, who — I believe, 

in my opinion — is probably the most famous product of 

Weyburn. And that is in no disrespect to T.C. Douglas, but I 

mean that in somebody who was born in the community of 

Weyburn. In fact, Mr. Speaker, W.O. Mitchell’s childhood 

home, as I think I’ve said in this Chamber, is just two doors 

down from the house that my wife and I live on, on 6th Street in 

Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. It’s a historic fact, historic site, Mr. 

Speaker, that house in Weyburn. 

 

And there’s an interesting story in one of the biographies of . . . 

just to not to dwell on this very long, but an interesting . . . In 

one of the biographies of W.O. Mitchell that was written by his 

son, Ormond, and his wife, Barbara — I believe it’s his wife, 

Barbara, Mr. Speaker — in the first volume, there’s an 

interesting story about how when W.O. Mitchell was a child 

about three years old, Prime Minister Laurier actually came to 

Weyburn in a whistle stop campaign stop, Mr. Speaker. And so 

Laurier obviously was a Liberal prime minister, Mr. Speaker. 

And so W.O. Mitchell was told that, as a child, he and his 

brother were taken to see the prime minister at the train station. 

But it was pointed out that it was the servant, Olga, who took 

them because his parents, staunch Conservatives, wouldn’t even 

take the children to see the prime minister because he was of a 

different political persuasion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not long after that election, the 1917 election, we 

have an intriguing situation. This is why history is so 

fascinating because there are so many stories. Despite it being 

our history and records being kept, there are so many stories 

that we really don’t know the circumstances around them. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, after the 1917 election, we have an 

intriguing situation where Charles McGill Hamilton was elected 

in four straight elections; however, he first entered this 

Chamber in a by-election uncontested. What is curious about 

this story is that he returned in a second by-election to this 

Chamber, less than one year after his first by-election, and 

again he was uncontested. He was an acclaimed candidate. And 

so the interesting story, the mystery is, why an uncontested 

candidate in less than one year would return, would come to 

this Chamber through by-elections. And so it’s one of those 

interesting stories about the history of Weyburn. And I’m 

leading into the story of Tommy Douglas for all members that 

are listening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Certainly we’re very proud in the city of Weyburn to have a 

history, a political history that we have had and names that have 

really been amongst our political history, names that are 

synonymous with the history of the city of Weyburn, whether 

that be Eaglesham or Staveley, Mr. Speaker. Mitchell is 

certainly one of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Hugh Eaglesham was elected in 1934. And one of 

the candidates that he defeated, the third place finisher, was a 

young, up-and-coming politician and a preacher by the name of 

T.C. Douglas, Mr. Speaker. And it wasn’t long after that that 

Mr. Douglas became a federal member of the parliament. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at the historical record, you know, 

I think it’s interesting or it’s important to put things in context. 

Certainly Mr. Douglas had a string of election victories in the 

Weyburn constituency. But it’s interesting to note that by the 

end of his run as premier, his election victories were getting 

closer and closer. In fact it was his second last election that, for 

the first time, he actually finished with less than 50 per cent of 

the combined vote in Weyburn. And his last election in 1960, 

Mr. Douglas actually just squeaked out a 500-vote victory, 

margin of victory. And in fact the record would show, Mr. 

Speaker, that in 1961, to fill his seat that was created by his 

resignation, the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] 

actually lost the Weyburn seat in that election. Soon they would 

regain it after in general elections after that but something that 

is worth noting. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it’s obvious that while even today in the 

city of Weyburn, there are a number of people, obviously 

seniors, that would have some recollection of Mr. Douglas and 

would have been around at the time. Certainly it’s safe to say 

that he wasn’t always the overwhelming choice for the people 

of Weyburn. But I think obviously people would have disagreed 

and been on different sides of Mr. Douglas when it came to 

political debate, not only across the province but in the city of 

Weyburn. 

 

And certainly there are a number of people that remain in the 

city of Weyburn today that have those memories of being on the 

opposite side of the debate with Tommy Douglas, no doubt 

respecting the man and respecting his position. But I think it’s 

probably best summed up, Mr. Speaker, by the editorial that 

appeared in the Leader-Post at Mr. Douglas’ resignation as 

premier of the province, when they wrote in their editorial that 

“Despite sincere differences over some of his government’s 

policies, the people of Saskatchewan generally have respected 

Mr. Douglas while from his followers he has received their 

utmost admiration and adoration,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the reasons why I think this is 

a relevant and an important debate is because it speaks to the 

whole of the historical record when it comes to not only Mr. 

Douglas but also the Douglas government. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

think that obviously is important when you talk about ensuring 

that there is accuracy in the record, when the record is told of 

that time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Earlier I quoted from the author David McCullough. One of the 

things that he has been able to do in writing his, I think, 

masterful biography of John Adams is use the actual 

handwritten letters between John Adams and his wife Abigail in 

telling the story of the time. And so that’s why I think the 

record, the full record is important. And we know what 

happens, Mr. Speaker, when historical records are incomplete 

and when creative licence is taken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think members of the public and members of the 

Chamber will recall a miniseries that Mr. Douglas, that came 

out on CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] just a couple 

of years ago. And I know the member from Elphinstone, my 

friend and I think who shares our shared interest in history of 

the province in the House, spoke on that miniseries when it was 



May 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5419 

unveiled. And he said, and I quote, “The story reminds us of 

Saskatchewan history.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I guess it did remind us vaguely of Saskatchewan 

history if you recall the trouble that ensued with that, Mr. 

Speaker. According to a StarPhoenix editorial, March 16th, 

2006, it was like, and I quote, “wonderful television but 

abysmal history,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think of all the historical inaccuracies, probably the worst of 

all was not necessarily the revisionists building up of Douglas, 

the man, but the tearing down of Jimmy Gardiner, Mr. Speaker. 

Jimmy Gardiner, as people will know, served the people of 

Saskatchewan as an MLA and an MP and a premier, and was 

the longest, I think, to date, is still the longest serving federal 

cabinet minister in one portfolio — an incredible 22 years as the 

minister of Agriculture in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And certainly when you look back at that time, just a few years 

ago, and really the terrible, the terrible telling of 

Saskatchewan’s story, David Smith, the Saskatchewan political 

scientist who co-authored, I believe, the only biography on 

Jimmy Gardiner called the treatment of that man scandalous, 

Mr. Speaker. And I quote from David Smith: “It’s not right to 

portray him like that. You might disagree with how he went 

about it, but Saskatchewan was very important to him.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m quoting from a StarPhoenix editorial 

from 2006 where it talks about the egregious errors that were 

done to Mr. Gardiner, Mr. Speaker, throughout that TV series 

talking about . . . that really weren’t even a debatable matter, 

Mr. Speaker. Having Gardiner being portrayed as a premier 

making a speech when in fact he wasn’t even premier at the 

time around the riots in Estevan, Mr. Speaker, the miner’s strike 

at that time, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Smith goes on to call it a 

travesty of what was done. 

 

So we know what happens when, not only when the historical 

record is incomplete but when it is not accurately portrayed, 

Mr. Speaker. In fact I believe CBC pulled the miniseries from 

future broadcasting, I think, in large part from the work that the 

member from Melville-Saltcoats who was speaking on behalf of 

the Gardiner family and the Premier who was leader of the 

opposition at the time . . . brought this member to the Chamber. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, moving to the words of the motion, in 

principle I agree with the motion before us, Mr. Speaker, that 

should there be no compelling reason existing that these 

records, I think, for the public record should be made public, 

Mr. Speaker, for, as I have said, their historical importance and 

significance. Obviously the motion speaks to, it speaks to the 

importance of access to information. I think we can all agree on 

that, Mr. Speaker. It speaks to the CSIS policy of releasing 

information as a matter of course 20 years after the person’s 

death. Obviously that is the case with Mr. Douglas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also agree with the Leader of the Opposition 

who, in his speech on this matter, said on April 22nd on page 

4987 of Hansard: “And if there is some glaring reason why it 

can’t or shouldn’t be released, then I think it’s incumbent on the 

agencies involved to outline exactly what those reasons are . . . 

” Mr. Speaker, I agree with that. I think if there is a compelling 

reason why it shouldn’t be released, then that information 

should be made known, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At this time I don’t know, I certainly don’t know of any 

compelling reason why it should or should not be released. I 

don’t know if the member, the Leader of the Opposition, does. 

But certainly that’s one where I think . . . a point where we may 

be able to agree on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion then goes on to read, and I will read 

from the motion that . . . And this was moved by the Leader of 

the Opposition: 

 

3. That 24 years after Tommy Douglas’s death and 

several decades after the information on him was 

gathered, there is no legitimate security reason for 

keeping that information secret. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I again, as I said, and the Leader of the Opposition 

right before he moved that clause, said that he wasn’t sure if 

there was any glaring reasons why it should be not disclosed, 

Mr. Speaker. And so I think that clause, Mr. Speaker, maybe 

needs to be amended, which I will do at the close of my 

comments, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think point 4, clause 4 of the motion speaks to 

the legacy of Mr. Douglas. Certainly it can’t be disputed — he 

was the premier of the province of Saskatchewan for many 

years, served as a legislator in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are other clauses that I do want to speak to, Mr. Speaker, 

that . . . When we get into clause 6 and it goes through a list of 

what the members opposite believe are Mr. Douglas’s legacy 

. . . And I, while I agree with the fundamental question before 

us and the motion, I don’t believe the matter should be released, 

the information should be released for any one particular reason 

or for anything in Mr. Douglas’s record as premier of the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I believe by virtue of his time as premier, by the fact that he did 

serve as premier then, that that information is probably relevant 

to the historical information, Mr. Speaker. I don’t believe that 

his legacy to medicare has, as the motion states, has any more 

or less bearing on the interest in this motion than his 

government’s decision to expropriate a box factory which 

ultimately went bankrupt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I don’t think either parts of the record, Mr. Speaker, have any 

bearing on the motion. I think the motion stands on its own, Mr. 

Speaker. I think as the motion reads, his contributions to old age 

pension or family allowance, I think it brings no more or less 

weight to the arguments for releasing the information than the 

issues around the reasons why the petroleum industry left the 

province and went to Alberta not long after the Douglas 

government was elected, Mr. Speaker, or the unanswered 

questions around things like Farmers’ Mutual and the 

commission that was put in place to delve into the issue of 

farmers’ mineral rights, and how they were treated by 

individuals in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think the merits of the argument stand on their own, that Mr. 

Douglas was the premier of Saskatchewan, he was an MP, he 

was an MLA, and by that fact alone, regardless of his record on 

health care or on, Mr. Speaker, on some of these other issues 



5420 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2010 

that I’ve talked about, I think the motion stands on its own. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the areas in the motion, the clause that I 

think really has no bearing on this issue at all is, as read by the 

Leader of the Opposition, is clause no. 7, that we do this, that in 

part, one of our arguments is that Mr. Douglas was somehow 

decided to be the greatest Canadian of all time, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I will be amending that as well because let’s 

put this into context. This was a contest on CBC television and 

radio that also chose the following people. So, Mr. Speaker, if 

we want to put weight into this one activity of the CBC, this 

contest which allowed people to vote in online or to register 

their vote by text or by as many times, I understand, as they 

wanted to . . . I didn’t vote in the CBC poll, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But if you put in some of the other votes, Mr. Speaker, on that 

same contest that selected Mr. Douglas as number one — Mike 

Myers, the actor, who I’m a big fan of . . . I enjoyed him on 

Saturday Night Live and I think he was Shrek. We’ve got a fan 

over on the other side of the benches, Mr. Speaker. He rated 

20th in the vote that was taken place by CBC and 21 was the 

Unknown Soldier, Mr. Speaker. Now I think if you put that in 

context, it really shows the CBC contest for what it was. 

Whether you have Céline Dion and Jim Carrey rating higher 

than a person like Rick Hansen, Mr. Speaker. I think that really 

shows what this was all about. 

 

Or my favourite, my personal favourite, Mr. Speaker, the 34th, 

according to CBC the 34th greatest Canadian was Hal 

Anderson. And people are saying, who’s Hal Anderson, Mr. 

Speaker. Well I’m happy to report according to the CBC, Hal 

Anderson, the 34th greatest Canadian, as voted on in the same 

contest that selected Mr. Douglas as number one, is an on-air 

personality at Winnipeg’s Power 97 and a regular host of 

amateur talent searches and Budweiser Messy Wrestling Nights 

at the Henderson Draft House. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, as I said before, I think the 

vote by CBC has no bearing on the motion, Mr. Speaker. And 

I’m pointing out, and I’m pointing out to the members who 

have maybe . . . I’m pointing out to the members opposite that I 

agree with the motion based on the fact that he was the premier 

of the province; not because CBC said one thing about him, Mr. 

Speaker, not because . . . for other reasons that were given, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, by all accounts, Mr. Douglas had a number 

of qualities that people think of today, whether it be . . . 

Certainly people would view him as a passionate individual, 

somebody who was pugnacious, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, but 

I think the overall as what I’ve been trying to say to members 

who may or may not have heard all of my comments, Mr. 

Speaker, but something that, Mr. Speaker, that I think is 

important is just so that we have the full historical record, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, so that we’re not looking through this 

through rose-coloured glasses so that the story’s been told just 

by one side, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of things that Walt Whitman wrote and that 

applies to history and I think applies to the debate that we’re 

having about the merits of a historical record, and I quote, “As 

soon as histories are properly told there is no more need of 

romances,” Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s very important 

because many times — not from everybody, but many times — 

whether it’s members opposite or other individuals, they do 

some revisionist history when it comes to the record of Mr. 

Douglas. Certainly members opposite would agree that he’s just 

a man, Mr. Speaker, who made mistakes, who’s fallible; had 

maybe points of view that weren’t always the correct ones or 

the proper ones. 

 

I give a lot of credit to my friend and colleague, the hon. 

member from Elphinstone, who has no problems with speaking 

about the full record of Mr. Douglas. In fact it was the member 

from Elphinstone that put into the record of this Chamber Mr. 

Douglas’s early writing on eugenics which the member from 

Elphinstone rightly pointed out that he never put those in place 

when he became Health minister and as he was the premier of 

Saskatchewan in the first government. But it is part of the 

record. 

 

Same as what we’re debating with this motion about these files. 

I believe the member from Massey Place said there’s about 30 

per cent of the file that has not been disclosed, Mr. Speaker. I 

think the member from Elphinstone, in talking about this, talked 

about how Mr. Douglas was ultimately a dogmatic, was not a 

dogmatic person, was fairly practical, Mr. Speaker. I think 

that’s seen by his early beliefs in things like the manifesto that 

talked about capitalism being driven out of the province and 

people not resting, and his party’s early positions in their 

resolutions that they passed at their own conventions in the 

early years of their government that talked about nationalizing 

the oil industry. Who then later became in his life, Mr. Speaker, 

a board of director of Husky Oil. So it really shows that he was 

not a dogmatic person that could change his ideas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note, it’s interesting to note . . . I 

guess other members want to get into the debate, Mr. Speaker. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I know my time is winding down. I’m going 

to move an amendment. The Leader of the Opposition . . . In 

my closing comments, Mr. Speaker, and I hope on a lighter 

note, and I hope the members have taken, will read my 

comments in their full, in the full body of my context, in the full 

body of my speech, Mr. Speaker, because I know that perhaps 

that was not the case. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, on a bit of a lighter note, the Leader of the 

Opposition, in moving his remarks, talked about the day that 

will come this year when the city of Weyburn will be receiving 

— I think they have received — a statue that was created of Mr. 

Douglas, that was created I think by an Ontario artist. And it’s 

been a couple of years in the making, Mr. Speaker. I think the 

city was expecting it a little bit sooner, but ultimately it will be 

arriving, Mr. Speaker, and it will be erected in the city of 

Weyburn this summer. And, Mr. Speaker, many people I think 

will obviously celebrate that day, Mr. Speaker, in Weyburn, 

across the province, just as I’m sure that many people perhaps 

will not be as boisterous and jovial in their celebration of that 

date, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I’m not sure really what Mr. Douglas would think of that, 

of having a statue raised in Weyburn of him, other than what he 

said, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 

 



May 6, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5421 

I don’t mind being a symbol but I don’t want to become a 

monument. There are monuments all over the Parliament 

Buildings and I’ve seen what the pigeons do to them [Mr. 

Speaker]. 

 

Now I hope the pigeons are more kind in this matter, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s been a pleasure for me to speak on 

this motion. I do want to move the following amendments: 

 

That the motion be amended by deleting the word 

“legitimate” under clause 3 and replacing it with the word 

“known”; and 

 

That the words “people of Canada” in clause 7 be deleted 

and be replaced by “viewers and listeners of CBC who 

voted in the contest”. 

 

I so move. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is the 

motion presented by the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy: 

 

That the motion be amended by deleting the word 

“legitimate” under clause 3 and replacing it with the word 

“known”; and 

 

That the words “people of Canada” in clause 7 be deleted 

and be replaced by “viewers and listeners of CBC who 

voted in the contest”. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — The amendment. That’s correct. The motion 

as amended, is that agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. Standing vote. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:05 until 12:14.] 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion as amended. Will the members take it as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. Those in favour of the motion please 

rise. 

 

[Yeas — 44] 

 

Morgan Bjornerud Gantefoer 

Draude Krawetz Eagles 

Duncan Harpauer D’Autremont 

Norris Reiter Hutchinson 

Brkich Hart Schriemer 

Stewart Allchurch Weekes 

Tell Wilson Michelson 

Ottenbreit Ross Chisholm 

Bradshaw Kirsch McMillan 

Lingenfelter McCall Harper 

Trew Higgins Junor 

Atkinson Forbes Broten 

Furber Morin Yates 

Iwanchuk Taylor Quennell 

Wotherspoon Chartier  

 

[Nays — nil] 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Mr. Speaker, 

those in favour of the motion, 44. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. I recognize the 

Opposition Leader. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 

transmit copies of the motion and verbatim transcripts of 

the motion just passed to the Prime Minister of Canada, 

leaders of the federal opposition parties, the Speakers of 

all provincial legislative assemblies, and the family of 

Shirley Douglas. 

 

I would ask leave to move that motion. 

 

The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has asked for 

leave to move a motion of transmission. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, could I take it as 

read and hand it to the Clerk? At the urging of the Government 

House Leader, I would read the motion again. I move: 

 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 

transmit copies of the motion and verbatim transcripts of 

the motion just passed to the Prime Minister of Canada, 

the leaders of the federal opposition parties, the Speakers 

of all provincial legislative assemblies, and the family of 

Shirley Douglas. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Leader of the 

Opposition: 

 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 

transmit copies of the motion and verbatim transcripts of 

the motion just passed to the Prime Minister of Canada, 

the leaders of the federal opposition parties, the Speakers 

of all provincial legislative assemblies, and the family of 

Shirley Douglas. 



5422 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2010 

Is the Assembly agreed with the motion of transmission? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion carries. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At this time I 

would move the House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until 1:30 Monday afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:19.] 

 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Draude ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5401, 5416 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5401 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5401 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5401 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5401 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5401 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5402 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5402 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5402 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5402 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5402 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5403 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5403 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5403 

 Youth Business Excellence Awards 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5403 

 Apologies 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5404 

 Good News For Saskatchewan 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5404 

 Efficiency 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5404 

 Mother’s Day 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5405 

 Member’s Whereabouts 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5405 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Habitat Protection and Sale of Crown Land 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5405 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5405 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5406 

 Health Care Provision 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5407 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5407 

 Efficiency in Government 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5408 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5408 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5408 

 Child Care Programs 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5409 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5409 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 144 — The Litter Control Amendment Act, 2010 

  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5410 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5410 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5411 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Children’s Hospital 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5411 

  Yates (point of order) ............................................................................................................................................................. 5411 

  D’Autremont (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................ 5411 

  The Speaker (point of order) ................................................................................................................................................. 5411 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 3 — Release of Intelligence File on Former Premier 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5411 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5417 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 5421 

  Lingenfelter (transmittal motion) .......................................................................................................................................... 5421 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


