




















































Hansard: April 21, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 48A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 21, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge Ind. Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4947 

 April 21, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — Members, it’s my pleasure this afternoon to 

introduce to the Assembly someone who needs no introduction, 

especially to the members of the Assembly. And I’d invite him 

and his wife and family to stand when I introduce them. But 

with us today we have Mr. Gerald Gerrand, the Conflict of 

Interest Commissioner who will be retiring after 10 years of 

service, effective April the 24th. And we want to extend our 

appreciation and gratitude to Mr. Gerrand. 

 

So I’d invite Mr. Gerrand to stand. Mr. Gerrand is accompanied 

today by his wife of over 60 years, Ella, and his daughter, 

Wendy Rossmo, and also his secretary, Orla Cuddington. I 

would invite members to join with me in extending a warm 

welcome to Mr. Gerrand and his family and staff who have 

joined us today. 

 

I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

the opposition Justice critic for the chance to precede him in 

welcoming our friend and his family and colleague to the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have in front of me a long list of achievements of 

Mr. Gerrand in terms of his legal career, and it’s been quite an 

amazing legal career to be sure. But at the very, very end of this 

list that I’ve been given, I think is the very, very most important 

descriptor of the Conflict of Interest Commissioner that we 

honour today, and you’ve already referenced it. The very, very 

last thing here at the end of a long list of achievements is 

reference to his marriage of 60 years to Ella and also a reference 

to his five kids and eleven grandchildren and eight 

great-grandchildren. Because we know that to be successful in 

any vocation or avocation, we rely a lot on, obviously, on 

family and on friends and on those around us. And by the way, 

Mr. Speaker, it’s great to meet, even from a distance, Orla, 

whom many of us have dealt with via the telephone. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we want to pay special tribute to the family 

of Mr. Gerrand because they have shared him both with the 

legal community and our justice system over the years. And for 

the last 10 years, she has, his wife Ella and their kids have 

shared him with the members of this Legislative Assembly, and 

therefore with those that we represent in the province, and also, 

of course, with a number of Canadians in the North where he 

has also served democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may, I just have a few things that we should 

note here. He was born in Melville in 1931. He graduated from 

the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] College of Law before 

Elvis even had a hit in 1954. He practised law for a number of 

years before the courts of Saskatchewan and the Supreme Court 

of Canada with a focus on civil litigation. 

 

In the 1960s he served two terms as a trustee of the Regina 

public school board. He was appointed Queen’s Counsel in 

1970, served as a bencher of the Law Society from ’78 to 1982. 

He was elected president of the Law Society in Saskatchewan 

in 1981. 

 

The list is long; I won’t go through it all, Mr. Speaker. But he 

was elected fellow of the American College of Trial Lawyers in 

1982, served on the advisory committee for judicial 

appointments for the province of Saskatchewan from ’92 to ’96, 

served as chairman for the last three years of that appointment. 

And in 2000, as you’ve noted, Mr. Speaker, he became the 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner and the Freedom of 

Information and Privacy Commissioner for the province of 

Saskatchewan, the latter of which he served until 2002. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s worth noting that our legislation in the 

province that enables this position, this officer, gives the 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council indeed the chance 

to refer things beyond conflict of interest questions to the 

commissioner. He has significant responsibility, this officer 

does. And we know that Mr. Gerrand has executed them with 

honour and with distinction, and he’s also done it with a bit of a 

sense of humour, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I remember an occasion meeting with the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner when I had handed in . . . It felt a little bit like 

handing in your work to the teacher or your professor from 

years ago. But I handed mine in and I said, how are we doing? 

How are our members doing? Are we getting . . . You know, we 

were getting close to the deadline at that time. Have most of our 

members submitted? And I remember on this one occasion he 

said to me, well actually all of your members have submitted 

except for one. He said, we’re waiting, and we’re waiting for 

the member for Kindersley. He said, and I quote, “He’s a tough 

dog to get from underneath the porch.” 

 

I know that those files were submitted though on time because 

of his bidding and his encouragement. But he has served . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . The member says, with the help of 

Orla. He has served this province with great distinction in his 

role of Conflict of Interest Commissioner, and we salute him, 

his family. We salute his legal career here in the province that 

truly has made the province a better place than how he found it 

and really that’s the ultimate measure for each and every one of 

us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

To you and through you, I’d just invite all of us to say thank 

you, and we’ll have a chance to do it at a tea later, but to say 

thank you here in this Assembly and to welcome Mr. Gerrand 

and Ella and his daughter and Orla to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 

the Premier for saying that I allowed him to precede me because 

I was being gracious. It was actually because I expected he had 

a script, and I was correct. 

 

On behalf of the official opposition, and I don’t know who else 



4948 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2010 

might pop up, Mr. Speaker, but if I might be so bold, on behalf 

of the small legal community here in the Chamber, I would also 

like to extend a welcome to Mr. Gerrand and his family. He has, 

as the Premier pointed out, served this Assembly well, its 

members well. It’s an important role in a modern democracy, 

which is not much known about or understood and is 

underappreciated, and Mr. Gerrand has served well in a largely 

thankless if not entirely thankless task. 

 

And as the Premier alluded to, we have also generously lent 

him to one of the territories in Canada and I think he’s served 

them well as well. And some credit goes to him to be willing do 

that as well, Mr. Speaker. So again on behalf of the official 

opposition, but I think also perhaps on behalf of legal counsel 

here in the Chamber, we too wish to extend our appreciation 

and welcome and thanks to Mr. Gerrand. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you today and to the members of the House, I’d like to 

welcome 20 members from the public service who are 

participating in the parliamentary program for public service. 

I’d like to welcome to the legislature. 

 

There are fine employees from the public service representing 

nine government ministries. There’s Advanced Education, 

Employment and Labour; Agriculture, Education, Environment, 

Health; Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport; Children’s Advocate 

office, and the Office of the Chief Electoral Officer as well as 

from the ministry I have the privilege of representing, and that 

is the Public Service Commission. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everyone in this Assembly knows the decisions 

that are made in this Assembly cannot be completed without the 

dedication and the hard work and the commitment of the public 

service, and we’d like to thank them for that work. 

 

After the proceedings today I’m going to have the opportunity 

to meet with them personally, along with other members of the 

Legislative Assembly so, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome 

warmly these participants to their Assembly and invite all the 

members to join me. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 

of the official opposition, I would like to join with the minister 

and welcome our guests today from the public service. It’s 

always wonderful to have you here with us. And I hope that 

today is an enjoyable day and you learn a little bit about the 

roles we perform on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan and 

that you often have the difficult task of implementing. And it’s 

a tough job at times, but we do appreciate it. 

 

Having been a career civil servant in the Saskatchewan public 

service prior to being elected and actually still on leave, I 

certainly understand the difficulties that at times is upon you 

and your families, implementing some difficult things. So we 

thank you very much and hope you have a very enjoyable day 

today. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. To you and to 

all members in the House, I’d like to take a moment and 

introduce some very special guests in the House. In your gallery 

right up here are members of the Self-Advocacy Action Group. 

And with us today is Jana Friel, Shelly Alderson, Patti Ward, 

supporter Barry Halliday, and facilitator Lynne Harley. Tina 

Friesen was with us earlier but had to leave. 

 

So we met with this group earlier today to learn more about 

their hopes and dreams and some of the frustrations they 

experience in our society and how we might eliminate some of 

those barriers, in fact make our society more inclusive. And, 

Mr. Speaker, really spoke to me that we need to make a 

commitment to do more. And one of those things that we could 

do is fully implement SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for 

disability], the principles. 

 

I want to let the House know that these folks are actually 

travelling to Berlin. They’re going to be presenting, actually 

presenting at the 15th World Congress of Inclusion 

International this June. Hopefully the airports will all be 

working. But they’re looking forward to that, and I know all 

members in this House will wish them best wishes and safe 

travels. And I know members will also want to join in with me 

to thank them for coming into Regina, visiting with us and 

visiting their legislature. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s truly an honour to join with my colleague in welcoming the 

people from the SAAG [Self-Advocacy Action Group] 

organization. They do great work, as do many of our advocacy 

groups for individuals with disabilities. They have been 

extremely helpful to our government in helping giving us 

direction in what needs to be done, and I know there is always 

more that can be done. 

 

But I have to say that the initiatives that we have undertaken, 

especially the new SAID income program, couldn’t happen as 

seamlessly as what it is without the help from the advocacy 

groups that we’ve received. So I thank them and I want 

everyone to help welcome them to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 

pleasure, to you and through you, to introduce seated in the east 

gallery a group of 52 grade 7 and 8 students from Regina 

Christian School here in Regina. They’re accompanied with 

their teacher, Mr. Geoff Glasspell who’s a . . . certainly brings 

his class, I believe, on an annual basis to this Assembly. But not 

only does he introduce students to the democratic process, he’s 

also one of the top-notch basketball coaches in Regina and we 

thank him for his service to our community. 

 

I also welcome teacher Mrs. Nadine Siever who’s here today; 

welcome her here today. And too, at risk of singling out one last 



April 21, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4949 

individual, I’d like to introduce air force cadet from the 41st 

Squadron, Mr. Matthew McArthur. And maybe Mr. McArthur 

could stand up. And thank you for joining us here today. So I 

ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in welcoming 

these fine students. I look forward to meeting with them 

following question period. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you I’d like 

to say a special hello to one individual in the group of civil 

servants that we have us. Chandra LePoudre is an individual 

that I grew up with in the same end of Saskatoon and she was 

good friends with my younger sister growing up. So I wanted, 

Mr. Speaker, to say a special hello to Chandra who lives in 

Saskatoon with her husband and family and dogs. Welcome this 

afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I’d like to introduce a familiar face again in the west 

gallery, Heather Malek, who is a film and television editor who 

moved to Saskatchewan in 1998 and calls Regina home. She’s 

very concerned with the haste of the SCN [Saskatchewan 

Communications Network] closure and the lack of public 

consultation prior to this decision. And I think she plans to be a 

regular attendee. So please join me in welcoming Heather to her 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure, but it’s also with a bit of sadness that I rise to make an 

introduction to an individual seated in your gallery. I’m 

speaking of Colleen Smith. Colleen Smith has worked with me 

as the constituency assistant in Regina Elphinstone-Centre since 

February 2001. Politically we go back to when I won the grade 

8 student representative council election at Kitchener School, 

and our families have known each other forever. Colleen is a 

real North Central girl. 

 

And anyway, so it’s a pleasure to introduce her to the 

legislature, Mr. Speaker, but the sadness comes in with the fact 

that Colleen is going on to some educational and career 

opportunities. I finally drove her out, Mr. Speaker. She’s an 

individual who’s served the people of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre with a tremendous amount of passion and 

compassion — people, you know, often in a lot of stress and 

duress. And she’s done that job with such diligence and such 

caring. 

 

Our friendship continues, Mr. Speaker. But it’s really good to 

see her today so we can mark out just to get it on the record 

what a great job she’s done as a servant for the people of 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre, and wishing her every success with 

these new opportunities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned 

over the conditions and the safety of our highways. This 

particular petition pertains to Highway No. 10 between Fort 

Qu’Appelle and junction of No. 1. This portion of the highway 

is a main traffic route to a year-round tourist destination as well 

as serves three major inland grain terminals. And, Mr. Speaker, 

the prayer goes on as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and 

the junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the 

Saskatchewan motoring public’s safety. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed by the good folks from Fort Qu’Appelle, 

Regina, and Yorkton, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of the protection of wildlife habitat 

lands. And the petition speaks to the issue that The Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act protects 3.4 million acres of uplands and 

wetlands or one-third of all wildlife habitat lands in 

Saskatchewan in their natural state; and that repealing the 

schedule from the actual Act leaves in question the protection 

and designation of these lands. And the prayer reads, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

To cause the provincial government to immediately and 

without delay recognize the importance of the protection 

of wildlife habitat lands and immediately withdraw 

proposed amendments that will negatively affect the 

protection of wildlife habitat lands; 

 

And in doing so cause the provincial government to 

commit to meaningful and adequate consultations with all 

stakeholders that will be affected by future legislative 

changes to The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens from Biggar, 

Outlook, and Regina. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to present a petition in 

support of maintaining educational assistants. As the members 

will know, in November of 2009 the Ministry of Education 



4950 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2010 

introduced a document that would consider drastically changing 

or reducing the number of educational assistants in the province 

and replacing them with a smaller number of people like speech 

and language therapists, psychologists, and so on. This will 

have a particular impact on those families and students living in 

rural Saskatchewan which have difficulty attracting those types 

of professionals. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

To cause the government to provide funding for the 

required number of educational assistants to provide 

special needs students with the support they need and 

maintain a positive learning environment for all 

Saskatchewan students. 

 

And this petition is signed by people from Shellbrook, Grenfell, 

Regina, and Montmartre. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for protection for renters from 

unreasonable rent increases. And we know that many 

Saskatchewan renters are facing dangerous combinations of 

rising rents and low vacancy rates in many communities. And in 

fact the vast majority of Canadians, some 80 per cent, now live 

in provinces with rent control guidelines. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

consider enacting some form of rent control with a view 

to protecting Saskatchewan renters from unreasonable 

increases in rent. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Prince Albert and 

Melfort. Thank you very much. I do so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of Highway 135. Concerns in the petition address 

some of the concerns of Pelican Narrows. I read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to pave the 7 kilometres of Highway 135 

through the community of Pelican Narrows as committed 

on August 24th, 2007. 

 

It is signed by the good people of Pelican Narrows. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition on the issue of high tuition fees. And I call on 

the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, to have their actions 

match their rhetoric. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to addressing the burden placed 

by high post-secondary tuition fees on Saskatchewan 

students. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today on yet another rural 

water issue. Although today is a day of celebration regarding 

the accomplishments of the Duck Lake community, the people 

all across Saskatchewan are wondering why the government 

still hasn’t offered any assistance with the issue of providing 

safe and affordable drinking water to the community of Duck 

Lake, resulting in monthly water bills in excess of $165 a 

month. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Saskatoon and Duck Lake. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of withdrawal of Bill 80. Mr. 

Speaker, the existing construction industry labour relations Act, 

1992 has provided a stable environment for labour relations in 

the construction industry in our province. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

results of that stable environment are good quality work, safe 

construction sites, and benefit for all the people. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its ill-conceived Bill 80, The 

Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 

2009 which dismantles the proud history of the building 

trades in this province, creates instability in the labour 

market, and impacts the quality of training required of 

workers before entering the workforce. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed by people in McLean, Regina, 

Moosomin, Ituna, Prince Albert, Good Spirit Lake, Melville, 

Saskatoon, and Bradwell. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 



April 21, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4951 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party 

government is referring two legislative options to the Court of 

Appeal to allow public officials to opt out of their legal 

obligation to provide couples with civil marriage services. And 

if successful, this would allow marriage commissioners to 

discriminate against couples, not only on the basis of sexual 

orientation, but also on the basis of religion or race. And the 

prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Today the petition is signed by residents of Saskatoon. And I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to present petitions on behalf of residents from 

across Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive $1 billion dollar deficits tabled by the 

Sask Party, and the two years and billions of dollars of debt 

growth under the Sask Party. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Saskatoon 

and Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 

present a petition in support of the Saskatchewan film and 

television industry. This petition is signed by residents who are 

concerned this government has put ideology before good public 

policy with the closure of SCN. I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to make changes to the film employment tax 

credit that will allow the Saskatchewan film industry to be 

more competitive with other provinces, to reverse its 

decision to shut down the Saskatchewan Communications 

Network, and to work with the industry to reverse the 

decline in film production. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed by residents of Regina and Moose Jaw. I 

so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Administrative Professionals Week 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There are certain 

people within an organization that are noticeably missed when 

they are absent. These valuable co-workers do so much to make 

our offices run smoothly and efficiently and brighten up our day 

with their positive attitudes. Without these wonderful people, 

we would truly be at a loss. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this week is dedicated to recognizing 

administrative professionals, where we take the time to show 

our gratitude and appreciation for the hardest working people in 

our workplaces. There are almost a half a million persons 

employed as administrative professionals across our country, 

and of course millions more around the world. 

 

These people are an integral part of any organization, whether it 

is in the public or private sector. But I would like to take this 

opportunity to mention a few of these important individuals 

whose efforts I get to see every day. In our government caucus 

office here at the Legislative Building we are lucky to have 

Marianne Hoffart and Terry Lynn Carefoot. And I would also 

like to acknowledge Rosalie who works in my constituency 

office in Estevan. These ladies bring a level of enthusiasm and 

dedication to their profession that is certainly admirable and 

greatly appreciated. 

 

I would ask all members to join me in recognizing 

administrative professionals in their lives and take a moment to 

let them know how much they are appreciated, not only today 

but every day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

TheatreFest 2010 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to one once 

again inform members of the Legislative Assembly of the 

continuing success of The Battlefords Community Players who 

recently came home from the very well-done provincial theatre 

festival held in Moose Jaw. The Battlefords Community Players 

came home with three awards. Rick Kostiuck, a relatively new 

actor was named best actor; Barb O’Neal was named best 

director, and The Battlefords Community Players entry entitled 

Speak was the runner-up for best play. 

 

My congratulations also to Regina Little Theatre, which won 

best entry for their play Pride and Prejudice, and to their own 

Bonnie Senger who took home the award for best actress. Also 

I want to thank the Moose Jaw Community Players for hosting 

another wonderful and inspiring event. 



4952 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2010 

Mr. Speaker, those who attend TheatreFest know that for more 

than 75 years community theatre companies from around 

Saskatchewan have been bringing entries for competition and 

entertainment. The Battlefords Community Players have 

featured prominently over the years, and for that we are all very 

proud. I ask all members to join me in recognizing and 

congratulating The Battlefords Community Players on another 

fine effort and I might add, Mr. Speaker, another fine year in 

providing young and some not-so-young theatre talent an 

opportunity to excel. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Victims of Crime Awareness Week 

 

Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today to inform this House that April 18th to the 24th is Victims 

of Crime Awareness Week in Saskatchewan, proclaimed as 

such to coincide with National Victims of Crime Awareness 

Week. This year’s theme is Every Victim Matters. Mr. Speaker, 

this week is an opportunity to raise awareness about victims 

issues and about the programs and services in place to help 

victims and their families in Saskatchewan. 

 

Victims of crime and traumatic events can feel overwhelmed, 

isolated, and unable to cope with what has happened. Victim 

service workers offer information and support immediately after 

the event and throughout the criminal justice process. They also 

refer victims and their families to other programs and services 

for help. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are almost 300 victim service volunteers 

operating out of 18 police-based programs which are available 

to 87 per cent of our province’s population. As victim services 

programs have evolved over the years, dedicated volunteers 

have connected with victims in their communities and 

supported them throughout the criminal justice process. By 

working tirelessly and selflessly with victims they show in their 

daily actions that every victim truly does matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in expressing our 

appreciation of our victim services volunteers for their service 

to the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Cancer Awareness Month 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April is Cancer 

Awareness Month, reminding us of those who are affected by 

the disease and gathering support and donations in the fight 

against cancer. During April, the Canadian Cancer Society’s 

Daffodil Month, thousands of volunteers from coast to coast 

will be selling daffodils, knocking on doors, and organizing 

special events. 

 

In 2009 approximately 171,000 Canadians were diagnosed with 

cancer, and over 75,000 died from the disease. An average of 

3,300 Canadians are diagnosed each week with cancer — that’s 

one person every three minutes. The good news today is that an 

estimated 62 per cent will survive five years after their 

diagnosis. Through a combination of healthy lifestyles and 

progressive public policies, 50 per cent of cancers can be 

prevented. 

 

On April 1st, ironically the first day of Daffodil Month, one of 

the two remaining gynecological oncologists in Regina closed 

her doors to any new cancer patients. She had given the 

government two years notice, citing severe overwork and 

substandard working conditions. But because of their inaction, 

women with cancer are left paying the price. 

 

Virtually all jurisdictions in Canada provide in-hospital space 

with its attendant support system for ovarian cancer specialists 

— all except Saskatchewan. This is yet another example of the 

Sask Party’s lack of response to a life-and-death situation. 

During Cancer Awareness Month, it is absolutely essential that 

the Sask Party government immediately find a solution to this 

problem so that women with ovarian cancer can receive the 

medical treatment that they need, when they need it. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 

 

Knights of Columbus Benefit Community 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 

weekend, I had the good fortune of attending the Knights of 

Columbus 88th State Convention State Banquet. It’s no wonder 

that an organization like the Knights of Columbus has lasted so 

long. The Knights of Columbus are Catholic men who are 

committed to making their community a better place while 

supporting their church. Being a Knight is more than 

camaraderie. It’s involvement in their community. It’s 

supporting their local church while enhancing their own faith. 

It’s about protecting and enhancing family life. 

 

Throughout its history, the Knights of Columbus have been an 

effective advocate and defender of civil and religious rights for 

all. The organization has also contributed billions of dollars and 

billions of hours of volunteer service to charity. The principles 

they follow are very admirable — charity, fraternity, unity, 

patriotism define the core of values of the Knights of 

Columbus. And these values in turn define the people of 

Saskatchewan. So much of what the Knights of Columbus have 

accomplished have gone to benefit this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this House join me in 

thanking the Knights of Columbus for their many years of 

service to the province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Exercising Judgment 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, it is clear from the events of not 

only the past week but also the previous 18 months that we 

cannot trust the judgment of this Premier. 

 

He appointed a Minister of Finance who can’t balance the 

budget. He appointed a Minister of Energy and Resources who 



April 21, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4953 

predicted potash revenue to be $3 billion, only to end up 

actually paying the potash companies $200 million. He 

appointed a minister to Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

who doesn’t know that gangs exist in prison, and another who 

fails to immediately notify the public when a violent offender 

has escaped from prison. 

 

He appointed a Provincial Secretary who believes that a full 

one-fifth of the world’s natural resources come from this 

province and then manages to misquote herself in her own press 

release. He appointed a legislative secretary to Western 

Canadian co-operation who made inappropriate and inoffensive 

comments to a member of our caucus. 

 

He appointed a Minister of Environment who’s so busy 

organizing an offensive pig roast that she has completely failed 

to take any action in reducing our greenhouse gas emissions. He 

appointed a Justice minister who clearly does not understand 

the fair and democratic process in accepting the recommended 

candidate for Chief Electoral Officer. And now the allegations 

are swirling about the member from Saskatoon Northwest, the 

judgment of this Premier being thrown into question even 

further. 

 

Clearly the people of Saskatchewan cannot trust him to recruit 

candidates, to appoint cabinet ministers, or let alone run the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Tri-Town Thunder Wins Silver 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

have great news from Carrot River Valley. Last week I 

informed the Chamber of our Junior B hockey team, the 

Tri-Town Thunder, and their subsequent winning of the 

provincial title. The Tri-Town went on to Kamloops to play in 

the Prairie Junior Hockey League playoffs in search of the 

Keystone Cup. The Prairie Junior Hockey League is made up of 

northern Ontario, Manitoba, and Saskatchewan, Alberta, and 

British Columbia and only the top teams of each province get to 

vie for the prestigious cup. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I said I had great news, and it is while the 

Tri-Town Thunder did not win the Keystone Cup, they played 

in the gold medal game against the Revelstoke Grizzlies who 

won 5-3. And the last goal was an empty netter; Mr. Speaker, 

this is indicative of how close this game was. The Grizzlies 

were the only team to beat the Tri-Town in round robin play, 

and that also was a close game of 4-2. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Tri-Town Thunder returns home with a silver 

medal, and I want to congratulate Coach Randy Cuthill, 

President Pat Flegg, Governor Leo LeBlanc, Associate Coach 

Ken Soucy, Trainer Maurice LaLonde, and of course Captain 

Brandyn Wasyliw for a fantastic and entertaining season. I 

would like all members of this Assembly to show their support 

for the Tri-Town Thunder. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Police Investigation and Member’s Conduct 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, on Monday the Premier said, “Mr. 

Downs has taken steps to turn over all of the information we 

have to the Regina Police Service.” When pressed by the media 

on what was handed over to the police, the Premier said, “We 

turned over everything we had.” 

 

To the Premier: what did the government have? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether the 

member there wants to play Perry Mason or play 

cross-examination. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, we have done what 

each and every member of this caucus . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have done exactly what 

we intended to do. We have turned over everything that is in 

our possession that is at all relevant to this. We have indicated 

to the Regina Police Service that we will give them our full and 

complete co-operation. And, Mr. Speaker, that is what each and 

every member of this House should do, and that is what each 

and every member of this House has an obligation to do. Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to urge all members of the House to do 

exactly that: co-operate fully with the Regina Police Service; let 

them do their work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have a 

right to know. Did the government have other information 

relevant to the cocaine affair in its possession before Friday, or 

did they have anything at all to turn over to the Regina Police 

Service? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I think the opposition 

members would be appropriate to allow the minister to respond 

to the question just presented. I recognize the Minister of 

Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is we 

have turned over everything that is in our possession. Mr. 

Downs made that statement, Mr. Speaker. We intend to leave 

this matter with the Regina Police Service until they have 

completed their investigation. The investigation is under way, 

Mr. Speaker. My understanding is that things are progressing as 

they should and, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to urge the members on 

that side of the House to let that work continue as it is supposed 

to do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



4954 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2010 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, in any other job if an employee 

used company resources inappropriately, the employee would 

be fired. At the heart of this cocaine affair are some basic 

questions about inappropriate use of government materials 

during work hours. The people of Saskatchewan have a right to 

know the answers. And it’s been five days since the cocaine 

affair came to light. What steps has the Premier taken to check 

whether his legislative secretary for Corrections, Public Safety 

and Policing misused taxpayers’ resources? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there was no knowledge 

by the Premier or anyone on this side of the House of any 

impropriety of any . . . or no knowledge of these allegations 

before last Friday. Mr. Speaker, I want to make it . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, within hours of when this 

came to light, they removed the legislative responsibilities of 

the member for Saskatoon Northwest and, Mr. Speaker, we 

have turned the matter over to the police and that it is where it 

will stay until the matter is resolved, Mr. Speaker. They can 

make the allegations that they choose to, Mr. Speaker, but the 

matter is with the Regina Police Service. We will co-operate 

with them. If they want more information, Mr. Speaker, if we 

have more information, if it comes to light, we will continue to 

provide any information that they want, and would like to urge 

the members opposite to do exactly the same. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, well before the cocaine affair came 

to light, the Premier should’ve been looking into the potential 

misuse of taxpayers’ dollars by his legislative secretary. 

Anyone who visits this individual’s personal website, which he 

uses to promote himself as a public speaker, will find that the 

person responsible for booking those highly lucrative speaking 

engagements is Ryan Long. Ryan Long is also the individual’s 

constituency assistant, whose salary is paid by the taxpayers. 

The same person who served as the constituency assistant is 

also the main contact for the individual’s company. 

 

To the Premier: does he still think it is appropriate for 

Saskatchewan taxpayers to pay Ryan Long to book lucrative 

speaking engagements for his legislative secretary? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the matter has been turned 

over to the Regina Police Service. We will continue to 

co-operate fully and completely with the Regina Police Service. 

We do not intend to make any further comments on this matter 

while the matter is with the police service, Mr. Speaker. And 

I’d like to urge the members opposite, if they have other 

information, if they think there’s an impropriety, they can raise 

the matter with the Board of Internal Economy. They can give 

the matter to the police. Mr. Speaker, we will, on this side of the 

House, give our full, complete, candid co-operation with the 

Regina Police Service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite have any other additional 

information, I’m sure the Regina Police Service would be glad 

to receive it. Mr. Speaker, I urge them to give the same level of 

co-operation that this side of the House has given. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we know the Premier’s legislative 

secretary for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing was 

potentially using his constituency assistant and his office 

inappropriately for his personal affairs. And we know that the 

Premier did nothing about it for two years. What we don’t know 

is whether this individual was also using his position as a 

legislative secretary in an inappropriate manner. Weeks ago the 

official opposition asked written questions about this legislative 

secretary’s expenses and travel. The government has refused to 

answer those questions. 

 

To the Premier: why the secrecy? Was his legislative secretary 

for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing using taxpayers’ 

dollars inappropriately for his own personal gain? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite 

have some additional information that would be beneficial to 

the Regina Police Service, I would urge them to give it to them. 

If they have other issues that they wish to raise, let them raise it 

in the Board of Internal Economy. Let them raise it through 

written questions, Mr. Speaker. Let them raise it in the ordinary 

and usual fashion . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the matter is with the 

Regina Police Service. We will let them do their work. The 

members opposite should let them do their work. We’ve made 

comments on this earlier in the media. We do not intend to 

make any further comments. We will let this matter work its 

way through in the ordinary course. The police are involved, 

Mr. Speaker, and that is where we are going to stop our 

comments, Mr. Speaker. The matter is with the police and we 

will give the police our co-operation. Mr. Speaker, if the 

members opposite have some other information, let them give it 

to the police or let them deal with it appropriately. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a basic question. Did the 

legislative secretary for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

use his position for personal gain? But the Premier refuses to 

answer and keeps hiding behind a police investigation. 

 

But the issues that will concern the Regina Police Service are 

very different from those that concern the Legislative Assembly 



April 21, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4955 

and the people of Saskatchewan. The police can only look at the 

potential for drug or prostitution charges. While those are 

concerning issues, the standards for an MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] go well beyond the Criminal Code. 

 

To the Premier: will he stop stalling and refer this entire file to 

the Conflict of Interest Commissioner immediately? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the matter is with the 

Regina Police Service. I’ve answered the question in that 

fashion before and, Mr. Speaker, the individuals can rephrase 

the question as many times . . . The matter is with the Regina 

Police Service. We will give them our co-operation. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Status of Member 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, there are still so many unanswered 

questions about this cocaine affair, but the most fundamental 

question is still the judgment of the Premier. With so many 

unanswered questions and so many competing stories, it’s no 

wonder that many Saskatchewan people are wondering whether 

they can trust the Premier or not. 

 

According to yesterday’s StarPhoenix, the Premier’s legislative 

secretary for Corrections, Public Safety and Policing had 

decided well before Friday that he would not run again, “. . . 

because he and Wall had discussed LeClerc heading a new drug 

treatment program that would involve the government.” 

 

To the Premier: is that true? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I had numerous conversations 

with the former Saskatchewan Party member, currently the 

independent member. In fact it’s a matter of public record that I 

advocated for the kind of model of a drug treatment model that 

was available through Teen Challenge, which the hon. member 

ran. And there would have been a number of occasions where I 

would have said if there was ever, if the decision was ever made 

not to be involved in politics, we would be open, we as a 

government would be open to proposals that work in terms of 

addictions treatment. I advocated for some capital funding for 

groups like Teen Challenge when I was the opposition leader in 

debate of premier’s estimates in May of 2007. Mr. Speaker, 

there’s no secret about that. 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, the allegations are baseless as we’ve seen 

from members opposite, but that is the truth of the matter. We 

want for this province addictions services that work, whether 

they are community-based, whether they are faith-based, or 

whether they’re offered in the public sector. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, on Monday the Premier chose not 

to be forthright about his legislative secretary’s nomination as a 

candidate. Yesterday he finally admitted he had a conversation 

with his legislative secretary on Sunday evening. 

 

This is what the Premier said yesterday about that conversation: 

 

That’s where he indicated clearly and definitively that he 

was not running again. That’s for the first time he’s ever 

indicated that to me. 

 

But the legislative secretary said that he and the Premier spoke 

about a golden parachute in the form of a drug treatment centre 

for the legislative secretary to run. 

 

To the Premier: did he or any member of his staff speak to the 

legislative secretary about setting up a drug treatment centre for 

him to run? And is this another example of providing a golden 

parachute? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the premise of the hon. 

member’s question is false. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — So clearly we have conflicting stories again. So 

again no one knows what to understand. Mr. Speaker, with so 

many competing stories, it’s difficult to determine what the 

truth is. 

 

The legislative secretary says the Premier had a dream and 

thought it was predestined that he would become an MLA. The 

Premier says, that’s not true. The legislative secretary says he 

talked with the Premier well before Friday about not running 

again. The Premier says the first time he heard about it is on 

Sunday night. The legislative secretary says the Premier was 

going to appoint him to head up a drug treatment centre. The 

Premier refuses to admit that today. 

 

To the Premier: with so many different versions of this story, 

how can Saskatchewan people possibly trust him? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier spoke with the 

media late last week. The Premier spoke in the House the last 

two days and answered questions and clarified facts and issues. 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier has answered candidly and openly the 

questions that were put to him about the conversations that he 

has had. 

 

Mr. Speaker, right now the matter has been given to the Regina 

Police Service and as long as that continues, the expectation of 

this side of the House is that we will give our full and complete 

co-operation to that investigation, Mr. Speaker, as should the 

members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 



4956 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2010 

Kidney Transplants 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in response 

to Stacey Simms’s dramatic demonstration of how the lack of a 

transplant program affects her daily life, the minister threw the 

doctors under the bus, basically blaming them for the lack of 

progress on the kidney transplant program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Dr. Shoker, the director of the kidney transplant 

program, has given two names of surgeons to the Department of 

Health. As of today, Dr. Shoker still does not know if those 

surgeons have even been contacted. 

 

To the minister, Mr. Speaker: have these surgeons been 

contacted? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday certainly we 

had some guests in the gallery that made a very compelling 

case, Mr. Speaker. And each and every time you see how the 

effects of, for example, a kidney failure impact people, it 

impacts us directly as legislators, Mr. Speaker, and as a 

government. 

 

What I have said before and I’ll say again is that the kidney 

program will be up and running in this province. I’ve set a tight 

timeline of three to four months, Mr. Speaker. Other specialists 

in other parts of the country have been contacted. There’s a 

couple of possibilities. Absolutely they’ve been contacted, Mr. 

Speaker. Now they’ve got to make arrangements and decide one 

way or the other if they’re coming here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I will say once again, and it was reiterated by the vascular 

surgeons and even Dr. Shoker, that the way the program had 

been running before under our government and under the 

previous government was not sustainable, Mr. Speaker. 

Something had to change, Mr. Speaker. Those changes are 

taking place — longer than what I want, Mr. Speaker — those 

changes are taking place. Our program will be up and running 

that will be sustainable well into the future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is about the future of the 

transplant program. Dr. Shoker is frustrated because of the lack 

of a concrete plan to reinstate the kidney transplant program. 

Today he said, “Nobody in the transplant program has any idea 

what’s going on. Saying it will be up and running in three to 

four months is not good enough. What surgeons have been 

contacted? When were they contacted?” 

 

Mr. Speaker, why is the minister keeping the director of the 

program out of the loop? Dr. Shoker is the patients’ link to 

information. Surely the minister could open up the lines of 

communication and show the plan to Dr. Shoker. When will he 

do that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what I will say to 

that is first of all the basis of the question is absolutely wrong. 

The Ministry of Health has met, ministry officials have met 

with Dr. Shoker on Saturday, had a very good conversation 

with Dr. Shoker. We understand some of the concerns he has 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, not only has the 

Ministry of Health talked to Dr. Shoker, the head of the 

transplant program; I have myself talked directly to him on 

Monday at about 12:30 for about 15, 20 minutes, Mr. Speaker. 

Got a very good understanding; both of us now have a very 

good understanding. Our government is working hard — he 

understands that — to find replacements, Mr. Speaker. He’s 

very aware of that. I asked him, what about a three- to 

four-month timeline? He thought that was aggressive, but he 

certainly was happy that we’ve got a plan, that we’re going to 

be moving forward to try and have a sustainable transplant 

program well into the future to service people here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the minister’s living in the 

same dream world as the Premier. I spoke to Dr. Shoker this 

morning. The minister says now there are not enough surgeons 

in place to sustain the kidney transplant program the way it is. 

Mr. Speaker, the minister’s in danger of losing the kidney 

transplant surgeons he has now. According to Dr. Shoker, “If 

there is no firm start date, the surgeons will leave.” Mr. 

Speaker, if these surgeons do not receive a firm start-up date 

from the minister, if they don’t see a concrete plan from the 

minister, they will leave. Perhaps that is his plan. He wants it to 

fail. He doesn’t want it to start. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier, the Premier promised Stacey Simms 

yesterday that he would fix this in three to four months. So 

what’s the plan? The clock is ticking. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, quite frankly I cannot 

believe that member’s assertion. I cannot believe that member’s 

assertion, that she stands in her place and says . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — I cannot believe, Mr. Speaker, that 

member’s assertions, that she would say that we are wanting the 

transplant program to fail. That’s what she’s inserting . . . 

referencing, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely nothing could be further 

from the truth. Mr. Speaker, all you have to do is stand and look 

in the eyes of patients that want care in this province. And then 

for her to stand there and accuse us of trying to see a program 

fail is absolutely ludicrous, Mr. Speaker. Anyone that would 

have the gall to do that, Mr. Speaker, has a . . . 

 

[Interjections] 



April 21, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4957 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. It’s 

difficult for the Speaker to hear exactly what’s being said and 

when, and I want to ask members to allow the members to 

respond without interference. And I ask members and ministers 

in their response as well to use language that would be more 

fitting with the appropriateness of the Assembly. 

 

I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Employment of Educational Assistants 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, on February 26th of this year 

the Minister of Education described a document issued by his 

ministry that called for the reduction of the number of 

educational assistants in the province as a working document. 

And the minister asserted that this was not government policy. 

And he claimed that school divisions across the province had 

misinterpreted the document. 

 

My question to the minister: does the minister still stand by 

those words? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I will state again for the 

record that this suggestion by the member opposite that the 

Minister of Education was going to somehow control the 

number of educational assistants that boards of education hire is 

in fact not true, Mr. Speaker. It’s not true. 

 

There has never been a change to the policy. It is the same 

policy that existed prior to, in fact, our government getting 

elected. It is the same policy, Mr. Speaker. There has been no 

change to this policy. School divisions determine the 

complement of teaching staff. Whether or not those are 

professionals in regards to teachers, special education teachers, 

therapists, psychologists, those people are determined by the 

school division. And, Mr. Speaker, that same school division 

also determines the number of educational assistants that they 

will hire. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Then, Mr. Speaker, the minister has some 

explaining to do because in March of 2009, his ministry sent 

out a 2009 funding guide to all school divisions, laying out the 

ministry’s expectations for funding. And in that document, it 

indicates that the: 

 

Key program expectations for 2009-10 associated with 

Intensive Supports Level I and II recognition include [and 

this is for special needs students, the following]: 

 

Continue development and implementation of a school 

division service delivery model and staffing profile that 

support learners requiring intensive supports, utilizing 

research-based ratios of appropriate supports and 

data-guided decision-making. 

 

Attached to that is the school division service delivery model 

staffing program, education teacher assistants, 1 to 100. How do 

you explain that, Minister? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, as the member would 

know, having been a former minister of Education, there’s been 

a change in how recognition is provided to students with 

intensive needs. The model that used to exist under the former 

government was, Mr. Speaker, a medically based model. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

know that the opposition critic has been raising the question in 

the legislature for many days, presenting petitions. Mr. Speaker, 

the model that we are changing to is from a medically based 

model to a needs-based model. And, Mr. Speaker, that money is 

provided to . . . Mr. Speaker, the money is provided to the 

school division, as it always was, in a block funding model, Mr. 

Speaker. The school division determines what their team-based 

approach will be. 

 

In many cases, Mr. Speaker, in rural school divisions where 

there is an educational assistant providing the support to a 

teacher in a classroom, that person is mandatory to have there, 

Mr. Speaker. And that is the statement that I have made, Mr. 

Speaker. Those are the considerations that boards of education 

are going to do. And in fact right here in Regina, we’ve just 

seen a centralization of those people, sorry, a decentralization of 

people from the board office out into schools, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we have the funding 

guide that was sent to all school divisions a year ago, and what 

is the result of that? And this came from the minister. 

 

[14:30] 

 

The Northwest School Division was told to cut the number of 

educational assistants from 127 to 49 over three years. South 

East Cornerstone was told to cut it by half. Then we had the 

assistant deputy minister defending the government’s plan by 

saying, and I quote, “This type of model provides better service 

and better outcomes.” It’s rather hard to believe any senior 

public servant, particularly in a government that tolerates no 

dissent, saying such things without the endorsement of the 

minister. 

 

So to the minister: in the face of all of this evidence, how can 

the minister expect us to believe that cutting the number of EAs 

[educational assistant] is not government policy? And why 

should we trust your government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, there has been a model in 

place since 2006. The former government, the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] began to look at the model of moving from a 

medically based model to a needs-based model to ensure that 

students across this province could be assured of services, Mr. 

Speaker. 



4958 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2010 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

the changes that our government has made . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member from Saskatoon Fairview 

will allow the Minister of Education to respond without 

interference. I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, there have been 

tremendous improvements to education. Mr. Speaker, we have 

looked at a number of initiatives. We have looked at initiatives 

in the First Nations and Métis programs. We have looked at 

improvements to the pre-kindergarten program, Mr. Speaker. 

But most importantly, Mr. Speaker, we have moved on the 

deficit infrastructure that that NDP government left. 

 

They left a horrific deficit program in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. The last two years of the NDP government, Mr. 

Speaker, not even $50 million, not even 50 was provided for 

infrastructure. Mr. Speaker, with our announcements this year 

in our budget, we’re moving forward with $328 million worth 

of capital construction. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

wish to table the answers to questions 1,530 through 1,532. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 1,530 and to 1,532 are tabled. 

 

I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 1,533 through 1,550. 

 

The Speaker: — Question 1,533 through 1,550 are ordered. 

 

I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House now adjourn to go to committees. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Before I place the question, I just want 

to extend an invitation to all the members of the Legislative 

Assembly to join with Mr. Gerald Gerrand who is retiring as 

our Chief Conflict of Interest Commissioner. The tea will take 

place in the Library Reading Room, beginning immediately 

through until 4 p.m. So at any time, members are welcome to 

drop by and extend their appreciation to Mr. Gerrand. 

 

The Government House Leader has moved this House do now 

adjourn to facilitate the working of committees. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:35.] 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4947 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4947 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4947 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4948 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4948 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4948 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4948 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4948 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4949 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4949 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4949 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4949 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4949 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4949 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4950 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4950 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4950 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4950 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4950 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4951 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4951 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4951 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Administrative Professionals Week 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4951 

 TheatreFest 2010 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4951 

 Victims of Crime Awareness Week 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4952 

 Cancer Awareness Month 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4952 

 Knights of Columbus Benefit Community 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4952 

 Exercising Judgment 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4952 

 Tri-Town Thunder Wins Silver 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4953 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Police Investigation and Member’s Conduct 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4953 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4953 

 Status of Member 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4955 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4955 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4955 

 Kidney Transplants 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4956 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4956 

 Employment of Educational Assistants 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4957 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 4957 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4958 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial Capital 

Commission 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 


