




















































Hansard: March 18, 2010


 

THIRD SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 52 NO. 33A  THURSDAY, MARCH 18, 2010, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Hon. Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
LeClerc, Serge SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4315 

 March 18, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟d like to 

introduce to you and all members of the Assembly a 

distinguished individual who‟s joining us today in your gallery. 

We have with us the current Liberal leader for the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Ryan Bater. Mr. Bater was elected a little 

over a year ago as the Leader of the Liberal Party in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And I‟d like all members of the 

Assembly to join with me in welcoming him to his Assembly 

on behalf of all of us. Take care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the east gallery I‟d 

like to welcome the grade 8 students from Alvin Buckwold 

from the great constituency of Saskatoon Eastview. With the 

students today is Mrs. Christine Rayner, Mrs. Jennifer 

Robertson, and Ms. Keila Campbell. 

 

I‟m looking forward to meeting with the students and 

discussing how the legislature works, and we‟ll meet with them 

after the Assembly . . . and question period. And I would like 

everyone to welcome them to the legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Well it‟s a real pleasure to join the member 

from Saskatoon in welcoming the kids from Alvin Buckwold 

School. Gee, that‟s my old class. That‟s the class I left before I 

came. I was teaching grade 8 at Alvin Buckwold School, but I 

think these kids may have been in kindergarten or just 

preschool when I left. 

 

Anyways I want to join the member in welcoming them here to 

the school. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — Members, as well I‟d like to welcome and ask 

you to join with me in welcoming to our Assembly Mr. Rob 

Parker from the National House of Prayer in Ottawa. Rob is 

seated in the Speaker‟s gallery with members of the 

Saskatchewan House of Prayer. I‟d invite members to join me 

in welcoming Rob to the Assembly today. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It‟s a 

privilege to present a petition today in support of First Nations 

University of Canada. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the provincial government to recognize the importance of 

the First Nations University of Canada, to restore funding 

to the institution, and to call upon their federal 

counterparts also to restore funding to the First Nations 

University of Canada. 

 

This petition is signed by individuals from the city of Regina. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you. It‟s my pleasure today again to stand 

on behalf of the Saskatchewan Student Coalition and present a 

petition in support of the implementation of the Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund that the Saskatchewan Party promised to 

implement in its 2007 election platform. The prayer of this 

petition, Mr. Speaker, reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement the promised Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these signatures are all from Regina. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition concerning . . . well requesting that 

minimum wage increases be indexed. And because minimum 

wage increases are often sporadic and do not always reflect the 

rising cost of living that‟s faced by minimum wage earners, and 

that indexing the minimum wage would ensure that minimum 

wage earners would be able to maintain a standard of living as 

the cost of living increases. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to commit to indexing the Saskatchewan 

minimum wage to ensure that the standard of living of 

minimum wage earners is maintained in the face of cost of 

living increases. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present on behalf of citizens in Moose Jaw. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to again 

present thousands of petitions, signatures on petitions that were 

presented to me in the legislature from people who are 

concerned about the elimination of chiropractic co-funding. 

And the petition reads: 



4316 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2010 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: the possible elimination of government funding 

for chiropractic services. We, in the prayer that reads as 

follows: 

 

. . . respectfully request that the Government of 

Saskatchewan honour the agreement negotiated between 

the Ministry of Health and the Chiropractors‟ Association 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, again the petition is signed by people from a 

wide variety of communities around the province which I will 

again read. There are signs from Regina, Radville, Wilcox, 

Weyburn, Parry, Stoughton, Colonsay, Griffin, Midale, Melfort, 

Birch Hills, St. Brieux, Rose Valley, Naicam, Lake Lenore, 

Spalding, Nipawin, Prince Albert, Muenster, Kinistino, Rama, 

LeRoy, Tribune, Minton, Yellow Grass, Regina Beach, 

Southey, Lumsden, Silton, Strasbourg, Semans, Meadow Lake, 

Makwa, Dorintosh, Loon Lake, Dore Lake, Rapid View, Green 

Lake, Waterhen Lake, Beauval, Goodsoil, Candle Lake, Air 

Ronge, Wynyard, Wadena, West Bend, Foam Lake, Indian 

Head, Kronau, Balgonie, Kipling, Bethune, Cut Knife, Unity, 

Luseland, Denzil, Langham, Saskatoon, Weldon, Shellbrook, 

Crooked River, Debden, Macdowall, St. Louis, Reward, Wilkie, 

Kerrobert, Handel, Evesham, Canora, Big River, Crystal 

Springs, Melville, Hague, Leask, Grandora, Perdue, Osler, 

Bredenbury, Saltcoats, Theodore, Kelvington, Elrose, Kyle, 

Bjorkdale, Lacadena, Wiseton, Hafford, Battleford, Watrous, 

Allan, Milestone, Odessa, Rouleau, Zehner, Grayson, Govan, 

Waldheim, Climax, La Loche, Waterhen Lake, Assiniboia, 

Coronach, Carlyle, Laporte, Vanguard, Shaunavon, Limerick, 

Lafleche, Lumsden, Bethune, Carrot River, Choiceland, 

Ridgedale, Swift Current, Waldeck, Webb, Craven, Claydon, 

Simmie, Perdue, Macklin, Weirdale, Snowden, Parry, Dilke, 

Fort Qu‟Appelle, Mozart, Wishart, Leslie, Fishing Lake, Elfros, 

Cupar, Birsay, Torquay, Redvers, Estevan, Admiral, Earl Grey, 

Whitewood, Stenen, Broadview, Leross, Windthorst, Lampman, 

Frobisher, Big Beaver, Oxbow, Carievale, Ogema, Viceroy, 

Radville, Tribune, Kenosee Lake, Creelman, Dilke, Bulyea, 

Craik, Davidson, Loreburn, Macrorie, Hafford, Govan, 

Rosetown, Moose Jaw, Cadillac, Mankota, Kyle, Maxim, 

Trossachs, Vonda, Waskesiu, Prud‟homme, Lac Vert, Welwyn, 

Manor, Drinkwater, Benson, Tramping Lake, Paynton, Vibank, 

Pense, Estlin, Francis, Phippen, Handel, Mossbank, Creelman, 

and Dilke. 

 

And I think the members of the opposition would be more 

concerned about where they‟re from rather than how I‟m 

pronouncing them. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I stand to request leave to 

introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — I would ask the member to wait to introduce 

guests till we‟re finished with petitions. I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a 

petition to present in support of the middle school for Warman. 

The petition indicates that the school is overcrowded. It was 

built for 350 to 400 students and now over 700 students are 

enrolled and that they expect a further 70 students to enrol in 

Warman Elementary School in the fall of 2010. The prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to recognize the urgency of a middle 

school for the fast growing community of Warman. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, all of these signators on the petition are from 

the town of Warman. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for the reinstatement of the 

domestic abuse outreach program. And we know that the 

domestic abuse outreach program provided a number of 

valuable services to women victims of domestic violence and 

their children, including helping women find emergency shelter, 

and accompanying women to their homes, court, and hospital or 

the police station, as needed. I‟d like to read the prayer, Mr. 

Speaker. Reading the prayer that reads as follows: 

 

. . . respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan take the following action to cause the 

provincial government to reinstate the domestic abuse 

outreach program as a provincial government service and 

make it available in all parts of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing the petition come from 

the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

in support of the long-term care facility in La Ronge. With a 

waiting list of almost one full year for our seniors, it‟s 

appalling. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately invest in the planning and 

construction of new long-term care beds in La Ronge. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good people of La Ronge and area. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition that has been circulated by the Saskatchewan 

Student Coalition — a petition in support of affordable 

undergraduate tuition and a request that the Sask Party 

government‟s actions match its rhetoric. The prayer reads: 



March 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4317 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to implement a long-term tuition 

management strategy in which tuition is increased by an 

average of 2 per cent or the most recent increase to the 

consumer price index. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition in support of reducing the interest on fixed-rate student 

loans to prime. The petition is being circulated by the 

Saskatchewan Student Coalition. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately reduce the interest on 

fixed-rate student loans to the prime rate of borrowing so 

that students can accumulate less debt and focus their 

finances on building their lives here in Saskatchewan. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from the city of 

Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today to present yet another petition on behalf of rural residents 

of Saskatchewan who question why the Sask Party government 

is leaving them behind with respect to issues of water in the 

province, safe and affordable water, Mr. Speaker. These 

individuals have been dealing with the situation for over two 

years and have not yet had any results with their petitions. And 

the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to financially assist the town of Duck 

Lake residents for the good of their health and safety due 

to the exorbitant water rates being forced on them by a 

government agency, and that this government fulfills its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Duck Lake, Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m pleased today to 

rise and present a petition in support of affordable rents and 

housing for The Battlefords, Mr. Speaker. The petition was 

initiated after rents in The Battlefords increased by more than 

40 per cent for seniors, students, immigrants, and others. Mr. 

Speaker, the petitioners: 

 

. . . call upon the Government of Saskatchewan to develop 

an affordable housing program that will result in a greater 

number of quality and affordable rental units to be made 

available to a greater number of people throughout The 

Battlefords, and that will implement a process of rent 

review or rent control to better protect tenants in a 

non-competitive housing environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of the town of 

Battleford and the city of North Battleford. I so present. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 

present a petition signed by residents of Saskatchewan 

concerned about this government‟s disregard for legal and 

constitutional rights. And the prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to direct marriage commissioners to 

uphold the law and the equality rights of all Saskatchewan 

couples, and to withdraw the reference to the 

Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that would allow marriage 

commissioners to opt out of their legal obligation to 

provide all couples with civil marriage services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

The signatures on this petition today are signed by residents of 

Saskatoon. And I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the shameful $1 billion deficit. They recognize that this is 

getting worse, not better. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Sask Party government to start managing our 

provincial finances responsibly and prudently to ensure 

that it does not continue its trend of massive budgetary 

shortfalls, runaway and unsustainable spending, equity 

stripping from our Crowns, and irresponsible revenue 

setting. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These concerned citizens are residents of Estevan and Regina. I 

so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



4318 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2010 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m happy to rise again to 

present a petition in support of the expansion of the graduate 

retention program. Again this petition is about fairness and 

about the need to maintain our best and our brightest here in 

Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master‟s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition is signed by the residents of Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the minister on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To ask for leave 

for the introduction of special guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave for 

introduction of guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my great 

pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 

this honourable Assembly a group of young leaders assembled 

in your gallery. I would like to introduce these Saskatchewan 

student leaders, among them including Jeanette Murphy, the 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology] Students‟ Association representative of Kelsey 

and Wascana campuses; Kyle Addison, the president of the 

University of Regina Students‟ Union; Katie Honey, the 

vice-president external for the University of Regina Students‟ 

Union; Jason Nauta, the vice-president, operations and finance; 

Kaytlyn Barber, vice-president, student affairs; and Chris 

Stoicheff, vice-president external for the University of 

Saskatchewan Students‟ Union. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today these student leaders are joined by their 

colleagues, other post-secondary students. These students are 

here today to represent and support the academic community 

and career needs of Saskatchewan students and the 

Saskatchewan Student Coalition. I‟m looking forward to 

meeting them a little later in the day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would welcome my colleagues on both sides 

of the House to please join me in welcoming these student 

leaders to their Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave to 

introduce guests, please. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has requested leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure to 

join with the minister in welcoming this delegation from the 

Saskatchewan Student Coalition. It‟s important to note that we 

have both the University of Regina and the University of 

Saskatchewan represented as well as SIAST campuses. 

 

The Student Coalition has been doing great work here in the 

province, Mr. Speaker, and they‟ve come today to the 

legislature to observe question period and see what answers are 

available to the causes that they‟ve been promoting here in the 

province. I ask all members to join me in welcoming them. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Canwest Canspell Spelling Bee 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my 

pleasure to attend the 2010 Canwest Canspell Leader-Post 

spelling bee. This competition, which celebrates literacy and 

fosters a desire for students to engage in learning, was made 

possible by the sponsorship of Canada Post, SGI [Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance], the Leader-Post, the Egg Producers of 

Saskatchewan, Air Canada, and Global. 

 

In this region, more than 6,000 students participated in this 

program and, of that, 40 bright young students emerged to the 

regional finals. 

 

I would like to specifically recognize Allyssa Lusung, a grade 6 

that attends St. Francis in my constituency. I am very proud of 

her achievement and would like to recognize her parents, Elsa 

and Eleazar Lusung, who immigrated from the Philippines just 

a few years ago. The success of Allyssa can be attributed in no 

small way to their hard work and dedication to their family. I 

am proud to count Elsa and Eleazar as friends. 

 

Every participant displayed exceptional literacy skills and 

confidence. They each have very bright futures before them. I 

would like to congratulate the winner, Miss McKenzie Warriner 

of Alameda School in Alameda. 

 

I want to thank Mr. Marty Klyne, Leader-Post publisher, for his 

leadership to this event; Mr. Bill Wright as host; and the judges. 

I ask all members to join with me in extending our thanks and 

gratitude to those that ensured the success of the spelling bee 

and to congratulate all the participants. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

North. 



March 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4319 

Junior Achievement Awards 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night I had 

the pleasure to partake in a special event honouring the 

entrepreneurial spirit of our great province‟s youth at the Junior 

Achievement Awards for southern Saskatchewan. 

 

Twenty-two awards were handed out, 10 of which were 

presented to two high schools in Moose Jaw. Mr. Speaker, it 

was a proud moment for me and the city that I call home, and 

an even prouder moment for the students and the parents of 

these outstanding young people. 

 

The Company of the Year went to Two Delicious — that‟s 

T-w-o Delicious, Mr. Speaker — for A.E. Peacock Collegiate in 

Moose Jaw. This is the second consecutive year that that school 

has won this honour. Das Mugs from Vanier Collegiate 

received the award for production excellence. There were many 

other individual awards as well, Mr. Speaker. It was amazing to 

see the ingenuity of these young entrepreneurs. 

 

In the JA [Junior Achievement] course, students form 

companies of which they become shareholders. They then 

operate the companies as a full-fledged business, designing 

products and creating marketing strategies. With the watchful 

eye of supportive teachers and business leaders, these students 

learn about the set-up and operation of a business and about 

making it viable in the marketplace. Last night I saw a display 

of creativity that was just amazing. These young people are the 

very definition of the new Saskatchewan — optimistic, 

energetic, and above all, a positive attitude. 

 

The future of Saskatchewan is in good hands, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Coronation Park. 

 

Z99 Radiothon 

 

Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, we live in a world of hurt, hope, 

and happiness. And we‟re blessed to live in a time when we can 

change much of that hurt to hope and even to huge happiness. 

We live in a world of exceptional acts performed by exceptional 

people. 

 

Today and tomorrow we can all be part of the exceptional acts 

of Z99‟s CC, Lorie, and Buzz. Today and tomorrow Rawlco 

Radio‟s Z99, the station that is world famous for CC‟s raging 

masses — that would be you and me — is having its 23rd 

annual radiothon in support of the neonatal unit at the hospitals 

of Regina, specifically at the Regina General Hospital. 

 

Z99 from 6 a.m. this morning until 6 p.m. tomorrow at the 

Cornwall Centre is providing inspiration, hope, and happiness, 

and this year‟s radiothon is raising funds, Mr. Speaker, for a 

new vision of mother and baby care in Saskatchewan. The 

Rawlco centre for mothers‟ and babies‟ care is getting better 

every day, thanks to literally everyone involved. Z99 needs to 

be listened to and then we need to act. I am asking everyone to 

listen and then to donate to this year‟s mother and baby cause, 

Z99‟s radiothon. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 

Husky Oil Announcement 

 

Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s my pleasure to 

rise in this House and announce more good news for the people 

of Lloydminster and Saskatchewan. Earlier this year, Husky Oil 

announced the construction of an energy-efficient office 

building to serve their needs in expanding their regional 

operations. Just this past Tuesday, I had the opportunity to join 

the Premier in attending the sod-turning ceremony on this 

project. 

 

Mr. John Lau, president and CEO [chief executive officer] of 

Husky, said, “The Lloydminster office building reflects 

Husky‟s commitment to the community and reinforces the 

importance of Husky‟s operations in the region.” 

 

In addition to this state-of-the-art facility, Husky has various 

infrastructure, production, and exploration, including heavy oil 

upgrader, cogeneration power plant, an ethanol plant, a logistics 

centre, and pipelines. 

 

More importantly, Mr. Speaker, this building will be an 

environmentally friendly facility that utilizes energy efficiency 

technology and practices. The project demonstrates the 

commitment that Husky Oil has to maintaining a healthy 

environment as well as their commitment to the people of 

Lloydminster. Innovative and efficient projects like this one 

currently under construction in my great community represent 

the new direction that this province is heading. Mr. Speaker, I 

want to congratulate Husky Oil on its new project, and the 

people of Lloydminster who will benefit from it. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 

 

Vacation Home 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well the 

Premier claims people everywhere want to move or to invest in 

Saskatchewan. Where does he choose to invest? Phoenix, 

Arizona. Just a few months after becoming Premier, where does 

he choose to make his first investment? Phoenix, Arizona. 

 

Rather than show a commitment to his home province by 

buying his vacation home here, he buys a home in the United 

States. Even the Premier now admits with his actions that 

there‟s a lack of affordable housing in this province. How many 

Saskatchewan families can fork over more than $100,000 in 

cash to pay for a vacation home in Phoenix? 

 

The Premier has tried to criticize the Leader of the Opposition 

for investing and living in Alberta during the years he worked 

in the private sector, but now he‟s investing in another country 

while sitting in the Premier‟s office. What‟s wrong with 

Cypress Hills? What‟s wrong with La Plonge? What‟s wrong 

with Duck Mountain or the dozens of other Saskatchewan resort 

areas where thousands of Saskatchewan families have invested? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier likes to talk about Saskatchewan first, 

but doesn‟t practise what he preaches. It is obvious his 

long-term plan does not include living and investing into 

Saskatchewan. I hope he enjoys his retirement in Arizona in 18 

months. 



4320 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2010 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

The Battlefords Projects 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. An article 

published in the Pipeline News this March carries the headline, 

“The Battlefords Billion.” I‟d like to quote from the article, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

A billion dollars is expected to be spent building three 

projects at the Battlefords. The first, already underway, is 

a $250 million natural gas peaking power plant for 

SaskPower. 

 

The second is a $50 million multi-purpose recreational 

facility complex which will start this spring. 

 

The third, and by far the . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member from Athabasca 

will allow the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford to make his 

statement. The member from Cut Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Mr. Chisholm: — “The third, and by far the largest, is the 

recent announcement of a $700 million baseload natural gas 

power plant to be built by Northland Power.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to remind this House that this $700 

million project is the same project the member from The 

Battlefords thought was a bad idea. The mayor of North 

Battleford was quoted in the article saying, “It‟s all very 

exciting for us right now. What it means for us is reassurance.” 

 

Before the members opposite start their same old tirade and 

dismissing the benefits, here‟s what North Battleford‟s city 

manager says, “These aren‟t going to be low-end, minimum 

wage jobs. It bodes well for housing sales. The spinoffs are very 

significant.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact is The Battlefords are moving forward, 

Saskatchewan‟s moving forward, but the tired, old NDP [New 

Democratic Party] are stuck in the past. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Success of the Energy Economy 

 

Mr. Furber: — Mr. Speaker, we know that whenever the 

Premier speaks in public, he‟s always eager to draw a laugh. 

His comedy stylings are famous, Mr. Speaker. And last spring‟s 

budget predictions on potash, were they not so sad, would 

already be a comedy classic. But the Premier, like with potato 

chips, can‟t stop at just one joke about pie in the sky optimism. 

 

So like many experienced comics, he recently decided to try out 

some new material on the road. Live in Lloydminster, Mr. 

Speaker, he drew guffaws from the crowd with comically 

exaggerated claims that Saskatchewan would soon outdo 

Alberta in oil production. Ever the improv artist, Mr. Speaker, 

the Premier kept pushing his premise: Saskatchewan would 

soon outdo Manitoba in hydro power and soon overtake Ontario 

in population and soon outproduce Quebec in poutine. 

 

But seriously, Mr. Speaker, we know that Saskatchewan‟s 

economy in general, and its energy sector in particular, are solid 

performers. So the Premier doesn‟t have to make up tall tales 

when he talks about Saskatchewan‟s energy economy, Mr. 

Speaker. He just has to smile quietly and say thank you, and 

just as all of the oil executives do, give credit to the NDP for the 

royalty and regulatory regime that‟s made it all possible. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[10:30] 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place 

 

Support for Post-Secondary Education 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year, Mr. 

Speaker, when the Sask Party had record revenues, tuition 

increased an average of 3.5 per cent across the province and 

significantly greater in a number of professional colleges. This 

year the Sask Party is facing a $1 billion deficit, and students 

and their families are worried about higher tuition costs at 

university campuses and on SIAST campuses. Will the Sask 

Party listen to Saskatchewan students and ensure that tuition 

increases do not exceed 2 per cent? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, as part of our task of being 

fiscally prudent, we‟ve made sure that investments in 

post-secondary education are a top priority, Mr. Speaker. That‟s 

why in our first two years, Mr. Speaker, we‟ve put more than 

$1.1 billion in post-secondary education. It‟s a record, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The track record for the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, the 

track record for the members opposite, well they know, we 

know what they did with young people. They encouraged them 

to leave the province in droves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The population has increased by almost 30,000 since we‟ve 

been elected, and for large measure, Mr. Speaker, it‟s the 

confidence that young people have within Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan students are paying 

the highest amount of interest on fixed rate student loans across 

the country. Nova Scotia has paid interest to the government‟s 

actual cost of borrowing. Newfoundland and Labrador has 

completely eliminated interest on student loans. But in this 

province, the Sask Party continues to heap record amounts of 

debt on students with interest rates 2.5 per cent above prime. 



March 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4321 

To the minister: in the budget next week, will the Sask Party 

listen to Saskatchewan students and reduce the interest on 

student loans to prime? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

speak to this important issue of student loans, student loans 

were certainly ignored by the members opposite. And that‟s 

why last year, Mr. Speaker, for the first time since 1994, we 

were able to ensure that there were additional dollars. It was the 

first increase since 1994. 

 

Mr. Speaker, certainly the issue of interest, it is an issue that has 

been initiated since the policies were in place by the members 

opposite. It‟s something that we‟re interested in, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly we‟ll be attentive to it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party made a campaign 

promise to create “a Saskatchewan scholarship fund to retain 

our best students.” Yet a full two years into their mandate, Mr. 

Speaker, all we see is more talk and no action. To the minister: 

will the Sask Party fulfill its promise to create a Saskatchewan 

scholarship fund in the next budget? Or is this yet just another 

broken promise from an incompetent government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

We‟ve acted on more than 100 of our promises, fulfilling them, 

Mr. Speaker. The member opposite offers some stark language. 

What he‟s probably missed, Mr. Speaker, is the Scholarship of 

Honour that‟s been established for returning soldiers, Mr. 

Speaker. In addition to that, we‟ve put forward a MITACS 

[Mathematics of Information Technology and Complex 

Systems] scholarship. And what we‟ve been able to do, Mr. 

Speaker, is leverage Saskatchewan dollars with federal funding, 

helping about 30 students already, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is there more to do, Mr. Speaker? Of course there is. But, Mr. 

Speaker, with more than $1.1 billion invested in post-secondary 

education, with the first movement and first support on student 

loans since 1994, our track record is solid. Is there more to do? 

Of course, and we‟re acting in the best interest of the students, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the track record is one of not 

taking responsibility for the promises that they make. Minister 

after minster, Mr. Speaker, stand up, Mr. Speaker, and take no 

accountability for what they‟re doing. They don‟t actually 

realize, Mr. Speaker, that they‟ve been in charge for two years. 

The promises they made about tuition, Mr. Speaker, the 

promises they made about a scholarship fund — all the 

promises, Mr. Speaker, that they‟ve touted for so long, Mr. 

Speaker, they just simply stand day after day and don‟t take 

responsibility for the role that they are in. 

 

From the minister‟s responses, it‟s clear that there‟ll be 

double-digit tuition increases, no reduction for student loan 

interest rates, and not a dime to the long-promised 

Saskatchewan scholarship fund. Why is it fair, Mr. Speaker, for 

the Saskatchewan students to pay for the incompetence that this 

government has caused by their own inability to balance a 

chequebook? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ve fulfilled more than 

100 promises, Mr. Speaker, already. And certainly when it 

comes to the post-secondary file, Mr. Speaker, to ensuring that 

we‟re focusing on our students, our record is solid, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What we‟ve seen, and I‟ll just use one example, Mr. Speaker, 

we saw members opposite begin in 2003 to talk about an 

Academic Health Sciences building. Well, Mr. Speaker, there 

was a lot of talk and there was no action, no construction. We 

came in, Mr. Speaker, and you can count the cranes on the 

campus today, Mr. Speaker, as work is under way. 

 

Another element to their legacy, Mr. Speaker, another element 

is they had the College of Medicine on probation, Mr. Speaker. 

How do you think the people of this province felt about health 

care when they were in power? We‟re acting to ensure there are 

more nurses being trained, more doctors being trained, and the 

Academic Health Sciences building is under construction. 

That‟s action, Mr. Speaker, while the others talk. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Child Care Spaces 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, this is the first time this 

Assembly has seen a gentleman strut sitting down, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other promises that the Sask Party hasn‟t 

fulfilled, and one of those promises was to improve child 

daycare. Mr. Speaker, there are young parents that are trying to 

pursue a post-secondary education, and they‟re finding it very 

difficult to find access to those child daycare spaces. 

 

So my question to the Sask Party, if they could update us: how 

are parents supposed to pursue higher education, build a better 

life for themselves and their children when they can‟t find 

reliable, affordable, and accessible child daycare? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, our government has a 

very strong record in education in the two and a half years that 

we‟ve been elected, as well as not only on education, but the 

child daycare piece, Mr. Speaker. We‟ve funded more spots in 

the first two and a half years than that government ever did in 

its 16 years of existence, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have more work to do and the Minister of 



4322 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2010 

Education is doing that work. We are opening up child daycare 

place spots in many, many different communities around this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — The areas that they have simply ignored is 

our campuses across the province. I‟m going to give the 

members of the legislature a little update: 435 families are 

waiting for 66 spaces at the USSU [University of Saskatchewan 

Students‟ Union] daycare centre; more than 500 families are 

waiting for 45 spaces at the Wascana Daycare at the U of R 

[University of Regina]; and 250 families are waiting for just 45 

on-campus spaces at Awasis child daycare at the U of R; and 

more than 300 students are waiting for 50 spaces at Wascana 

SIAST. Close to 1,500 families waiting for 206 spaces. 

 

Can the government commit today that there will be money in 

next Wednesday‟s budget to deal with this very difficult issue 

facing young parents that are trying to pursue post-secondary 

education? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education, Employment and Labour. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the issue of child 

care is profoundly important and that‟s one of the reasons that 

we‟re moving forward, Mr. Speaker, on student housing. That‟s 

vitally important. 

 

And so what we‟ve seen, Mr. Speaker, is a $34 million 

initiative to move forward at the University of Saskatchewan, a 

$6.8 million initiative on student housing in Prince Albert, and 

— just recently announced — a $9 million initiative regarding 

student housing in Meadow Lake. All the members opposite 

would have to do is talk to some of those parents that are going 

to be living in student housing, Mr. Speaker, to see the 

connection between obviously their studies and their families. 

And we‟re helping to take care of the students‟ families, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I‟d just like to remind the ministers to 

have some relevance to the question. I recognize the member 

from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another particular 

problem is the lack of child daycare spaces for infants and 

toddlers. The Wascana child care centre at the U of R doesn‟t 

accept children until they‟re 18 months of age. The U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan] campus daycare doesn‟t accept 

children until they‟re two and a half. That leaves a very large 

gap between when paternal benefits run out and when a child 

can be enrolled in child daycare, assuming that parents can find 

a space. 

 

So to the government, to the government: what are these parents 

supposed to do? And why is this government not dealing with 

this very difficult issue facing parents that are trying to pursue a 

post-secondary education and better their lives? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, let‟s 

compare where we started two and half years ago. Two and a 

half years ago, if we compare our province, the province of 

Saskatchewan, to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I‟m having some 

difficulty hearing the response, and I‟m certain the visitors are 

as well. So would the members allow the minister now to 

respond to the question presented? I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, if we compare our 

province to the province to the east, Manitoba, about the same 

population, Mr. Speaker, when we came to government in 2007, 

we had less child care spaces than Manitoba. In the two and a 

half years we‟ve added over 1,000 child care spaces in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, a record that we‟re proud of. There‟s 

more work to do, Mr. Speaker. I‟m not sure what it would have 

looked like if it would have maintained under the NDP 

government where they ignored the issue, Mr. Speaker. We‟re 

in a time of growth in this province, and we know there‟s more 

to do. But, Mr. Speaker, we‟re taking action. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the interesting 

observations of people who study this is that when things are 

going well for the government, it‟s because they‟ve done such a 

terrific job. And when there‟s difficulty, well let‟s blame the 

former NDP government. We have 1,500 people waiting for 

child daycare spaces on our campuses at the U of R, the U of S, 

and Wascana SIAST. We‟re simply asking a question that 

parents want to hear the answer to. 

 

Can they expect any money in the budget to deal with 1,500 

families waiting for child care when there‟s only 206 spaces on 

those campuses? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Once again, Mr. Minister, in a short 

two and a half years — we‟ll compare our record to the former 

government‟s record, Mr. Speaker — we‟ve increased the 

number of registered child care spaces in this province by 31 

per cent over where the NDP left off, Mr. Speaker. Thirty-one 

per cent in two and a half years; it‟s a good record. Is there 

more to do? Yes, there is.  

 

The member opposite is asking what are you going to do in the 

budget. Well, there‟s only a few more sleeps and they can find 

out what will happen on March 24th, but I can guarantee you 

it‟ll be continuation of a very stellar record by this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Support for Low-Income People 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. All 

Saskatchewan people have a right to social and economic 

security. Yet today we know one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in poverty. This week the government 



March 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4323 

refused to answer written questions on social assistance 

caseloads in this province, questions identical to ones they‟ve 

answered on four previous occasions. That suggests that the 

problem‟s getting worse — much worse, not better. 

 

To the minister: why is this government hiding these caseload 

numbers? Why are they trying to minimize the growing 

problem of poverty in our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

should know that there are more written questions sent to the 

Ministry of Social Services, probably about three times more 

than any other ministry. And it is very taxing for the officials to 

get the answers in a timely manner. And they are trying. So 

therefore I will definitely defend my employees in their ability 

. . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Minister of Social 

Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — The NDP continuously criticize the 

government for their spending, so we‟ve increased the housing 

budget. We have increased shelter allowances, rental 

supplements, and emergency shelter allowances. We‟ve 

definitely increased significantly funding for disabilities. We‟ve 

increased funding significantly for CBOs [community-based 

organization]. We‟ve increased funding for child welfare, and 

we‟ve increased funding for seniors. What would that member 

opposite like us to cut? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we know the questions that we‟ve 

asked. They‟ve got the data right at hand. This is not new 

information. This is amazing she would say such a thing. But 

we‟ll talk about some other things that are increasing in this 

province. But we know that this minister has told The 

StarPhoenix last fall that she didn‟t think eliminating poverty 

was a realistic goal. in fact. 

 

But there are a lot of costs over which the provincial 

government has control, things they could do something about. 

Well here are some things that are increasing in this province: 

rising rents with some of the lowest vacancy rates in all of 

Canada. And this government spends next to nothing on 

affordable housing. They‟ve increased rates for water, 

electricity, natural gas, camping, driving a car, or even riding an 

STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] bus. And next 

week, more low-income people will be forced to live in pain, 

thanks to the government‟s cuts to chiropractic coverage. 

 

To the minster: why is this government making it less 

affordable for families struggling to make ends meet? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, time and time and time 

again, I have spoken to the fact that we have set precedent in 

our country for making housing affordable for our clients. We 

have increased the housing, the shelter allowance, the rental 

supplements. We have increased the Saskatchewan employment 

supplement, and we have indexed the housing supplements to 

the rates within the community that the client lives. 

 

We have completed over 537 units for social housing. We 

currently have over 900 in construction and an additional 200 

that are in development and planning. That is over double what 

the NDP did in any given two-year time stretch. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we‟ll talk about those numbers 

more in committee because I‟m not sure if she‟s quite right on 

when she talks about 900 units. But this government is 

imposing real costs on Saskatchewan families. And there will 

be real consequences for those families, for taxpayers, and for 

our economy. 

 

People can‟t afford chiropractic care will lose time from work 

or end up going to emergency rooms. Workers who can‟t afford 

rising rents, rising utility rates, and other rising costs will flee 

this province, making it harder for businesses to recruit 

workers. This government needs to stop making life less 

affordable and start making better choices. 

 

To the minister: will the government commit today to action in 

next week‟s budget that will make life more affordable for 

families struggling here to make ends meet? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And that 

member opposite knows it‟s just a few more sleeps. He just 

needs to be a little patient when the budget will be introduced. 

 

But he said that we make poor choices, so I am again curious. 

What does the member opposite think was a poor choice? Was 

the tax cuts that took all of the citizens, a lot of them seniors, 

off of the tax rolls, was that a poor choice? Eighty thousand 

low-income people off of tax rolls, was that a poor choice? Was 

increasing shelter rates, was that a poor choice? Was increasing 

supplements for low-income seniors, was that a poor choice? 

Was increasing spaces for child welfare, children that come into 

our care, was that a poor choice? Was increasing CBO funding, 

was that a poor choice? 

 

We have done all of those, Mr. Speaker. I think that member 

needs to stand up and say which one was a poor choice. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Forthcoming Budget 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. A recent article 



4324 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2010 

in the Canadian Business magazine says, I quote, “For all its 

reputation for being attuned to business, the Saskatchewan 

Party government of Premier Brad Wall has a terrible track 

record at budget forecasting.” That‟s what the business 

community is saying about this government — a terrible track 

record with respect to budgeting. 

 

We know that what this Sask Party‟s proposing as it relates to 

job cuts is being called nonsense by insiders, Mr. Speaker, yet 

they seem that they‟re going to forge ahead. To the minister: 

what is he doing to ensure that the Sask Party doesn‟t table 

another failed budget? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, our government has 

promised a balanced, prudent, responsible budget. And it‟s just 

a few more sleeps, the members opposite just need to be patient 

for a few more sleeps, and they will see a budget that this 

province will be proud of. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we keep hearing about a 

few more sleeps, a few more sleeps. It‟s kind of child-like 

language and consistent with sort of fairy tales, and certainly 

consistent with the kind of fantasyland budget that they put 

together last year as it related to revenues. 

 

But this year, Mr. Speaker, the problem is that fantasyland 

relates to the cuts that they‟re putting together that their, I 

understand, their civil service is telling them won‟t work, Mr. 

Speaker. But the Finance minister is very, very fond, and all 

members of that caucus, in blaming all the problems on potash 

and saying no one could have predicted what happened. But of 

course that‟s not true. The same article from Canadian Business 

says, I quote, “Today, NDP finance critic Harry Van Mulligan‟s 

March 2009 characterization of the budget as „blind optimism‟ 

sounds prescient.” 

 

To the minister: he didn‟t listen to the NDP‟s legitimate 

concerns last year, and his budget was a disaster as a result. 

Will he listen this year? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I do have to make a comment that I 

did listen to the members opposite when they were government, 

and they used the term “just a few more sleeps” all the time. So 

that‟s actually where that terminology came from. So if he 

needs . . . Yes, it‟s a term that was used by the NDP many, 

many times over. Budget day is on the 24th, so that is when he 

will get the details of the budget, but . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I‟d ask the members to allow 

the minister to respond to the question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: —Yes, because that member has said, a 

number of times, irresponsible spending. I know my own critic 

has just referenced irresponsible spending. So we have a 

number of members opposite asking us to spend more. Which 

message is it? Should we spend less or should we spend more? 

 

We have been asked to spend more in revenue sharing. We‟ve 

been asked to spend more on schools. We‟ve been asked to 

spend more on housing. We‟ve been asked to spend more on a 

number of areas. Which is it that the NDP want us to do? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s simply about having a 

plan, some direction, a strategy, something that this government 

is as deficit of as they are money. Mr. Speaker, whether it‟s a 

golden parachute for their failed candidate in the by-election, 

100 per cent increases to the salaries of political staff, or a 

$26,000-a-day consulting fee for their political friend, this 

government is clearly not leading by example. 

 

To the minister: will the Sask Party be rolling back their gifts to 

friends, golden parachutes, and massive wage increases to their 

political staff? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to say 

that our budget is one that this province and the people of 

Saskatchewan will be proud of. 

 

And what is our plan? Well you know what? We have the 

lowest unemployment rate in Canada. Our plan is to keep that 

going. Mr. Speaker, we have for the first time in decades a 

growing population, and our plan is to keep that going. Mr. 

Speaker, we have put investments into infrastructure, and our 

plan is to keep those investments going — unprecedented 

amounts of money. Mr. Speaker, for the first time in many, 

many, many years we have growing numbers of students. Our 

plan is to keep all of that going as well as keeping the province 

strong, keeping the finances strong, and supporting those most 

vulnerable within our society. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, again it speaks to the 

misunderstanding by the Sask Party government of what‟s 

going on in Saskatchewan. While we have a growing 

population, we have static employment — no gain. We have 

less people working in this province and we see it through the 

social assistance numbers that are skyrocketing. Mr. Speaker, 

far more people on social assistance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this week we‟ve heard that this budget process has 

been extremely chaotic, that it has been without vision, no 

central theme, no direction, and no plan. Our inside sources 

have told us that the Sask Party is making cuts that they don‟t 

understand, proposing a strategy that is “nonsense,” that they‟re 

refusing to lead by example, and that Saskatchewan people are 

going to keep paying the price for the Sask Party‟s 

incompetence. Now it‟s our understanding that this budget 

process has been so disorganized that the budget isn‟t even at 

the printer‟s yet. 



March 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4325 

My question is: will the minister step up to the plate, lead by 

example, and fix this failed budget before it‟s too late? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I think that we need to 

remind the members opposite that we have the lowest 

unemployment rate in our nation and that Saskatchewan‟s 

unemployment rate is at 4.3 per cent and Canada is 8.2 per cent. 

That‟s a record we‟re proud of, and that‟s a record we plan on 

sustaining. And Saskatoon and Regina have the second and 

third lowest unemployment rates in Canada in the major cities. 

 

Employment is up 3,100 year over year. There is 12,000 good, 

full-time jobs created in February of 2010 in our province. 

There are over 6,300 jobs on saskjobs.ca today, Mr. Speaker. 

We have the lowest youth unemployment in our country, Mr. 

Speaker. So I don‟t know what the member opposite is talking 

about because we have a very good record in our country for 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member from 

Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Reality check for the minister once 

again. What we know is that the financial incompetence of this 

government is unprecedented. What we know is that it‟s come 

at a huge cost to Saskatchewan people, those individuals for 

example that are seeking domestic abuse support. Those 

individuals for example that are students that are trying to get 

an education and enrich their lives. Those individuals for 

example that are paying utility rates that are having huge 

increases being forced upon them. Civil servants within our 

province and those people in the province who are dependent 

on services and programs that they provide. And what we know 

is we‟re going to see tax increases across this province as a 

result of their broken promise to municipalities. 

 

My question, my question to the minister opposite: what does 

he say, what does he say to all these individuals, all these 

organizations for whom they‟re forcing huge increases and 

affecting their quality of life? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Those increases that the member 

opposite from the party that just has negative things to say 

about our province simply have not taken place. I have gone 

through a number of things that have improved within our . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I‟d ask the members 

who just finished asking the question to allow the minister to 

respond. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — We will be introducing a budget on 

the 24th. And we have promised the people of Saskatchewan 

that it will be balanced, it will be prudent, and it will be 

responsible. The members opposite only to have wait a few 

more days. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to question 793 and 794. 

 

The Speaker: — 793 and 794 questions are tabled. I recognize 

the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 795 through 883. 

 

The Speaker: — 795 through 883 are ordered. I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 884 through 888. 

 

The Speaker: — Questions 884 through 888 are tabled. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Rural Health Care 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. At the 

end of my remarks I will be tabling the motion and the motion 

will read: 

 

That this Assembly commends the current government‟s 

actions as it works towards addressing the many deficits in 

rural health care left by the previous NDP government. 

 

The Speaker: — [Inaudible] . . . technical problem with the 

clock. Make sure it‟s corrected. I recognize the member from 

Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s great to be in this 

debate to really to contrast the record of the previous NDP 

government and the Saskatchewan Party government‟s record 

in the last two and a half years. As we know, and as the voters 

of Saskatchewan pointed out in the 2007 election when the 

NDP did not elect any rural members, spoke volumes about 

what the Saskatchewan people thought of the NDP health care 

or lack of health care programs in all of Saskatchewan, but 

particularly in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As we know, under the NDP created some of the longest 

waiting lists in Canada. And contrast to the Saskatchewan Party 

government‟s plan to reduce waiting lists to only three months. 

We have a plan. When we were in opposition, we asked the 

NDP government many times about their targets, what are their 

plans. And they never did have a target to reduce surgical 

waiting lists. The Saskatchewan Party government does. 

 

[11:00] 

 

What else did the NDP do while they were in their 16 years of 

rule? Well they closed 52 rural hospitals. And that was while 



4326 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2010 

. . . It happened in 1993 when the then associate minister of 

Health, Lorne Calvert, was bringing that into the province. And 

it‟s very revealing that as a premier he didn‟t do anything to 

address those inequities in rural Saskatchewan health care. 

Under the NDP, up to 1999, closed 421 hospital beds. So 

there‟s just a record of cutbacks and neglect in rural 

Saskatchewan and in Saskatchewan concerning health care. 

 

A number of other issues I‟d like to raise concerning the NDP 

record. In 2003 the average surgical waiting time in 

Saskatchewan was 32.6 weeks. That was the worst in Canada at 

that time. It was quite, not only embarrassing but it was 

dangerous to the citizens of Saskatchewan to be waiting that 

long for surgeries. In 2004, 93 doctors left Saskatchewan, and 

that was at the same time while every other province in . . . 

[inaudible] . . . had an increase in doctors. 

 

The NDP eliminated 136 long-term care beds since 2002. As 

we all know, our Health minister announced some time ago that 

there‟ll be 13 new long-term care facilities built in 

Saskatchewan. That‟s quite a contrast between what the then 

NDP government was doing and what the new Saskatchewan 

Party government has been doing since the 2007 election. 

 

Many other things have happened under the NDP that just 

caused a lot of concern in health care in the province. Under the 

NDP, they delisted many drugs, including insulin and other 

diabetic supplies, in their 1992 budget. That was their first 

budget as government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know the story is they didn‟t have enough 

money and the economy was bad, but after 16 years of rule, 

well maybe some of that concerns could be laid at their table 

because they were the government for 16 years. And we 

definitely agree the economy was very bad during 16 years of 

NDP government. 

 

Under the Saskatchewan Party government, we‟ve done some 

amazing things as far as the economy. In our budgets, we paid 

off 40 per cent of the debt in the province. That means that 

there‟s more money. Instead of paying interest on that debt, 

more money is going to health care in the province. We 

eliminated taxes to 80,000 residents in Saskatchewan — more 

disposable income in those people‟s pockets. 

 

Other things that the NDP did to ruin the economy in 

Saskatchewan during their 16 years of rule, they. . . Well before 

that, previous government back in the Blakeney days, they 

nationalized the potash industry. And that was a disastrous 

move on the part of the NDP back in those times. It literally 

took decades before business confidence returned to the 

province. And now, as we see now is we have the potash 

industry that it is just doing amazing things and growing. 

There‟s record number of expansions under way in the potash 

industry. The potash industry has great confidence in the future 

of Saskatchewan and of the potash industry in the world, and 

we‟re going to see great things happen in the future for the 

potash industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, other things that the NDP did which really hurt rural 

Saskatchewan is they eliminated the GRIP [gross revenue 

insurance program] program. And this all speaks to, it speaks to 

rural health care and health care in particular because the 

government needs the adequate revenue in order to support 

health care in the province. And under the NDP the economy 

was very poor, and they admitted to it. I mean they made 

comments that it was just impossible to grow the economy at 

any reasonable rate that other provinces were doing and the 

federal government were doing as far as economic growth. 

 

And even their former leader Tommy Douglas said, without 

adequate revenues and a growing economy, government can‟t 

do anything as far as, you know, social injustice, social 

services, health care, and all those infrastructure. Those are all 

things . . . And that‟s something that the NDP government 

forgot about. You have to have a growing economy in order to 

fix the roads and highways. And that‟s what we have done in 

the Saskatchewan Party government since the 2007 election. 

We‟ve put record amounts of money into infrastructure, 

building up the roads and infrastructure in the province. 

 

Contrast that to the cutbacks that the NDP continued to carry 

out. As far as health care, insufficient funding to the College of 

Medicine over the last decade as the NDP were in government. 

And it actually caused the College of Medicine in Canada to be 

put on probation and risk losing accreditation. Not only . . . 

Again, that was embarrassing. But again, what a terrible 

situation that the NDP government put on the College of 

Medicine in the province. 

 

As we know, the NDP would just like to identify different 

problems needed to be addressed. As an example, the NDP 

spent $2 million on a study that identified $1.2 billion in 

infrastructure repairs needed in the province. And then what? 

They did nothing about it. Well the Saskatchewan Party 

government is doing something about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, other areas that they identified problems and never 

did anything about is, according to a CIHI [Canadian Institute 

of Health Information] report, where Saskatchewan has the 

oldest equipment in the country. And the average equipment 

age is 13.5 years. Again the NDP did a lot of talking but they 

never did any of the walking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s an interesting quote from the Leader-Post on 

November 14th, 2003. And I quote: 

 

Romanow also admitted that his government was wrong 

to slash enrollments in nurse training programs. In 

1991-92, more than 500 nurses graduated from the 

programs. By 1998-99, the number of graduates had 

fallen to 115. The provincial government has since 

increased the number of training spots and attempt to deal 

with the severe shortage of nurses. 

 

Well there the former NDP premier admitted how wrong they 

were in slashing enrolments in nurse training. And again, 

contrast that to what the Saskatchewan Party government has 

been doing on nurse recruitment — 206 more nursing full-time 

equivalents as of December 30th, 2009. We set the target at 800 

and we are 75 per cent there. That is quite a contrast to what the 

NDP did in their 16 years of government. 

 

And in terms of nursing retention rates, we‟ve gone from the 

worst in Canada a few years back to the best retention rate in 

Canada. And again it also goes hand in hand with the economy. 



March 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4327 

When you have the nurses that are trained in Saskatchewan and 

they have spouses that are looking for jobs, well they‟ll stay. 

First they have a job in Saskatchewan as a nurse and their 

spouse will have a job as well in the booming, growing 

economy. 

 

There‟s a number of quotes from the former NDP members on 

the other side which talked about, they did not want to train 

nurses in Saskatchewan. The comments were made, why would 

the Saskatchewan government train nurses when they‟re only 

going to leave to other places to work? Well they never got it 

through their minds and through their brain that you have to 

have a growing economy. When you train the nurses and you 

need the nurses, well you have to make sure that they have a job 

here and that they want to stay here. So we‟re certainly doing 

very well as far as nurse retention and training and recruitment. 

 

Again I‟d like to quote from the Saskatchewan Registered 

Nurses‟ Association news release, March 19th, 2008. And I 

quote: 

 

“For the first time in over a decade, I am confident that 

the RN shortage is getting the attention it deserves,” said 

Donna Brunskill, RN, Executive Director of the 

Saskatchewan Registered Nurses‟ Association . . . 

 

“The trend downward since the initial health reform in the 

early 1990‟s has been alarming,” Brunskill said. “The 

increase in the number of RNs is good news. Our number 

increased from 8,958 last year to 9,151 this year.” . . . 

 

“The partnership of government, health authorities and 

SRNA in this ethically sound recruitment endeavour will 

alleviate the strains on our RNs and result in better quality 

care for the citizens of our province,” Brunskill said. 

 

Quite an amazing quote from the registered nurses. 

 

Now to go on to some of the other improvements that the 

Saskatchewan Party has done in primary health care in rural 

Saskatchewan. We now have 91 primary health care teams — 

70 established and one in development — and of these, 45 are 

in rural Saskatchewan, 17 are in metropolitan areas, and eight 

are in northern Saskatchewan. We have a provincial diabetes 

program, also a HealthLine — a 24-hour health, advice, and 

information line — vendors selected for the provincial primary 

health care electronic health record, and the introduction of 

publicly funded midwifery services in Saskatchewan. All 

making great improvements to our health care in the province. 

 

We have also provided $2 million to the Saskatchewan 

Academic Health Sciences Network to enhance training for 

health sciences students and assist in meeting our province‟s 

need for physicians and nurses. The announcement was made at 

the Regina General Hospital this past Monday. Also distributive 

medical education model will enable medical students to 

complete some of their studies and some residencies in Regina, 

providing an opportunity to train and establish relationships 

outside the usual practice environment. 

 

Also other improvements that the Saskatchewan government 

has made is expansion to other communities and other health 

physicians are also being planned. 

The strategy will also develop an enhancement of the physician 

application and licensure process in the development of the 

Saskatchewan-based program to assist foreign-trained 

physicians, provide $54.9 million for medical equipment 

through including diagnostic and imaging equipment, $37.7 

million provided to several regions to continue the facility 

projects and major upgrades, $100 million in 2008 and 2009 to 

regions to address urgent health facility maintenance and repair 

requirements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some very, very important improvements that we 

have made in the health care system is implementation of the 

provincial clinical pathway for hip replacement saw 307 more 

hip and knee replacement surgeries in 2008-2009 compared to 

2007-2008 — major strides and improvements in health care in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, 18,000 Saskatchewan seniors are receiving 

enhanced benefits to the senior income plan. That‟s $190 per 

month for senior citizens up to a maximum of $155 per person 

for seniors couples. Mr. Speaker, just a few of the 

improvements that Saskatchewan government has done since 

the 2007 election and certainly is in great contrast to the years 

of neglect of the NDP government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to move: 

 

That this Assembly commends the current government‟s 

action as it works towards addressing the many deficits in 

rural health care left by the previous NDP government. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Biggar has moved: 

 

That this Assembly commends the current government‟s 

actions as it works towards addressing the many deficits 

in rural health care left by the previous NDP government. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

from The Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Taylor: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to speak today in the 75-minute debate. The member 

opposite had 15 minutes to outline how he wants to commend 

the current government‟s actions. And, Mr. Speaker, I and my 

colleagues have 10 minutes to speak to this motion. It was 

interesting that even though he had 15 minutes to speak, the 

member from Biggar couldn‟t use that time fully to talk about 

commending the current government actions. I can only think, 

Mr. Speaker, that as he demonstrated, there aren‟t enough 

actions over there to commend, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:15] 

 

What he forgot about the current government‟s actions is that, 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen this government mismanage its fiscal 

resources to the extent that individuals in this province are 

going to have to pay for that mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. 

We‟re going to see, as we did this year, a continuation, Mr. 

Speaker, of communities waiting for health facilities to be 

announced and brought forward in their communities, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟re going to see a continuation of a deterioration of 



4328 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2010 

services in health care, Mr. Speaker, and we‟re going to see a 

continuation of municipalities struggle in competition with each 

other for physicians and nurses and other health professionals 

within their communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There really wasn‟t much to commend about the current 

government actions, Mr. Speaker. And the member from Biggar 

couldn‟t even take 15 minutes to go through what it was that he 

wanted to commend. But, Mr. Speaker, he wanted to go back 

. . . They‟re rear-view mirror looking, Mr. Speaker. That 

rear-view mirror looking continues to this day, despite the fact 

that they‟ve had two years, more than two years, Mr. Speaker, 

to establish a record of their own. They are so afraid of their 

record, Mr. Speaker, that they continue to look in that rear-view 

mirror to look back 16 years. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they should go back a little more than 16 

years, Mr. Speaker, because they talk about, they talk about 

some of the challenges that the New Democratic Party faced 

when they came to government in 1991. Go back just a year 

before 1991, Mr. Speaker, and we will see the development by 

the Conservative Party at that time, Mr. Speaker, the cousins of 

the Sask Party, the development of a $15 billion debt that 

virtually bankrupted this province, Mr. Speaker, bankrupted the 

province to the point where municipalities, school boards, and 

health districts, Mr. Speaker, had to find ways to deal with that 

debt rang up by the Conservatives. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party opposite is doing exactly 

the same thing that the Devine Tories did, Mr. Speaker, and it‟s 

falling again to municipalities, school boards and health 

districts, Mr. Speaker, to pay for that, pay for it, Mr. Speaker. 

We will learn from history, Mr. Speaker, but the members 

opposite should stop repeating it so that we don‟t have to pay 

again and again and again for their big mistakes. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let‟s just think about what‟s happened in the 

last year, Mr. Speaker. They had a $10.2 billion — billion 

dollar — budget, Mr. Speaker, for expenditures. And what did 

they have to do with that $10 billion? 

 

Well they had to cancel projects around the province, Mr. 

Speaker, because they couldn‟t find the money to fund facilities 

in Meadow Lake, in Shellbrook, in Prince Albert, in Tisdale, in 

Kelvington, in Watrous. In Biggar, Mr. Speaker, the Biggar 

Diamond Lodge deferred for another year because of the 

mistakes of the members opposite. Kerrobert, Rosetown, Maple 

Creek, Kipling, Radville, Redvers. Every single person in this 

province that wants a children‟s hospital has to wait yet another 

year, Mr. Speaker, because of the current actions of the current 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in my own constituency, people who care about the 

delivery of mental health in this province, Mr. Speaker, are 

waiting yet another year and maybe more because of the 

actions, the fiscal actions of the government opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. A motion that calls for a commendation of the current 

government actions can‟t even be supported by the members 

opposite. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in years prior to this, New Democrats in 

‟06-07 had a $6.8 billion budget and in ‟05-06 a $6.5 billion 

budget. But, Mr. Speaker, what were we able to move forward? 

Mr. Speaker, we built a new hospital in Swift Current, Mr. 

Speaker, with almost half the revenue, half the revenue that the 

members opposite have. We built a brand new hospital. 

 

We did integrated facilities in Outlook and Maidstone and 

Ile-a-la-Crosse and Moosomin and Preeceville, Mr. Speaker. 

We announced and started that project, Mr. Speaker. We also 

announced and started the project in Humboldt, Mr. Speaker. 

Oliver Lodge, Hudson Bay, Lloydminster, and Prince Albert, 

Mr. Speaker. On half the revenues, roughly half the revenues 

the members opposite have, we supported health care facilities 

across this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the member opposite with $10.2 billion has to defer 

projects all over rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker: Meadow 

Lake, Shellbrook, Prince Albert, Tisdale, Kelvington, Watrous, 

Biggar, Kerrobert, Rosetown, Maple Creek, Radville, Redvers, 

and Kipling, Mr. Speaker. It‟s just shameful that the members 

opposite think that they‟ve got something to say about how 

their actions are helping people in rural Saskatchewan in 

particular. 

 

And the member opposite sits there with the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook sitting next to him talking about what 

we‟re doing for rural physicians, Mr. Speaker. The member 

from Rosthern-Shellbrook has been working for a number of 

years — not very successfully, I might add — for physicians in 

the town of Shellbrook . . . Spiritwood, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think if there‟s great success to be had, the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook would be up talking about this, but he 

can‟t, Mr. Speaker, because of the failure of this party‟s actions 

in the last two years to support the promises he was making in 

his community in 2007. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this mismanagement of revenues has created 

no end of problems across this province. And in fact if we look 

at some numbers, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite in 2007 

promised, promised, Mr. Speaker, to deal with the physician 

shortage across rural Saskatchewan. Well in fact, Mr. Speaker, 

if we look at healthcareersinsask.ca, the website, we will notice 

that rural or physician vacancies in this province since 2007 is 

actually up 50 per cent — 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker, the number 

of vacancies. That‟s a great failure in commitments, Mr. 

Speaker. Nothing to commend there about government‟s 

current actions, Mr. Speaker. That is a failure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2007 the number of vacancies listed for nurses 

in the province, Mr. Speaker, hasn‟t changed very much to 

today. If you look today, Mr. Speaker, there‟s still 214 

vacancies for nurses across this province. And if you dig into 

that, Mr. Speaker, the majority of those, Mr. Speaker, are also 

in rural Saskatchewan. The number of doctors, Mr. Speaker, it‟s 

now up to 123, the vacancies in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also the member from Biggar talks about waiting 

lists. Well, Mr. Speaker, the waiting lists in Saskatchewan have 

increased since 2007, not decreased. And, Mr. Speaker, we 

know that activities that were put in place and, Mr. Speaker, for 

which funding had been announced for reducing waiting lists in 

Saskatchewan have not been followed up by the current 

government in their two years, Mr. Speaker. In fact they‟ve 

been deferred. 



March 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4329 

In point, Mr. Speaker, the surgical care centre that was 

supposed to be built here in Regina. Surgical care centre was 

intended to ensure that we have more time in our operating 

rooms in our hospitals. Take the day surgery or surgery that 

doesn‟t require hospital stays out of the hospital, out of the 

operating rooms, and create more time available to deal with 

some of the more significant surgeries like hips and knees, Mr. 

Speaker, where our waiting lists are the longest. But waiting 

lists are longer now because this government misspent and can‟t 

follow through on not only the previous government‟s promises 

but their own promises, Mr. Speaker, to fund a surgical care 

centre. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think the most telling tale is that the 

government‟s current actions, which the member from Biggar 

wants to commend, has made it absolutely impossible to 

proceed with the children‟s health centre in the city of 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, something that the Sask Party 

campaigned on, something that the New Democrats did commit 

to, Mr. Speaker, and started the process, and now, Mr. Speaker, 

deferred again because of the current actions of the current 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see my time is up. I thank you very much for the 

opportunity to speak on this motion. And I look forward to the 

debate brought forward by my colleagues later in the morning. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I look 

forward to entering into the debate today. And I am pleased to 

be able to rise in the House today and speak in support of the 

motion put forward by the member from Biggar. And I‟m going 

to read the motion again because I know the member opposite 

didn‟t really address the rural health care which is the focus of 

the motion: 

 

That this Assembly commends the current government‟s 

action as it works toward addressing the many deficits in 

rural health care left by the previous NDP government. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We are working very hard 

to break the cycle that was developing in Saskatchewan by 

exporting our trained doctors and nurses and health 

professionals to other provinces and other countries.  

 

And that is why our government has launched a province-wide 

agency aimed at recruiting and retaining more physicians to 

rural and urban Saskatchewan. Now this physician recruitment 

agency will act as a one-stop point of contact for physicians 

seeking to set up practice in Saskatchewan. I think this is a 

very, very positive move that we are making. It will also 

enhance and coordinate recruitment efforts across the province, 

working closely with health regions and communities to 

addressing the needs of their physicians. Mr. Speaker, we are 

taking action. 

 

Now this agency will focus first on retaining our own medical 

graduates because we know that our students that come from 

Saskatchewan, that are trained here, are more than willing to 

locate here. So the people of Saskatchewan will benefit from 

the dollars spent training doctors in this province. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as many of the members know, my husband 

teaches biology at the University of Regina. And he‟s been 

employed there as a laboratory instructor for over 20 years. And 

one of things that has really caused him great concern, probably 

within the last 10 years, was the amount of very highly 

qualified students who graduated top of their class but were not 

able to get into the University of Saskatchewan. And that‟s why 

our government has made great strides in ensuring that the 

brightest and the best of our universities are able to be trained 

here. 

 

Now over the next four years, the physician recruitment 

strategy commits to reducing the annual turnover of physicians 

in Saskatchewan to less than 10 per cent. We are also making a 

commitment to increase the number of the University of 

Saskatchewan medical students and residents who will train 

outside Saskatoon by 25 per cent. These are going to be 

students getting real instruction right within our province, 

increasing the number of the University of Saskatchewan 

medical graduates establishing practice in Saskatchewan by 10 

per cent. This is commitments that we are making: increasing 

the percentage of Canadian-trained doctors working in 

Saskatchewan by an additional 10 per cent, retaining and 

attracting physicians as a means of ensuring timely access to 

quality health care. That is a top priority of this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are working hard to solve this dilemma of our 

physician shortage and putting patient first by fulfilling our 

commitment to establishing a physician recruitment agency. 

Now the overall supply of physicians has been steadily 

increasing since we formed government. And the head count of 

licensed physicians in Saskatchewan including temporary 

licensed locums was 1,742 at the end of March 2007. Today we 

have 1,906 at the end of December 2009. Now that‟s an 

increase of 72 general practitioners and 92 specialists. So that‟s 

an overall increase of 164 doctors in Saskatchewan. 

 

So when the members opposite make statements that in fact that 

we have a negative count, I‟m not sure how they would 

consider 164 more doctors being less than. So I think that 

maybe they will have to recheck their figures. 

 

In 2008-2009 a total of 84 undergraduates‟ training seats and 84 

residency seats were filled, and that is an increase from 60 seats 

in the program. Mr. Speaker, that is a commitment that our 

government has made to train more of our locally owned, 

educated students. We‟ve made a commitment of 3.5 million to 

develop a comprehensive physician recruitment strategy and 

better support for our rural physicians. And as we said, this 

whole motion speaks to rural health care. Adding 40 new 

training seats and 60 additional residence training seats 

positions to medical school enrolment, this is allowing our 

students to have the opportunity to be educated here in 

Saskatchewan and stay in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, our 

government is committed to providing education for our health 

care professionals in this province. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government also had an agreement signed 

with SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] that has produced 

major progress towards the target of employing 800 more 

registered nurses and registered psychiatric nurses in 



4330 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2010 

Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Speaker, our government was not 

afraid to set a target. Now some people may be afraid of setting 

a target. We were not afraid of setting a target because we 

rolled up our sleeves and we went to work on solving the issue 

of 800 nurses that we were short. 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker, we can proudly stand here and say that 

we have hired more than 75 per cent of the nurses. So in fact, 

Mr. Speaker, we are working towards that goal of 800 nurses. 

And we had made that commitment that we would look at 800 

over four years, and this is two and a half years and we‟re 

already way over halfway to attaining that goal. 

 

So I think in fact, Mr. Speaker, our government is working very 

hard to ensure that health care is a number one priority of this 

government. Now our government and our health regions are 

committed to addressing the nursing concerns, so we are 

working closely with SUN to achieve these goals. Together we 

are laying a solid foundation for a stable nursing workforce, and 

we‟ll provide patients with a safer high quality of care. 

 

As you know, we undertook a patient-first review and one of 

the . . . the major finding out of that review was patient-centred 

care. Ensuring that we have adequate health care professionals 

is the first way and the best way of patient-centred care. 

 

Health regions now employ over 560 more RNs [registered 

nurse] and RPNs [registered psychiatric nurse] than when the 

partnership was signed. This is great strides. The nursing 

vacancies has also declined from 518 in October 2008 to 403 as 

of June 2009. Mr. Speaker, this is impressive progress. We are 

right on our hiring target and it confirms that collaboration 

rather than confrontation is the best means of achieving goals. 

Our unique nursing partnership is a public policy initiative that 

I think we can all be very, very proud of. 

 

So in terms of the nurse recruitment and retention, we have 

gone from the worst rate in Canada a few years back under the 

previous government to the best retention rate in Canada. I 

think that‟s something that all residents of Saskatchewan can be 

so proud of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rural Saskatchewan is once again the home of 

innovative, caring health care. We have different projects 

happening throughout the province which, in fact, are being 

very creative and innovative in being able to provide quality 

rural health care to Saskatchewan residents, something the 

previous government seemed to forget. 

 

They were more than happy to close a facility such as the Plains 

Health Centre which was, in fact, the money was raised and it 

was built for the purpose of serving rural southern 

Saskatchewan. They had no qualms about closing that facility. 

We are proud to be able to make a commitment to rural 

Saskatchewan to provide high quality health care to ensure that 

the residents of Saskatchewan do not feel left behind but rather 

included in this province which is moving forward. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, it is with mixed feelings I enter 

this debate with great concern and disappointment as the Sask 

Party abandons rural and northern Saskatchewan health care. 

 

You know, you look at some of the health issues that rural and 

northern Saskatchewan . . . Of course being from the 

Cumberland constituency, and my colleagues before have 

expressed the great concern we‟ve heard as we‟ve gone out to 

the different communities when we‟re doing our outreach. And, 

you know, the Sask Party likes to spin things like everything‟s 

wonderful and going good. And I would like to inform them, 

Mr. Speaker, and everyone who‟s paying attention, that it‟s not 

going as good as they like to cheerlead and say it is. 

 

There‟s so many concerns in the health care facility and I‟m 

going to talk, Mr. Speaker, a little bit about some of those topics 

that affect the rural area and northern Saskatchewan. And 

there‟s many, many concerns out there. You know, I want to 

talk about long-term care. And, you know, they go around and 

they come up with a committee or a review and, you know, 

you‟ll watch the process that happened. And I took part when 

one of the members from the Sask Party came to La Ronge on 

seniors and wanted to do seniors‟ care and all that, and I took 

part in that. As we were serving in this House — and everybody 

knows it — hundreds and hundreds of signatures on petitions of 

long-term care with a waiting list of just about one full year to 

get into long-term care in La Ronge. It‟s appalling in the North. 

Something needs to be done and addressed. 

 

And they can go around and say, oh they listened. But sad to 

say nothing‟s been done. They have nothing to say about it, but 

yet they want to cheerlead. They want to go around . . . Our 

seniors in the North have a right to the same health care and the 

waiting time as a southern and as a rural. It‟s important. It‟s 

crucial. We have that right. They have a right. 

 

Some day I will retire and have to enter a, you know, long-term 

care home. I don‟t want to have to leave my community and 

leave my family to go away two, three hours to a facility that 

doesn‟t understand and can‟t meet the cultural needs that I have. 

You know, it‟s concerning. And being around family . . . You 

know, listening to some of the stories back home of some of the 

individuals that recently went through that, you know, lost their 

loved ones. It‟s sad to watch. All they wanted was to have their 

loved ones with them, just to spend time as they spend their last 

days on this earth. 

 

You know, and it‟s appalling to see that the government doesn‟t 

take it serious. To see a waiting list of just about one full year 

for long-term care in La Ronge and the North, it‟s appalling. 

There‟s nothing else you can say. It‟s appalling. They had the 

money but unfortunately with their mismanagement of our 

finances they can‟t do anything. Oh they‟ll cheerlead again — 

and they‟re good at that — telling people, oh yeah, you know, 

everything‟s great. It‟s just wonderful out there. Just watch. It‟s 

the 16 years of the NDP that‟s caused all the problems. 

 

Well let‟s get the facts straight. It‟s their cousins that they say, 

if you want to say, the Conservatives who drove this province‟s 

finances. I listen to it and I just find it so unacceptable to think 

anyone can blame and pass on to the past. Well maybe not 

everything was perfect in those 16 years. There was a lot of 

challenges, but people have to look at why those challenges 

were there, to deal with some of the health care needs that we‟re 

facing today. It‟s not all the past 16 years. 



March 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4331 

Nobody ever wants to talk about the 16 years prior to that. Oh 

you don‟t want to hear about it? But it‟s amusing to watch that, 

you know. I think the people know about it. The people know 

about those 16 . . . I go back and I talk to some of our 

community members. They make it very clear. Do they actually 

think that we don‟t realize what happened prior to 16 years? Do 

they think that we actually don‟t understand, don‟t get it? And 

it‟s sad to think that this government, the Sask Party 

government would actually think that people can‟t figure it out 

for themselves. It‟s very clear. But I want to go back on to 

health care because it‟s so important in the North and the rural 

areas. 

 

Addiction services. You know, there‟s such a strong need for 

addiction services in the North and the rural areas. And people 

feel like they don‟t have the support, and I have to, you know, 

recognize the great work that our front-line staff are doing. We 

have addictions workers that do an excellent job and they care 

about the community people. They care about our youth and 

they try to help them and they do all they can, and they‟re 

burning out. 

 

And then you go, from addictions you go to mental health. And 

mental health in the North and the rural areas, there‟s so much 

concern. And people, our young people are losing hope. They 

lose their battle with depression. They need more from the Sask 

Party government. But what do we get? Everything‟s great; 

everything‟s great. It‟s not great. I‟m telling you, the people are 

starting to see it. They‟re being neglected. They know it. You 

can cheerlead and you can talk as a Sask Party government, oh, 

we‟re in tune with the rural area and the North. You are so 

wrong. And I think the people of our province are going to send 

you a message. 

 

You know, you talk about doctor shortages. And we went out 

there and when you look at some of the recruiting, 

municipalities have to recruit doctors, have to get involved to 

make sure that they have doctors for their community members 

that they‟re responsible for. But it‟s not their responsibility to 

make sure that they spend $800,000 on incentives to keep the 

doctors there or to bring them there. That‟s appalling. It‟s the 

provincial government‟s job. It‟s the Sask Party government‟s 

job. 

 

You know, you look at nurses and they talk about all the nurses 

and they talk about all the things they‟re doing. You know, they 

like to really cheerlead, again like I say. But you know, we 

have, we have communities . . . I‟ll give you an example, and 

maybe some of the rural areas. One community I want to make 

mention of is Wollaston Lake. It‟s a fly-in, fly-out community. 

And if a patient has to be flown out from that community to 

Saskatoon or P.A. [Prince Albert], after they‟ve been treated 

and get the treatment that‟s needed, they‟re sent home. They 

have to pay for the cost to go home. Yet they were air 

ambulanced out, but they have to pay the cost to go home. And 

some of these people don‟t have the money. They don‟t have 

the money. What are they supposed to do? They phone us. They 

ask us. The government needs to fix this. This is wrong and it 

needs to be addressed. 

 

And again we‟re going to go back to the mismanagement of 

finances. All I can say to them is the government has wasted, 

has mismanaged their finances so bad, they can‟t even assist 

people. That is appalling. 

 

You know, you look at, Mr. Speaker, health care workers and 

you look at the excellent job the front-line workers do. And I‟ve 

watched them day in and day out when I see them and I go visit 

people at the hospital. They‟re busy. You know, the health care 

workers are doing all they can. And they do an excellent job. I 

commend what they do and we should be proud. But they have 

no contracts. This government will not deal with them fair. That 

is appalling and it‟s shameful. They put in their hours and 

they‟re asked to do what they need to do for their community 

members and they do it. And they do an excellent job. 

 

You know, there‟s many, many, I guess, issues that come up 

and I‟m just going to talk a few of them. You know, diabetes is 

so . . . amongst Aboriginal people and northern people, diabetes 

is, you know, it‟s . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — It‟s epidemic. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — It is. It‟s an epidemic. It is. It‟s unreal where 

it‟s going. And instead of trying to assist and help out, I see this 

government cutting. Because of their mismanagement, they‟re 

cutting programs that give education, that give advice to people 

— how to eat right, how to take better care of yourself. 

 

You know, when you look at all of this, and I want to go back 

to this because I think housing is a huge part of this. We have a 

lot of people who live in crowding, overcrowding of housing 

and all the different issues that come with overcrowding and the 

shortage of affordable housing. So people crowd in our northern 

communities and some of the rural areas. It‟s amazing how the 

connection is, but you know, a lot of people — young children, 

babies, the elder — they have respiratory problems. There are 

so many health issues that are caused by overcrowding that on 

the health system . . . [inaudible] . . . we have to do a better job 

to assist that. It is unreal the housing issues, overcrowding, it 

creates on our health system. 

 

There are so many, so many, you know, so many issues that, 

you know — and my colleagues have talked before — that have 

gone on in rural area. And people are truly concerned, and all 

they want from their government, the Sask Party government, is 

to hear their issue, their concerns — address them. You have 

the decision. You have the power. You are now in control. You 

cannot continue to blame. Take the responsibility and do what‟s 

right for the people of our province. They have that right. That‟s 

all they‟re asking. They‟re not asking for more. They just want 

to be treated in their rural and northern communities, they just 

want to be treated with dignity and respect, and they deserve 

that. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, it‟s a pleasure to join in 

this debate in commending this government for the work 

they‟re doing across Saskatchewan in health care, and 

particularly in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

It was interesting listening to the member who just spoke, Mr. 

Speaker, saying at the end of his remarks that the North just 



4332 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2010 

wanted to be treated like everybody else. And, Mr. Speaker, I 

agree with him. The North should be treated just like everybody 

else. And yet he stands in his place, Mr. Speaker, and say, but 

we want special treatment for this and we want special 

treatment for that. So, Mr. Speaker, I guess I‟m . . . Does he 

want the same that everybody else has in the South, or does he 

want to have a special treatment, Mr. Speaker? 

 

You know, he was talking about the need for long-term care in 

the North. There‟s need for long-term care, Mr. Speaker, across 

the province. I guess it‟s . . . In the North, perhaps in his 

constituency in La Ronge, it was amazing to the people there 

that, all of a sudden, there were seniors there after November 

2007. Is he telling me that the previous administration didn‟t 

realize that people were going to get older and that there was 

going to be seniors in La Ronge after November 2007? Because 

if they knew that was going to happen, why didn‟t they plan to 

expand the long-term care facilities in La Ronge and the other 

communities in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I don‟t think it was a surprise to anyone that seniors would get 

older in Saskatchewan, that seniors would get older in northern 

Saskatchewan. What it was, Mr. Speaker, was a failure of the 

NDP when they were in government to do long-range planning 

and to set goals. 

 

The previous minister of Health, the member from North 

Battleford, wouldn‟t set a goal because they couldn‟t meet it. 

They wouldn‟t set a goal because they couldn‟t meet it. This 

government, Mr. Speaker, has set goals. We have set goals, Mr. 

Speaker, on nurses. We have set goals on new training seats in 

the universities for health care professionals. We have set goals, 

Mr. Speaker, for the training of new doctors, Mr. Speaker. And 

we‟re well on the way to meeting those goals, Mr. Speaker. 

And the previous minister of Health couldn‟t even set a goal 

because he knew that the NDP would not allow him to even 

come close to meeting those goals, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health care has been an issue in Saskatchewan for 

a long time. And I think back to my early days when I got 

elected. I had the pleasure to go to Oxbow on April the 1st, I 

think it was 1992 or 1993, to do the opening of a new health 

care facility in Oxbow. Unfortunately Louise Simard, the NDP 

Health minister of the day, on April the 16th — 15 days later, 

Mr. Speaker — closed that brand new hospital. 

 

When I got elected, Mr. Speaker, we had hospitals in 

Gainsborough, Oxbow, Lampman, Redvers, Arcola, Fillmore, 

and Wawota. Today because of the NDP‟s management of 

health care, we have hospitals in . . . We have a palliative care 

respite facility in Oxbow. We have a hospital in Redvers and a 

hospital in Arcola, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the rest of those 

facilities were closed by the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the members opposite in their speeches were talking about 

the facilities that they built. They mentioned Moosomin. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, prior to the 1991 election, the announcement had 

been made for the construction of a new hospital in Moosomin. 

The NDP cancelled it. They reannounced it for the 1995 

election and subsequently cancelled it. They reannounced it, 

Mr. Speaker, for the 1999 election and subsequently cancelled 

it. They reannounced it for the 2003 election, Mr. Speaker. And 

finally, in about 2005, the work started on that facility. So, ‟91, 

‟95, ‟99, 2003, Mr. Speaker — 16 years before they finally got 

around to doing it. And this was not an unusual circumstance, 

Mr. Speaker. They did the same thing at Preeceville. They did 

the same thing at Humboldt, Mr. Speaker, all the while when 

costs were expanding, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, Redvers in my constituency built a new hospital in 

the 1990s. The community said, we‟re not going to wait for the 

NDP government to do this. They paid 100 per cent of the cost 

to build that new facility, Mr. Speaker. And yet the minister of 

the day, the associate Health minister of the day, the member 

from Saskatoon Eastview showed up to do the ribbon cutting, 

even though the NDP government had not put a single nickel 

into the project, Mr. Speaker. That was the attitude that that 

government had towards health care in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

This government, Mr. Speaker, has announced that we‟re going 

to be proceeding with a number of new long-term care facilities 

across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Those negotiations are 

ongoing with the foundations to get their share of the money in 

place, 35 per cent which is the same rules that the former 

administration had in place. So those communities are in 

negotiations with the Health ministry to get their financing in 

place and to determine the size of the facilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the issues that has taken place has been 

staffing in the facilities under the former administration. I have 

one long-term care facility in my constituency that has one 

wing closed, 10 beds are closed, because there wasn‟t enough 

nurses. Well what happened to the nurses, Mr. Speaker? Well 

when the NDP closed 52 hospitals across Saskatchewan, they 

let over 600 nurses go, Mr. Speaker. So those nurses either 

remained in the rural areas where there were no facilities and 

carried on their lives in another manner or they left the 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then the members opposite when they were 

government decreased the number of training seats down to 

160. Mr. Speaker, this government has raised that training seat 

level up to over 550 seats, Mr. Speaker. But it‟s going to take 

four years to get those students through and trained and into the 

workplace, Mr. Speaker. It doesn‟t happen overnight even 

though the fact that seniors got older in La Ronge seems to have 

surprised the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, doctors, the same things happened. We had 60 

training seats for doctors in this province when doctors were 

leaving. We knew we had a dearth of doctors, Mr. Speaker. But 

for the members opposite that wasn‟t a problem because their 

expectation was that the population of Saskatchewan was going 

to decrease down to about 750,000 so you weren‟t going to 

need these nurses; you weren‟t going to need these doctors. 

 

And they had a second plan as well, Mr. Speaker. They were 

going to strip these facilities, these professionals from rural 

Saskatchewan and force everybody to move to the cities, Mr. 

Speaker. So there was no need to have facilities across rural 

Saskatchewan. There was no need to have professional nurses 

and doctors in our rural centres, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well under the Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker, 

these communities are growing. There is a need for more of 

these professionals. And yes it‟s a problem, Mr. Speaker, 



March 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4333 

because we can‟t train them fast enough because the facilities 

were not in place to do that. But we are getting there, Mr. 

Speaker. We‟re progressing very quickly on this. We‟ve 

recruited a large number of nurses. We‟re almost up to our 800 

nurses that we set as a goal, Mr. Speaker, and we will achieve 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the role of health care in rural Saskatchewan is 

changing, however. We‟re going to more primary care centres, 

Mr. Speaker, that will provide services to the communities. As 

well we‟re seeing a move to more partners within the 

fee-for-service doctors to cover off more centres, Mr. Speaker, 

because the new doctors want to have a lifestyle that is more 

reflective of their contemporaries and other professionals that 

they have met, say, at university. 

 

So there is a change happening across rural Saskatchewan on 

how these professionals deliver their services. It makes it more 

difficult because now the doctors aren‟t prepared to be there 24 

hours a day, seven days a week. You need more doctors to 

cover the same area than you did previously, Mr. Speaker. But 

we are training more doctors. More doctors are coming into the 

province. As my colleague said, we have 164 more doctors in 

Saskatchewan than we had in 2007, Mr. Speaker. It‟s getting 

better in Saskatchewan and it‟s going to be great soon as the 

budget comes down, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Southeast. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, don‟t worry; be happy. Well the 

Minister of Health was interviewed in November of ‟09 and 

said that: 

 

Can I ensure that there will be a doctor in every 

community like there used to be? I don‟t . . . You know, 

we just can‟t do that. The system is changing, the 

environment is changing. 

 

And also went on to say: 

 

The way health care was delivered in rural Saskatchewan, 

especially 20 or 30 or 40 years ago, isn‟t going to be the 

way it‟s going to be delivered in the next number of 

years. 

 

So basically the minister . . . And he also said that he‟s met with 

many groups from small towns. He meets with them every 

week and he said his biggest challenge is to change their 

expectations of how services are delivered. 

 

He now has to change their expectations. Who raised their 

expectations, Mr. Speaker? Who told them there would be more 

care for seniors, more doctors in rural Saskatchewan, more 

nurses in rural Saskatchewan? He and his party during the 

election in ‟07 raised everyone‟s expectations, just to get the 

vote, I am assuming because now when it comes time to 

deliver, all the excuses are being rolled out. They don‟t have the 

money. It‟s our fault. What did we do for 16 years? 

 

Well nobody is interested in what happened over 16 years ago. 

What they‟re interested in now is what was promised to them in 

‟07 is not being delivered now, and frankly, according to the 

minister, won‟t be delivered any time soon. In fact, what you 

thought you might get — you might get a doctor in your 

community — you will not. 

 

The member from Cannington told the town hall meeting a 

couple of years ago, you go out and start competing with your 

other communities around you to get yourself a doctor. Now 

that I don‟t think is . . . That‟s cold comfort to communities in 

Coronach and Shaunavon who are out with their own personal 

recruitment agencies looking for doctors — the communities of 

Climax and Redvers, as the member from Cannington 

mentioned. And I have another letter from someone in Redvers 

who‟s equally distressed about what‟s not happening there. 

 

People in Shaunavon and Arcola and Spiritwood and Lestock 

and all kinds of communities around the province who thought 

that when the Sask Party made a promise, that perhaps they had 

some intention of actually doing what they said, well they 

certainly found out in the last two years nothing that they 

promised has ever happened — a lot of hype. 

 

And the Premier actually said to the SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] convention . . . I think one 

of the members last week in the speech, when the motion that I 

made was exactly contrary to this — and frankly was a much 

better motion — that the Premier said to SARM, be happy that 

this is, that rural health care is top of mind for us. Well that is 

cold comfort to know that the Premier has as top of his mind. 

Big deal. 

 

Where is the delivery of the promise? There‟s nothing 

happening, nothing happening. When they talk about 13 

communities going to get an upgrade in long-term care beds, 

funding was put on hold and basically cancelled because there‟s 

no money. 

 

And given the fact that you‟re looking at putting agreements in 

place — I think looking at what happened to the chiropractors 

and when they bargained in good faith, came to an agreement, 

ratified the agreement, signed the agreement, and then the 

minister went, no, we‟re not going to honour that — anybody in 

this province who thinks that entering into an agreement with 

this Sask Party government means anything is wrong. And I 

think it‟s going to be evident. I mean there‟s 25,000 health care 

workers right now without a contract, over two years almost. 

What does that say to rural Saskatchewan? 

 

A lot of those people, like thousands of those people, work in 

rural Saskatchewan. They have no contract. They have no 

respect. They have no indication from this government that 

there will be any honour in bargaining, that there will be any 

improvement to their working conditions. And they‟re the ones 

who deliver the services that we‟re talking about needing to 

have in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The doctors are at the table right now bargaining. How do you 

think they feel when the chiropractors‟ deal is ripped up? How 

do you think their confidence is in this government to see that 

something will actually occur, and if something is signed, it will 

actually be honoured? 

 

Certainly it‟s not going to attract doctors. It‟s not going to 

attract any other health providers who are looking at the 



4334 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2010 

workplace environment and the relationship with government 

and saying, I don‟t think so. It‟s certainly giving Saskatchewan 

a black eye when the government cannot be honourable in its 

dealings with its workers. 

 

And I mean that‟s a whole other debate, Mr. Speaker, when we 

talk about honour with the workers. We‟re at war with labour. 

And the thing that the government has forgotten and the 

Premier has forgotten and the Minister of Health has forgotten 

is the people that we‟re at war with are the people that are 

looking after our mothers and fathers, that are going out into 

home care delivering home care services, that are assisting at 

our operations in our bigger centres that are being . . . They‟re 

the surgical attendants. They‟re doing our lab tests. They‟re 

doing our X-rays. They‟re doing our physiotherapy. They are 

the workers that are delivering the services that everybody says 

we need and want and expect and value, but you don‟t value the 

people that are actually delivering the services. 

 

[12:00] 

 

And this is very key to rural Saskatchewan‟s health and 

wellbeing, is that the people that are out there, that are working 

there, a lot of them are women. A lot of them are wives of 

farmers. A lot of them are teachers. A lot of them that work out 

there need to know that they can depend on this government to 

come through with what they promised. 

 

If there is no honour in bargaining, this is just an absolutely 

appalling state of affairs. And if we‟re talking recruitment and 

retention, it will have nothing but a negative effect on that. 

 

And it‟s interesting that the member that stood up, I think it was 

the member that moved the motion, from Biggar, that he talked 

about the academic health sciences — started under the NDP. 

He talked about primary health care — started under the NDP. 

He talked about the electronic health record, previously known 

as SHIN [Saskatchewan Health Information Network] — 

started under the NDP. I was on the first board of SHIN, so 

there‟s no way you can take . . . The Sask Party can take credit 

for none of this. 

 

The children‟s hospital started way before the member from 

Silver Springs attached himself to that. And certainly the 

children‟s hospital must be really happy now when there‟s no 

money. And all of a sudden, after all the hype in Saskatoon, the 

member from Silver Springs really thought this was his to 

deliver — yanked the money away. I‟m sure they‟re very 

happy. 

 

And talking about recruiting Filipino nurses, the member from 

Nutana, when she was the minister of Immigration, she 

travelled to the Philippines to start that process. It happened 

under the NDP. 

 

So there are now 123 vacancies for doctors. This is nothing to 

be proud of. We now have a Crown corporation to talk about 

recruitment. Well the minister and all the Sask Party have really 

been very, very negative about Crown corporations — we don‟t 

need them; there‟s no value to people. But all of a sudden we 

can get one to do recruitment and retention of doctors. 

 

And the fact that some of their authority comes through 

reaching agreements with people, well I‟ve already talked about 

what an agreement means. It isn‟t worth the paper that it‟s 

written on. Anything that anybody believes the Sask Party 

agrees on, they can turn around and rip it up the next day. So 

their word means nothing, and I think the people of 

Saskatchewan understand that. 

 

And I think that when we‟re looking at chiropractors, 21,000 

signatures on petitions that say, keep chiropractic services. I 

spent a great deal of time over the last couple of days, Mr. 

Speaker, going through those petitions line by line and looking 

at what communities people are signing from. And there‟s 466 

communities in Saskatchewan — cities, towns, and resort 

villages. There were 206 names yesterday and 189 today. 

Granted there‟s going to be some overlap, but I think those 

chiropractic petitions are going to contain signatures from every 

single community in the province. It means something to people 

that this is happening. 

 

There‟s this low-hanging fruit comment that‟s coming out from 

members around the opposition, low-hanging fruit. Well get out 

of the orchard. There‟s this low-hanging fruit that they‟re 

talking about. If you looked around at the people that were here 

when the chiropractors and their patients were here, that 

low-hanging fruit feeds those people. It keeps them at work. It 

keeps them moving. It keeps them going. 

 

And 21,000 signatures from all over Saskatchewan, mainly 

rural Saskatchewan, says a lot about what rural Saskatchewan 

thinks about the health care promises from the Sask Party. They 

do not believe it. And, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this 

motion. There‟s no confidence in rural Saskatchewan. And I 

would condemn them for what they have been doing. 

 

The Speaker: — The time for debate has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Athabasca for the 10-minute question period. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 

the member from Cannington, the passing tourist of northern 

Saskatchewan. When he made a reference to special services or 

special needs for northern Saskatchewan, the one question I 

have is, what does he mean when northern Saskatchewan 

demands extra or special services? And the second question I 

have for him, Mr. Speaker, when he spoke about 1991, the 16 

years we were in power, the second question I have for him is 

that: was the government broke at the time? In 1991 when we 

took over from the former Tory administration, which he was 

part of, was the government broke? And secondly, what special 

or extra services does he think northern Saskatchewan wants? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

in 1991 we were looking at a situation where the previous 

administration had left that former administration with a $6 

billion debt at 19 per cent interest rate, Mr. Speaker. And you 

compound that over nine years, and you have a very significant 

debt. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, there was debt there, in place, in 1982. And 

there was debt there in 1991, Mr. Speaker. And there was debt 

there in 2007, Mr. Speaker, and we reduced that debt by $2.6 

billion, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this government has been 



March 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4335 

dealing with the debt left behind by the NDP and every 

previous administration. 

 

What does the North want that‟s special? I don‟t know. I was 

listening to the member from Cumberland say, we want special 

treatment for this. We want to be treated the same as everybody 

else, but we want special treatment. 

 

So I don‟t know what it is that the member from Cumberland 

wants that‟s special treatment, Mr. Speaker. But I was simply 

quoting what the member opposite had to say, that he wanted 

special treatment, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the most 

alarming actions from the NDP‟s mismanagement of health 

care in the great province of Saskatchewan was the closure of 

421 hospital beds. 

 

To the member from Cumberland: was the closure of these beds 

a response to the fact that the population in the province 

continually decreased under their watch? Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I‟m pleased to answer the 

question. And they like to referring to all the things that the 

previous government did of closing hospitals. But I‟ll say this. 

What are you guys doing? And how many are going to be 

reopened? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this government talks about 

how they‟ve raised the number of medical seats in order to 

support rural Saskatchewan. And that, of course, is a fine start. 

But there is much more to ensuring we have increased numbers 

of doctors in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

To the member from Regina Qu‟Appelle: what is your 

government‟s plan to ensure we have enough preceptors in rural 

Saskatchewan, and that they have the proper support and 

training to do this job well? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Qu‟Appelle Valley. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much. I‟d like to thank the 

member opposite for that question. Well that is exactly what the 

Minister of Health has stated, that we have undertaken an 

agency that will focus on retaining our own medical graduates, 

so that people of Saskatchewan will benefit from the dollars. 

We are committed to the rural Saskatchewan. We are ensuring 

that in fact facilities and people will be available to encourage 

and help educate our young physicians coming out. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. LeClerc: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our government 

values the senior citizens of this province. Our government 

appreciates the hard work they have done in laying the 

foundation of this province. Mr. Speaker, when asked about the 

benefits of seniors making different lifestyle choices in regards 

to diet and exercise, an MLA from the opposition stated, I 

quote, “They will live healthier, longer, and die quicker.” 

 

To the member from Cumberland: why does the NDP 

government believe it is better for our senior citizens to die 

quicker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I‟m not exactly 

going to get into the comments of the previous, and the answer 

that came there. But I‟ll tell you what, I‟ll tell you what, I know 

that there are a lot of concerns out there. And I will say this to 

you — there are different things that need to be done for our 

seniors. And I‟m not going to comment on the previous answer, 

so thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — I listened very intently, Mr. Speaker, to the 

motion. And I also listened to the speeches of the members 

opposite, as appalling as they were, and not one of them spoke 

about the things that they‟re doing in their own motion. All they 

spent time doing was looking in the rear-view mirror talking 

about the past, which is what they‟ve become accustomed to 

doing. And they‟ll be returned to the opposition where they can 

continue to ask questions in question period as they have all this 

week. 

 

Now what they failed to talk about is the 16 years we spent 

paying off the debt of the guitar museum, the debt of the booze 

bill that was signed for by the Premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan. So I‟m going to ask the Biggar member: in 

terms of hospital closures that were forced upon Saskatchewan 

people by their mismanagement before 1991 how many are they 

going to reopen? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank 

you for the questions. Well as we know, the former NDP 

government closed 52 rural hospitals. Under their watch, the 

health care in rural Saskatchewan was decimated. 

 

Under our watch, since 2007 we have announced 13 new 

long-term care homes to be built in the province. In the 

Heartland Health Region, there‟s going to be a new long-term 

care home, in Kerrobert and in Rosetown and Biggar. This is 

the philosophy of the Saskatchewan Party: we‟re not closing 

hospitals, we‟re opening health care facilities in this province. 

And we will continue to do that during our mandate. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow.  

 

Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Cumberland 



4336 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2010 

was wanting facts when he started talking. Well the facts are 

there was 52 hospitals closed in Saskatchewan under their reign 

— 52 rural hospitals closed, Mr. Speaker. The former Health 

minister has even ignored his own constituency by ignoring the 

North Battleford hospital, and now he presents petitions to it. 

Mr. Speaker, during 1999 the NDP government caused the 

largest nurses‟ strike in the province through its complete 

incompetence regarding the management of health care. This 

Saskatchewan Party government has gone on to provide nurses 

with the largest wage increases their profession has ever seen 

and improved nursing conditions by hiring more nurses. 

 

To the member of Saskatoon Eastview: why did your party 

expend considerable efforts undervaluing and ignoring the 

profession of nursing? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

member from Saskatoon Northwest. Oh, am I answering? Well 

I didn‟t hear it directed to me, actually, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t 

think it was directed to anybody. 

 

But the members that are speaking in their speeches are talking 

about the value of seniors. And I‟m interested to know, since 

we‟re talking about a bill of rights that‟s before the Assembly at 

the moment, I‟m wondering if they‟re going to . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I believe a question was 

directed. And I understood the minister from Saskatoon 

Eastview was taking the question, so I would ask the member to 

respond to the question. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I didn‟t actually hear 

the question since everything was so loud, so I certainly didn‟t 

hear it was me that was answering it. But I think that the 

members who have spoken, that their commitment to rural 

Saskatchewan has been clearly undermined by their actions in 

the last two and a half years. And talking about things that have 

happened under this government for 16 years, I think the 

member from Cumberland was clear that when our government 

came in 16 years ago, this province was bankrupt. There was no 

money. So now, there is no excuse, I mean, unless you‟re 

admitting bankruptcy, then there‟s no excuse for the programs 

you‟re cutting, the promises you‟re breaking, and the things that 

you are not doing. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is for the member from Cannington. Mr. Speaker, we 

hear repeatedly the members opposite talking about how during 

the period where this province had no money and conversions 

had to occur, the closure of hospital beds. Today, they‟ve now 

been the government for more than two years. They were left 

with a budget surplus of more than $2.3 billion when they took 

over, Mr. Speaker. They haven‟t opened a single new bed, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So to the member from Cannington: when can we expect him to 

reopen the 52 centres that he claims were closed, and when can 

we see the multiple new beds that they‟re talking about? 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed on the 75-minute debate. 

Order. Order. Order. I think members would like to hear what 

the motion is for debate on private members. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 607 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Yates that Bill No. 607 — The Public Safety, 

Security and Protection Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m very 

pleased once again to stand and talk about this very important 

piece of legislation. It‟s a piece of legislation that‟s important to 

all the people of the province of Saskatchewan and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I‟m informed that we‟ll have to 

have another speaker to the motion since you moved the 

motion. It‟s been brought to my attention. The member from 

Regina Dewdney has moved the motion. I recognize the 

member from Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to enter into the debate today on Bill No. 607. It‟s an 

Act that proposes to provide public safety, security, and 

protection for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And you‟ll note very clearly why it has been brought forward. 

It‟s because in opposition, members opposite called for an Act 

that‟s very similar to this one that would protect the public 

servants in Saskatchewan from scrutiny when they speak out 

against their employer. And now when we‟ve brought forward 

similar legislation, they absolutely refused on every count to do 

anything about it. And so we are forced to bring forward a Bill, 

Bill No. 607, which reads, it‟s An Act to provide for the Public 

Safety, Security and Protection of the People of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so it‟s hard to fathom that we live in a day and age in 

Saskatchewan where you have to bring forward legislation to 

protect the workers in Saskatchewan. But that‟s where we‟re at. 

And if it wouldn‟t be for the extremely archaic and brutal 

actions of the members opposite, we wouldn‟t have to be here, 

we wouldn‟t have to be speaking to this Bill today because what 

you would . . . provide a culture in the workforce, especially in 

government-employed facilities and agencies, where you would 

feel free to bring forward an issue where it affects negatively 

the public safety, security, and protection of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But that‟s not the case. And I think we need to talk about why 

that‟s not the case. That‟s not the case for several reasons. It has 



March 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4337 

been proven very recently when people in the province of 

Saskatchewan who are employed by the Government of 

Saskatchewan bring forward issues that directly affect the 

public safety of the community and the people in 

Saskatchewan, that they are admonished for it. The ministers 

responsible will bully and intimidate them. They‟ll send the 

police service out to investigate them. They ask them about 

whether or not they have an affiliation with an individual 

political party. 

 

And so what I find interesting in some of these instances, if you 

talk to the folks that are affected and were interviewed, what 

comes out of these interviews is that the first question is asked 

is, have you ever been a member of the NDP, which is contrary 

to the collective agreement they signed and work under, 

contrary to their human rights. But it‟s the first thing they‟re 

asked. And then they‟re asked, have you ever put up a sign for 

the NDP on your lawn? And the relevancy that that has to the 

public safety of the people of Saskatchewan is hard to fathom, 

but that‟s the question that‟s asked. 

 

They also ask if you‟ve ever been a supporter. Do you ever vote 

for the NDP? Well how in Saskatchewan today does that 

influence in any way whether or not they were speaking out on 

behalf of Saskatchewan people with respect to their public 

safety, security, and protection? It‟s unfathomable.  

 

And so what‟s hard to imagine again is that we‟re here today 

speaking to having to protect people who are employed by the 

Government of Saskatchewan, who have a constitutional right 

to affiliate to a political party, who have a collective agreement 

in which they have an opportunity to vote for whoever they 

choose and support whoever they choose. And yet you‟ve got a 

government here, a Saskatchewan Party government that starts 

a witch hunt process in order to go after people. And it‟s hard to 

believe that that‟s where we live today. 

 

Now if you want to have a civil servant . . . or a civil service, 

excuse me, that are productive, that work hard for the people of 

Saskatchewan, you should respect them. That‟s where I would 

start. And so you have to ask yourself: where is the respect in 

Saskatchewan for the civil service, the people that work in our 

Crown corporations, that do the business of the people of 

Saskatchewan every day in this province, when the ministers 

opposite will start a witch hunt in order to find out who 

attempted to protect the public safety and security of the people 

of Saskatchewan? That‟s who they go after. 

 

Now we should certainly understand the absolute, vital role that 

civil servants play in Saskatchewan. They provide a tremendous 

service in every aspect of their dealings. They do things like 

provide social services. They provide safety in correctional 

institutions. They also work to ensure that businesses have 

some of their things moved forward when it comes to 

regulatory regime structures. And so they do all of the business 

of the people of Saskatchewan. They play an absolutely vital 

role. 

 

And not only are the members opposite going to cut 1,500 jobs, 

but also they believe that it‟s important to beat them up and to 

intimidate them. And if you look at what‟s going on with 

members opposite and the witch hunt that they start, it‟s 

unbelievable when a member of the civil service would come 

forward to try to protect people in Saskatchewan and that‟s the 

treatment that they get when they‟re trying to carry out the very 

important work of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So we have to ask ourselves what exactly . . . Because the 

Saskatchewan Party is used to doing many things, and one of 

them that they‟re very good at is promising things to people. 

But the other thing that they‟re not so good at is delivering on 

those promises. And if you look, many examples: Bill 5, a pulp 

mill for the city of Prince Albert, a second bridge for Prince 

Albert, airport improvements, the children‟s hospital, long-term 

care facilities including ones in Prince Albert. So they make 

those promises before the election, but they won‟t carry through 

on. 

 

But in addition to making those promises, they‟ve also done a 

few things. And that‟s proposed legislation in opposition to deal 

with this very issue. Now when similar legislation is brought 

forward, they oppose it. So what kind of government do you 

have who in opposition will propose legislation in order to 

protect workers whistle blowing or making claims against the 

government, when as soon as they‟re elected, the exact same 

legislation is brought forward, they deny it. So they want people 

to be protected when they‟re in opposition, but when they 

become the government, they want absolutely nothing to do 

with transparency and accountability. 

 

They don‟t want people to be able to speak out against the 

government for any reason. And they certainly don‟t want 

people, if it hurts their government in any way, to speak out on 

the public safety, security, and protection of the people of 

Saskatchewan. And so you have to ask yourself, why would 

you believe anything that they say? 

 

Because they promise many things. They go so far as to 

introduce legislation to protect people when in opposition. But 

when they become the government, look out. Look out. They 

don‟t want to keep promises in the many that I‟ve listed, and 

they certainly don‟t want to protect people from whistle 

blowing on the government. 

 

They campaigned on accountability and transparency. And so 

you have to ask yourself today, when you propose legislation as 

a member of the opposition and you want to have it read and 

introduced then passed, how is it that when you‟re in 

government, you won‟t pass the legislation? It‟s unfathomable.  

 

Now there are a litany of examples where they are not 

accountable, where they‟re not transparent. We talked about 

some today in question period. We sent over a number of 

written questions pertaining to Social Services and Health, and 

they‟re ordered. So they don‟t want to be transparent and 

accountable and provide answers because they‟re hiding 

something. And what are they hiding? We don‟t know. We‟re 

going to find that out. But we‟re going to find it out in six 

months after, they hope, things have gotten better. Well it might 

not be the case. And so in six months, I guess we‟ll find that 

out.  

 

But what it does is it speaks to the accountability of a 

government because they don‟t want to be measured. They 

don‟t want to be . . . And in spite of the fact that on a monthly 

basis the Department of Social Services compiles records on 



4338 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2010 

how many people are accepting assistance, and when you can‟t 

provide them, what does that say? Does it say that you don‟t 

want to be accountable and transparent, or does it say that you 

quit keeping numbers? So are you a terrible manager in a 

ministry, or do you want to bury the information so that people 

can‟t find it? That‟s the question. 

 

And so certainly they are attempting to instill a culture of 

cover-ups. It‟s hard to imagine. What do they have against 

transparency, Mr. Speaker? What do they have against 

transparency? 

 

You‟ve got the member from Indian Head-Milestone who, as a 

member of the opposition, talked to health care workers and 

said, there will absolutely be no reason that we could introduce 

essential services legislation. I‟m in Lloydminster meeting with 

folks from CUPE [Canadian Union of Public Employees] just 

this week. And what do they say? That there are now more of 

them this week, as we stand here today, being told that they‟re 

essential. Over 90 per cent of the folks that work there are being 

deemed essential services. And so it‟s an issue of trust. 

 

When you have a minister . . . well a member of the opposition 

who‟s now the Minister for Health, who will say that we don‟t 

need essential services legislation, then not only do they 

introduce it, not only do they introduce it, but it goes so far as to 

cover 90 per cent of people in his own ministry. And they did it 

. . . You have to ask yourself why they would do it. And the 

biggest reason is to kill unions. When the Premier says he‟s 

going to war with working people in Saskatchewan, this is a 

part of what he means.  

 

So they introduce legislation, want to introduce it in opposition. 

We introduce it when they‟re the government, and they don‟t 

want anything to do with it. 

 

Now you have to ask yourself, how it is that in 2010 in 

Saskatchewan you have a group of men and women, 

Saskatchewan Party government, that are elected to govern all 

people in Saskatchewan. You have a Corrections minister, the 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety — ironic that public 

safety is a part of his mandate — who should be very accepting 

of this legislation. He should be the one calling for it. Because 

when you have somebody who voices an opinion on the direct 

impacts on public safety to the people of Saskatchewan and 

there‟s an absolute witch hunt that ensues, or they‟re asking 

questions about whether or not you voted for the NDP or 

whether or not you had a lawn sign, you can see that it‟s clear, 

absolutely fundamentally clear, that they are more interested in 

their own political futures than they are in the public safety, 

security, and protection of the people of Saskatchewan. That‟s a 

sad state that we live in, that that‟s the case here today. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s with sadness that we‟re here introducing 

this Bill, but we feel it‟s important. We feel it‟s important that 

the people of Saskatchewan feel free, the employees in 

Saskatchewan, be they working directly for government or in a 

Crown corporation, feel free to bring forward concerns that 

directly affect the public safety and security of the people of 

Saskatchewan. They should feel free to do that. We should live 

in a society and a province where that‟s encouraged, not 

discouraged — where it‟s encouraged that you attempt to 

protect the public safety of the people that you live and work 

with in the community that you live and work. 

 

[12:30] 

 

Instead what we have here is a group of folks, the 

Saskatchewan Party, who absolutely choose . . . Not only do 

they choose to ignore the legislation. In fact they do exactly the 

opposite. They go on a witch hunt to try to find out just who it 

is that‟s protecting the public safety and security of the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now it‟s absolutely unfathomable, absolutely shameful, but it‟s 

not entirely surprising. It‟s not entirely surprising because 

you‟ve got an Agriculture minister who said that in opposition 

you could do and say anything — for 12 years, a lot of the 

times, I did. 

 

And so you understand a bit of the motivation as to how they 

could introduce legislation in opposition, and when they 

become the government, not only do they not want to 

reintroduce the legislation themselves, not only do they want to 

introduce and pass their own legislation. When we introduced 

the exact same legislation, they want nothing to do with it. They 

want to walk away from it. This thing, in reality, should have 

taken one day to pass. It should have had the agreement of 

everybody because they agreed upon it when they were in 

opposition. And so on day one this Bill should have passed. 

 

But it‟s clear, it‟s very clear that when you‟ve got somebody 

who‟s the Health minister who says that we don‟t need Bill 5 

and then they introduce it directly after becoming government, 

when you‟ve got an Ag minister that says you can do and say 

anything in opposition and that he did for 12 years, where you‟d 

get to this point. 

 

But it‟s not acceptable to the people of Saskatchewan, and it‟s 

not right. You have to ask yourself when you introduce a Bill 

— we have introduced a Bill that affects directly government 

employees, Crown corporation employees — who would bring 

an issue forward that affects negatively their counterparts and 

companions? And who do they want to silence? Who does this 

Bill encompass? This Bill encompasses government workers 

and employees. So it‟s only that group of folks that they want to 

silence. 

 

Now you‟ve seen today, we asked questions coming out of their 

Finance department where it‟s interesting to note that the 

budget process is chaotic. And I would suspect that there‟ll be a 

witch hunt that ensues there because they know full well that 

they are absolutely chaotic in their own budget. They can‟t 

control that process. They have no idea what they‟re doing. And 

so they‟re going to try to find out how it is that everybody 

knows that their budget‟s chaotic. But it shouldn‟t be a secret, 

Mr. Speaker. If you looked at last year‟s budget, you‟d 

understand that there‟s a good reason why it‟s chaotic. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it‟s clear that for a number of reasons we think 

that this Bill should be moved forward. And it‟s with the best 

interests of the people of Saskatchewan at mind. Because we 

want to ensure that their public safety, security is protected 

properly and that they can ensure their own employment when 

they try to do the same thing. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 



March 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4339 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I‟m 

extremely pleased to be able to enter into debate on this private 

member‟s Bill, An Act to provide for the Public Safety, Security 

and Protection of the People of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a Bill that I think is long overdue, given the 

circumstances that the people of our province and the public 

service in particular have witnessed in the last several months, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think the preamble is important because it suggests that 

Saskatchewan‟s public employees are employed by the people 

of Saskatchewan and that these public employees have a duty to 

work for and in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan 

and that Saskatchewan public employees should not be 

punished in any manner for acting in the best interest of the 

people‟s public safety, security and protection, Mr. Speaker. 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is a principle that all members of the 

legislature who are elected in a free and democratic election 

should agree to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve had an incident in this province that I think 

is unprecedented. We have an incident where a duly elected 

member of the legislature rose in this House and asked the 

Minister of Corrections and Public Safety a series of questions 

regarding the release of a prisoner and the cover-up of that 

release, Mr. Speaker. And what was the aftermath of that? The 

aftermath of a duly elected member of the legislature, member 

from Regina Dewdney, asking a series of questions to the 

Minister of Public Safety, the aftermath of that was that the 

minister sat in this House and he asked that member whether or 

not the police had come to visit him. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is the Minister of Public Safety. This is 

the minister who is responsible for policing in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And for those of us that observe on these 

matters, it was clear that this was an intimidation tactic to 

silence a member of this Legislative Assembly that had been 

elected by the citizens in 2007. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, after the minister tried to intimidate a 

duly elected member of the legislature, the minister said that he 

was going to launch an investigation. And he launched an 

investigation by hiring a couple of retired police officers to do 

the investigation. And what did those two retired police officers 

do at the request of the Minister of Policing? 

 

What did those two retired officers do? They came and met 

with the member, a private member, a member of this 

Legislative Assembly, elected by the people of this province. 

They came and interrogated him for more than two hours — for 

more than two hours. This is unprecedented. 

 

This is not a Member of the Legislative Assembly who has been 

accused of wrongdoing. This is not a Member of the Legislative 

Assembly that there is some thinking that they may have been 

involved in some illegal activity. This is a Member of the 

Legislative Assembly who stood in this House and asked a 

minister of the Crown a series of questions, a series of 

questions. 

Now I know that the member from Moose Jaw is making fun of 

me. He can make fun of me all he wants, but you should pay 

attention because we are elected members of this Legislative 

Assembly and we have the right to speak in this Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have an elected member of the 

legislature that asked a series of questions to a minister of the 

Crown. He did nothing illegal. He did his job to ask the 

government, to hold the government to account. And what did 

that government do? They sent two retired police officers to 

interrogate that member. And that is unacceptable. 

 

The members of the opposition are elected to ask questions. We 

are elected to hold this government to account and we will not 

be intimidated by the government. Now not only was this 

reprehensible enough. Then they decided to go on a witch hunt 

in the public service. And what did that witch hunt entail? It 

entailed a person who they identified as having been the 

possible source of the leak. 

 

And what did those two retired police officers ask at the request 

of the Minister of Public Safety and Policing? What did they 

ask? They asked, are you a member of the NDP? Have you ever 

had an election sign of the NDP on your lawn? Have you ever 

voted for the NDP? Well, Mr. Speaker, my understanding is 

how you vote is a private matter. You go into the election booth 

and no one knows how you vote unless you are prepared to tell 

them, Mr. Speaker. And that is a right in a democratic society. 

 

So not only did they ask those kinds of questions, which are 

irrelevant, Mr. Speaker . . . When was the last time a public 

servant was asked by an investigative group, retired police 

officers, at the request of the Minister of Public Safety, how did 

you vote? Did you have an NDP sign on your lawn? Have you 

ever voted NDP? Do you have a membership in the NDP? And 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that in the province of Saskatchewan where, 

as far as I know, we still live in a civil and democratic society, 

those kinds of questions should not be asked of any public 

servant, any public servant. 

 

There is a reason for this Bill and I have just laid out the 

reasons for this Bill. Because people in this province, people 

who work in the public service should be able to have the right, 

the right to inform the public when our public safety, security, 

and protection is threatened, Mr. Speaker. We should give them 

the right to do that. And that‟s what this Bill is about. And there 

are reasons why this Bill has been entered into this Legislative 

Assembly by the duly elected members of the opposition. It is 

because of the actions of the Sask Party ministers of the Crown 

and their members, Mr. Speaker. And their members. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we do not live in a country where civil 

liberty and democracy is threatened. We live in a province 

where you should be able to get up in the morning and go to 

work. You should be able to do a decent day‟s job. You should 

be able to speak freely without threat. And by goodness, you 

should be able to come into this House as an elected member of 

the Assembly and ask the members opposite questions without, 

without, Mr. Speaker, without the minister of the Crown hiring 

a couple of former police officers to try and intimidate a 

Member of the Legislative Assembly. 

 



4340 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2010 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there seems to be a pattern. We have a 

group of men and women in Ottawa, and they‟re Conservatives. 

And what have they done to long-time public servants when it 

comes to the Afghan detainee issue? They prorogued 

parliament. They have threatened those public servants. They 

tried to intimidate members of parliament. They‟ve shut down 

parliament so that people can‟t get at the truth, Mr. Speaker. 

And we have the same kind of right wing, conservative 

behaviour emanating from the members opposite. The same 

kind of right wing behaviour. It is my way or the highway. It is 

my way or the highway. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know what I‟ve noticed in the last two 

weeks? We‟ve had citizens come to this Assembly as we‟ve 

asked questions. And I have noted with interest some of the 

ministers that have been held to account by the members of this 

opposition, after they‟ve sat down, they‟ve stared up into the 

Assembly, and I can say that‟s nothing other than intimidation 

tactics, Mr. Speaker. Intimidation. It is bullying behaviour. 

 

We citizens of this province should be able to come to this 

Assembly. Members of the opposition should be able to ask 

questions and, Mr. Speaker, there should be no retribution, Mr. 

Speaker. No retribution. No retribution. 

 

But these men and women don‟t quite understand democracy. 

They think that they are the political masters, not only of the 

public service, Mr. Speaker, but they‟re the political masters of 

citizens in this province that for whatever reason may not agree 

with them. 

 

And we hear, we hear ministers phoning up friends in certain 

communities and saying, you better be careful. We‟re going to 

be in office for an awfully long time and you‟re just not going 

to get that school. Or you better be careful. You better be 

careful. If you‟re coming to the legislature, you just may pay 

the price, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[12:45] 

 

Now what kind of democracy is this? What kind . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . Oh, the member says, honest democracy. Oh, 

honest democracy. So I guess the honesty is, their version of 

honesty is that people can‟t come to this House where we speak 

and have their opposition speak on their behalf and ask the 

government to account for their public policy decisions. And 

the honesty I guess coming from the Sask Party members is, if 

you do that, you will pay the price. Well, Mr. Speaker, that may 

work for a little while but it‟s not going to work for the long 

term, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There are literally thousands and thousands of people that work 

in the public service, in our Crown corporations, in health 

regions, and you know what? They talk to members of the 

opposition. Some of them talk to us and we‟ve learned all kinds 

of things. And one of the things that we‟ve learned is that there 

is intimidation tactics going on. 

 

I‟ll give you the latest example. You know constituency 

assistants do work for us when we are here, when we‟re away 

from our offices, and apparently there‟s a new policy that has 

come from the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Now for a very long time constituency assistants were able to 

contact the Ministry of Social Services in their area — 

Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Regina, whatever the region was — and 

they could ask questions or get an update on what was 

happening with a particular case. Well now we‟ve got a whole 

bureaucracy that we have to go through. It now has to go 

through the legislative services wing, whatever that means, and 

then off to the Chief of Staff of the minister. Well you know, I 

think we‟ll soon hear shortly that while they‟re doing the four 

by four in the public service, which is you cut 4 per cent of the 

positions every year for four years, or 16 per cent — in fact 

more than 16 per cent if you accumulate this — that they‟ll 

soon be asking for more staff in their offices because they‟re 

going to be so busy handling all of the MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] casework, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I find this unacceptable, Mr. Speaker, because I know that 

certainly when we were in office that Sask Party MLAs 

regularly contacted the civil service, Mr. Speaker. But we‟re no 

longer able to do that in the Ministry of Social Services. And 

this is a problem, Mr. Speaker, because it makes your work on 

behalf of your constituents more bureaucratic and bogged 

down. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It‟s far more political. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Exactly. Far more political, and that is key. 

The other thing that I noticed in terms of democracy — and 

today we saw another example of this — a number of questions 

were asked by the Health critic of the Minister of Health, and 

the Whip ordered them returned. Now why would that be? Then 

we have a question from the critic for Social Services. Now this 

is not rocket science. The Social Services ministry every month 

can tell you how many people are sitting on the Social Services 

caseload. And what did they do? They ordered that answer 

returned, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, something is a bit out of sync here, a bit out 

of sync. Because this is the group of men and women, now they 

don‟t talk about this in all their promises that apparently they‟ve 

kept, but one of their promises was that they were going to be 

open, accountable, and transparent. Now does anyone have a 

definition of transparent? I don‟t think they know the definition 

of transparent. Do they know the definition of open? Do they 

know the definition of accountable? And the answer is, no. 

Open, transparent, and accountable. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the public service — and I know they don‟t 

like this — but the public service is going to be in this province 

long after any of us are here. The public service are going to be 

administering the province of Saskatchewan long after the 

youngest member of the Assembly, which I believe is my 

colleague from Massey Place — I may be wrong — but long 

after he has left the place of this Legislative Assembly, long 

after he‟s gone as an MLA. 

 

The public service needs to be protected from us. They need to 

be protected from us because we have a political agenda. And 

that political agenda is not necessarily in sync with what the 

public service does, which is administer the day-to-day 

activities of public service. And the public service should have 

the right to inform the public, who they ultimately work for, 

when the health and safety and security of our citizens are at 



March 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 4341 

risk. 

 

Maybe we can‟t do that because we‟re political and we don‟t 

want to be embarrassed, but the public service should be able to 

do that, Mr. Speaker. And I think this is an important principle 

that all members of this Assembly should, at the very least, be 

able to agree with. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said, the public service represents all of 

us. They administer the public policy that comes from the 

government and they should be able to tell us. They should be 

able to tell us when our security and our safety and our 

protection is at risk, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This Bill incorporates good public policy. This Bill incorporates 

a protection of that public service. This Bill prevents renegade 

ministers, renegade governments from going after people whose 

interest is to protect the health and safety and security of our 

citizens, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of Bill that 

we should all be proud of supporting. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that the members opposite have 

had difficulty with their public safety. There have been many, 

many incidents of people who have been released before they 

had properly served their sentences. And in fact we had one 

example of someone who had served their sentence, a woman I 

believe who had served her sentence, and they were in such a 

rush to notify the public that they indicated to the public that 

she was at large and not to be at large. Well, Mr. Speaker, we 

then learned that she had fully served her sentence and was free 

to go and was now a citizen of, I believe it was Alberta and that 

she was not at large. So they made a mistake. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that sometimes mistakes are made. 

People are released when they shouldn‟t be released. People are 

released when they should be released and then everybody‟s 

advised that they — it‟s confusing — they weren‟t to be 

released when they should have been released, etc., etc. It‟s 

hard to keep track and it‟s sort of disorganized for these men 

and women. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we need to be able to know. We need to 

know when mistakes are made and people are released. And we 

shouldn‟t have a government covering that up. We shouldn‟t. 

And if they‟re not prepared to deal with it, if they‟re not 

prepared to deal with it, then public servants should be able to 

tell us. They should be able to tell us because we‟re all citizens 

of this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll be interested to see which members of 

the opposition, or which members of the government enter into 

this discussion. And I suspect it‟s going to be very few. And I 

suspect it‟s going to be very few because they know that public 

employees are employed by the people of Saskatchewan. They 

know that public employees have a duty to go to work and work 

in the best interests of our citizens. They know that public 

employees should not be punished in any manner when they act 

in the best interests of the people when it comes to their safety, 

security, and protection. 

 

They know that their behaviour has led to a person being 

intimidated by two retired police officers that were hired by 

their Minister Responsible for Public Safety and Corrections, 

intimidated by asking, have you ever been a member of the 

NDP? Have you ever voted NDP? Have you ever had a sign on 

behalf of the NDP? They know this is wrong. 

 

They know that it was wrong when those two retired officers 

went to a member of this Legislative Assembly and tried to 

intimidate him into divulging his source. They know that it was 

unacceptable to have a member of the legislature in a meeting 

with these two retired officers for two hours talking to these two 

retired officers trying to get information from a member of the 

legislature. 

 

This was not someone who was accused of any wrongdoing. 

This is not someone who had maybe broken the law, maybe 

was involved in fraud, maybe was involved in a hit and run, 

maybe involved in . . . This is a member of the legislature — 

wasn‟t accused of any criminal offence. This was a member of 

the legislature I guess that was accused of standing up in this 

House, which we have a right to do, and asking the minister of 

the Crown, a Sask Party minister, a series of questions. And 

what does that minister of the Crown do to further intimidate 

this member of the legislature? He asked if the police had come 

to see him yet. 

 

Now I know the minister was under some stress and whatnot. 

And he said that there‟d been a lot of catcalls over to him from 

our side, but this is the Minister of Public Safety and 

Corrections and Policing. This is a minister that has some 

experience in this Assembly and this is a minister that I think 

has developed thicker skin than that. And this is a minister that 

goes out into the foyer to speak to the press and says, well he‟d 

gotten a lot of catcalls and if he offended the member, he was 

sorry. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it didn‟t end there. He wasn‟t that sorry. 

Because then he proceeds to hire two retired police officers — 

now remember he‟s in charge of policing — to conduct an 

investigation, and they come to meet with the MLA for Regina 

Dewdney and proceed to ask him a series of questions because 

they were trying to find out the leak — unacceptable, 

unacceptable, unacceptable in a free and democratic society. 

And if this group of men and women think this is acceptable, 

then they do not believe in democratic principles, which I 

would hope all members of this Legislative Assembly would 

adhere to, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve had an opportunity to put my comments 

on the public record. I know that we are coming close to the 

hour of adjournment. I know that this has been a serious sore 

point for the opposition. And I would hope that it would be a 

sore point for those members of the Assembly, the Sask Party 

members of the Assembly, that do believe in democracy. I 

would hope. I would hope, because some day you might be 

sitting over here. And I would hope that if any member of a 

new NDP government tried to intimidate you that you would 

find that unacceptable. 

 

I would hope that you would adhere to the principles that we 

come into this Assembly, whether we‟re in government or 

opposition, and we have the right as private members of this 

Assembly or as members of the government to ask questions. 

And we should not be intimidated. You should not be 

intimidated in your own caucus. You should not be intimidated 



4342 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2010 

in this Assembly. And we should be able to speak freely about 

what we believe in. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is here because there has been 

intimidation — intimidation of the public service and 

intimidation of a private member of this Assembly, and it is 

unacceptable in a free and democratic society where most of us 

are children of immigrants that came here to escape that. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The time of adjournment having been 

reached, this House now stands adjourned until 1:30 Monday 

afternoon. Have a good weekend. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4315 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4315 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4315 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4315 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4318 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4318 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4315 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4315 

  Higgins ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4315 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4315 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4316 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4316 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4316 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4316 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4317 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4317 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4317 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4317 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4317 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4318 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Canwest Canspell Spelling Bee 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4318 

 Junior Achievement Awards 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4319 

 Z99 Radiothon 

  Trew ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4319 

 Husky Oil Announcement 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4319 

 Vacation Home 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4319 

 The Battlefords Projects 

  Chisholm .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4320 

 Success of the Energy Economy 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4320 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Post-Secondary Education 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4320 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4320 

 Child Care Spaces 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4321 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4321 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4322 

 Support for Low-Income People 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4322 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4323 

 Forthcoming Budget 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4323 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4324 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4325 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Rural Health Care 

  Weekes ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4325, 4335 

  Taylor ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4327 

  Ross ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4329, 4335 

  Vermette ........................................................................................................................................................................ 4330, 4335 

  D’Autremont ................................................................................................................................................................. 4331, 4334 

  Junor .............................................................................................................................................................................. 4333, 4336 



 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4334 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4335 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4335 

  LeClerc .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4335 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4335 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4335 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4336 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 607 — The Public Safety, Security and Protection Act 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4336 

  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4336 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4336 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4339 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

Minister Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Research Council 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments 

Corporation 

Provincial Secretary 

Minister Responsible for Information Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

 

Hon. Rod Gantefoer 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, Employment and Labour 

Minister Responsible for Immigration 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Government Services 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Capital Commission 


