




















































Hansard: November 18, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 13A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 2010, 10 a.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6101 

 November 18, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Municipal Affairs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you this morning to all members I would like to 

introduce a lady in your gallery this morning who, about 21 

years ago, said yes to a date with this young man. And next 

May, next May I get to celebrate 20 years of marriage to this 

lovely lady — my wife, Charlene. If you want to stand up, 

please, Char. 

 

Just for the reference of the Legislative Assembly this morning, 

she teaches grade 1 in Prince Albert. And she left a very 

well-behaved classroom to come here to watch us, so we’ll see 

what happens with that. But on a closing note, Mr. Speaker, the 

looks I get from you when I am out of order don’t compare to 

what I get at home from her, Mr. Speaker. So thank you very 

much this morning and welcome my wife, Charlene. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina South. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased today to introduce to you and through you to the 

members of the Assembly three guests who are seated in your 

gallery. 

 

They are Rosemary Thompson, Heather Moore, and Carl 

Martin from the National Arts Centre in Ottawa. They are here 

in Regina today, Mr. Speaker, to participate in the launch of the 

Prairie Scene, which takes place this very afternoon at the 

MacKenzie Art Gallery. 

 

Prairie Scene is a multidisciplinary arts festival celebrating our 

province, and will showcase not only at the National Arts 

Centre but many other venues throughout Ottawa April 26th to 

May 8th of next year. 

 

Saskatchewan is partnering with Manitoba to send 500 of our 

artists, both emerging and established, to participate in the 

Prairie Scene exposition. It’s going to be a fabulous opportunity 

for our artists of all genres to show and perform to new 

audiences as well as to network with talent scouts and 

promoters from all over North America and the world. 

 

Heather is the producer and executive director of the Prairie 

Scene. She also produced the shows for Alberta and Quebec 

and British Columbia. Heather’s been working hard consulting 

with dozens of Saskatchewan and Manitoba arts organizations 

and has assured us all that Prairie Scene will be the best show 

ever. 

 

Rosemary Thompson is the director of communications and 

public affairs for the NAC [National Arts Centre], but she 

might also be familiar to some of us in the House today from 

her earlier work as a journalist and political correspondent for 

CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] and CBC [Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation]. 

 

She covered national politics for more than 20 years as a 

journalist in Winnipeg, Montreal, Washington, and Ottawa. 

And, Mr. Speaker, she covered the hotly contested election 

between George Bush and Al Gore. In fact, Mr. Speaker, her 

biography claims she is actually one of the privileged few who 

knows the difference between a pregnant chad and a hanging 

chad. 

 

Please join me in welcoming these fine individuals and 

welcome them on behalf of the NAC. Thanks for coming. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf of the official opposition it gives me great pleasure to 

join with the minister in welcoming the three guests to 

Saskatchewan and to Regina on this truly Saskatchewan scene 

morning out there. So welcome, and enjoy your stay; and thank 

you for sharing Saskatchewan stories. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silver Springs, the Minister Responsible for First Nations and 

Métis Relations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. To you and through you and to the rest of the 

Assembly I would like to introduce to you 68 very 

good-looking students from Dr. John G. Egnatoff School in the 

heart of the Saskatoon Silver Springs constituency. They’re a 

hardy bunch. They were up early. They braved the roads to be 

here at their Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

They are accompanied by their teachers, Ms. Nicola 

Bishop-Yong, Mr. Jeremy Van Olst, Ms. Lisa Hynes, and Mr. 

Cory Farthing. Also accompanying the group are some parents, 

Colette Brakstad, Reina Lambert, Paul Scheibe, and Paul 

Rogan. Now Mr. Rogan and I played football together, so I 

know if he’s in charge of the group there that nobody will be 

misbehaving certainly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The group comes from a school that has a wide mosaic, many 

new residents to our province and to our country, and it is a 

culture that we certainly embrace in Saskatoon Silver Springs. 

 

Dr. John G. Egnatoff School is well known for their fantastic 

fundraising activities. They raised $5,000 for the Terry Fox 

Run, $5,000 for UNICEF [United Nations Children’s Fund]. 

Saskatchewan is known for volunteers in the spirit of giving 

and these students are learning that at a young age. 

 

They had an opportunity to meet with our Premier. I wish them 

a great day and hopefully a safe ride home. Mr. Speaker, to all 

my colleagues, please welcome the group from Dr. John G. 

Egnatoff. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 



6102 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2010 

Ms. Chartier: — I just would like to welcome the students 

from Dr. Egnatoff School as well, but someone I know, Paul 

Rogan, who may have played football with the minister on the 

opposite benches but who plays badminton with me. So 

welcome, Paul. I’d like everyone to welcome Paul especially to 

the Legislative Assembly today. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly, 

the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to rise today and introduce two 

people in your gallery, Mr. Speaker: one who I’ve introduced 

before — I’ll refer to her maybe as the veteran — and the other 

one who is here for the very first time in the gallery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased, I’m very pleased to introduce 

my spouse. Gail has been supporting me for 38 years, Mr. 

Speaker, and also nearly 16 years in this job. So I too want to 

extend my thank you and appreciation to my wife, Gail. 

 

But also I want to introduce the lady seated next to her, who is 

Dianne Ford. Dianne joins me as my chief of staff effective 

November 1st, or she joined me on November 1st. Dianne has a 

wealth of experience with school divisions, having worked in 

Canora and Kindersley and now most recently in the Living 

Sky School Division at The Battlefords. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d 

ask all members to join me in welcoming my spouse, Gail, and 

my chief of staff, Dianne. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned 

over the deteriorating safety of our highways. And I’ll read the 

prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway 10 between Fort Qu’Appelle and the 

junction of Highway 1 in order to improve the safety for 

Saskatchewan’s motoring public. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from Fort 

Qu’Appelle, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today again to 

present petitions on behalf of the residents of Saskatchewan 

who support the Saskatchewan Seniors Association and their 

180 senior centres, mostly in rural Saskatchewan. These centres 

provide much-needed recreational and social activities as well 

as important health clinics and workshops which contribute to 

an enhanced quality of life for many of the seniors who use 

them. Many of these centres are facing increased costs of 

operation and anticipate as many as a quarter of them may close 

over the next little while. The closure of these centres will put 

seniors at risk for being into more access to long-term care and 

even hospital beds. 

 

We in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan: to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to provide the 

much-needed funding to assist seniors’ recreation centres 

to remain open and active within their communities. 

 

And these petitions are from Wilkie, Drake, Tramping Lake, 

and I so present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

present a petition in support of the expansion of the graduate 

retention program and a call for fairness for post-secondary 

students here in Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to immediately expand the graduate 

retention program to include master’s and Ph.D. 

graduates. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals who signed this petition are from 

the city of Regina. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Ms. Morin: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 

government ministry has directed SaskWater to cut off supplies 

of water for domestic use to Furdale customers. The same 

government ministry has directed that customers may no longer 

treat non-potable water using methods approved by Sask 

Health. The Furdale residents, in dealing in good faith with 

SaskWater for over 30 years, have paid large amounts for their 

domestic systems and in-home treatment equipment, as well as 

for livestock irrigation lines. The alternative water supply 

referred to by the government minister is a private operator 

offering treated, non-pressurized water at great cost, with no 

guarantee of quality, quantity, or availability of water. And the 

prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to withdraw its order to cut off 

non-potable water to the residents of the hamlet of 

Furdale, causing great hardship with no suitable 

alternatives; to exempt the hamlet of Furdale from further 

water service cut-offs by granting a grandfather clause 

under The Environmental Management and Protection 

Act, 2002 and The Water Regulations, 2002; and that this 

government fulfills its promises to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



November 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6103 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the good residents of 

Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the true cost of human 

suffering or loss of human life cannot be measured in dollars 

and cents. And that the government allows fines levied against 

companies for violations of The Occupational Health and 

Safety Act to be treated as tax-deductible expenses, and they 

also continue to allow companies to treat such violations and 

fines levied for them as the regular cost of doing business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to amend the law so companies will not be 

allowed to get a tax deduction for fines levied against 

them under The Occupational Health and Safety Act and 

regulations, and to remove the existing cap on fines levied 

against such companies. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petition is signed by people from Delisle, Langham, 

and Saskatoon. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to 

rise once again today to present petitions on behalf of 

concerned residents from across Saskatchewan as it relates to 

the unprecedented mismanagement of our finances by the Sask 

Party. They allude to the two consecutive deficit budgets, the 

billions of dollars of debt growth — $4.2 billion over the next 

four years alone, Mr. Speaker — and they recognize that 

Saskatchewan people are being asked to pay for the Sask 

Party’s financial mismanagement, specifically up in Saskatoon 

where now education is being underfunded, and cuts to 

educational assistants, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned citizens and 

good folks from Regina and Pilot Butte. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Technology Week Keynote Speaker 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

to honour Darwyn Peachey, the chief technology officer of 

Pixar Canada. Mr. Peachey’s keynote presentation was the 

highlight of Technology Week, an annual University of 

Saskatchewan event. From November 1st to 5th, instructors, 

researchers, staff, and students learned of major issues and 

future trends in information and communications technology. 

 

Mr. Peachey graduated from the U of S [University of 

Saskatchewan] with a bachelor’s degree in computer science in 

1978 and a master’s degree in 1983 and is a member of the 

Innovators Hall of Fame at the Wilson Centre for 

Entrepreneurial Excellence. 

 

While working as a researcher at the U of S, he published 

articles in scholarly computer science journals. These articles 

garnered the attention of a then small computer-generated 

imaging studio in Los Angeles, known as Pixar Animation. Mr. 

Peachey was part of the team that created the blockbuster hit 

Toy Story, and he was also involved in the creation of A Bug’s 

Life, Toy Story 2, Ratatouille, and Up, the first-ever feature 

animated film in 3-D. As he led the team that created Up, 

Peachey’s keynote provided insight into the history of 3-D 

movies and their place in the animation world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he also discussed how digital evolution has 

affected the art of movie making. As a result of digital effects 

and digital characters, filmmakers can tell stories in ways they 

never could have before. Another important result of the 

evolving digital world is what Mr. Peachey refers to as the 

democratization of moviemaking. Digital cameras, 

state-of-the-art computers, and Internet distribution are now all 

easily accessible to anyone with the desire to create movies. 

 

[10:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t think there could be a better role model for 

Saskatchewan students aspiring to pursue careers in 

international industries like film or technology. Please join me 

in thanking Mr. Peachey for the trail he has blazed for 

Saskatchewan people in respect to arts and technology. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

National Child Day 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, National 

Child Day is celebrated in Canada on November 20th each 

year. Here in Saskatchewan our government has always 

believed in securing the health and well-being of this province’s 

children. Our government has worked hard over the past three 

years and taken significant action to address long-standing 

challenges in Saskatchewan’s child welfare system. 

 

Since 2007 we have ensured a 106 per cent increase in funding 

for child and family services; the creation of 193 new 

out-of-home residential spaces for infants, children, and youth; 

a reduction in the number of foster children in homes with more 

than four by one-third; a commitment of $15 million to 

implement an new automated case management system for 

children and youth in care; an investment of $5 million to hire 



6104 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2010 

60 new child protection workers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also been working closely with First 

Nations Child and Family Services agencies to improve quality 

of care for the children who need it most. More senior level 

staff is dedicated to identifying and rectifying the issues around 

the overrepresentation of First Nations children coming into 

care. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to join 

me in recognizing National Child Day as part of this 

Assembly’s ongoing commitment to protect the basic human 

rights of children and youth in our province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Honouring the Memory of Al Johnson 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the week opened, 

this Assembly honoured the memories of former MLAs 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly], people elected to this 

Chamber to undertake important work on behalf of 

Saskatchewan’s people. 

 

As the week ends, it’s my privilege to rise to pay tribute to one 

of Canada’s most distinguished civil servants, Al Johnson, 

whose vocation it was to see that such important work was seen 

through to completion. 

 

Born in Insinger in 1923, Al Johnson would go on to serve as 

our province’s deputy treasurer, helping CCF [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation] governments achieve ambitious 

reforms while maintaining fiscal balance. 

 

Having helped to build a professional and progressive civil 

service here at home, this member of the Saskatchewan mafia 

left the province after Ross Thatcher’s election in 1964, 

carrying our province’s pioneering ways on to Ottawa, helping 

to create new federal programs such as equalization and 

medicare and from there to serve as president of the Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation and, after that, on around the world 

to help build democratic institutions. 

 

One of his last major tasks, Mr. Speaker, was to provide an 

account of the Douglas government’s accomplishments in 

government, building on his Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] 

dissertation, entitled Dream No Little Dreams. He also very 

generously lent his name, alongside that of his friend and 

colleague Tommy Shoyama, to Saskatchewan’s 

Johnson-Shoyama Graduate School of Public Policy. 

 

It is said that of any grand plan, the devil is in the details. Mr. 

Speaker, public servants like Al Johnson knew that in the 

details lie the dreams — the dream that it is never too late to 

build a better world. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 

 

Nation Builders and Community Recognition Awards 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of 

attending the Ukrainian Canadian Congress 16th annual Nation 

Builders and Community Recognition Awards luncheon in 

Saskatoon this past Sunday. The UCC [Ukrainian Canadian 

Congress] Nation Builders Award was established in 1995 to 

recognize individuals who have provided outstanding service or 

exceptional community involvement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Nation Builders Award recognized three 

individuals who have left a legacy and provided an exemplary 

role model for the Ukrainian community. Winners were Ernest 

C. Boychuk, retired Provincial Court chief judge; Mary 

Woroniuk Budzak; and Gerald M. Luciuk. Mr. Luciuk is the 

current Chair of the advisory committee on 

Saskatchewan-Ukraine relations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Community Recognition Award recognized 

seven individuals who made meritorious contributions in youth 

achievement, leadership, volunteerism, and culture preservation 

and development. The award winners were Garry Gawryliuk, 

Eugene Hnatiuk, Alex Patryluk, Terence B. Zwarych, Lucas 

Makowsky, the late Olga M. Stefaniuk, and Pat Marchinko. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Pat Marchinko is a constituent of mine in 

Canora-Pelly and I’ve known Pat as a lifelong educator and 

volunteer in the community. Her organizational and leadership 

abilities have served people at events such as Mother’s Day 

concerts, Ukrainian dance events, and reunion committees, to 

name only a few. She is also the current president of the Canora 

branch of the Ukrainian Women’s League of Canada. Mr. 

Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating all of 

these outstanding recipients. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatoon Business Turns 100 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday evening over 800 

people gathered in Saskatoon to celebrate 100 years of business 

for the Saskatoon Funeral Home. For over a century, Saskatoon 

Funeral Home has responded to the needs of people from all 

different faiths and backgrounds as they struggle with the 

incomprehensible loss of a loved one. Although the funeral 

home itself has roots dating back over 100 years, today the 

Edwards family remains Saskatoon’s only locally owned, 

full-service provider of funeral and cremation services and is 

managed by Bill Edwards, the son of Arnold and grandson of 

William. Mr. Speaker, this is truly a family business success 

story. 

 

The business has received countless awards, most recently the 

Family Enterprise of the Year 2010 award from the Canadian 

Association of Family Enterprise, which recognizes significant 

achievements made within a Canadian family enterprise. 

 

At this event on Tuesday evening, the Edwards family made a 

sizeable donation of artifacts to the Western Development 

Museum. And the Western Development Museum has indicated 

that within the next several years an old-fashioned funeral home 

will be installed at the Western Development Museum. 

 

There are not many businesses that hit 100 years of age, 

especially as a sole family enterprise being passed down 



November 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6105 

through the generations with the same principles that led to its 

initial success. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 

congratulating the Edwards family for their historic 100th 

birthday in the Saskatoon community. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Champion of Change 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

CBC is currently engaged in a search for champions of change. 

This contest celebrates volunteerism and those who work hard 

to make Canada a better place. One of the top 10 finalists is 

Welde Yemane from Saskatoon. 

 

His work with Habitat for Humanity was inspired by the very 

hardships he had to endure as a refugee. Born in Eritrea, this 

remarkable 29-year-old was deported by Ethiopia to Sudan 

during a violent conflict. He was then shipped to Egypt where 

he was arrested as an illegal immigrant and detained in prison. 

Eventually the brave Welde made his way to Canada. 

 

This cycle of displacement and hardship made the Habitat for 

Humanity organization a perfect fit for his charitable spirit. 

Now that Welde calls Saskatoon home, he dedicates himself to 

building homes for the less fortunate. His gift of giving is 

selfless. And even though he spends considerable time helping 

those in need through his volunteerism at Habitat for Humanity, 

he still manages to work two part-time jobs, learn English 

language and culture, and volunteer at a nursing home. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, Welde is truly a testament to the very best of 

the human spirit. I ask all members to join me in cheering 

Welde along in his efforts. No matter what the outcome of the 

contest, Welde is certainly Saskatchewan’s champion of 

change. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Green Week in Regina 

 

Ms. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, this week has been declared Green 

Week in Regina. Now Green Week can be interpreted to be 

about preserving the environment and being more conscientious 

about reducing, reusing, recycling, but this Green Week, Mr. 

Speaker, is referring to pride in the Saskatchewan Roughrider 

football club. Rider nation has been encouraged to wear their 

green with pride this week and support and encourage our 

Riders as they square off against the Calgary Stampeders this 

Sunday in Calgary. 

 

Last Sunday certainly was a memorable one for Saskatchewan 

Roughrider fans. As the group I was with was nervously 

chomping down on popcorn and losing our voices from 

cheering, the 13th man was in full force, Mr. Speaker. Well, 

Mr. Speaker, the Riders did not disappoint Rider nation and 

won the playoff game over the BC [British Columbia] Lions 41 

to 38. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have full confidence in the Riders and in the 

13th man with yet another win in the Western final on Sunday 

in Calgary. Saskatchewan fans and the Rider organization are 

admired by CFL [Canadian Football League] fans all across 

Canada, and we have something to be incredibly proud of here 

in Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, I encourage everyone to 

wear their green, show their green pride, and I would encourage 

all members of the Assembly to cheer “Go Riders!” this Sunday 

in Calgary. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Support for Agricultural Producers 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, question to the Minister of 

Agriculture. As the minister knows, we have had a very, very 

difficult summer in the province as it relates to grain production 

as well as red meat production in the province. There were 12 

million acres unseeded or flooded. The crop that did come off, 

much of it is in not the greatest condition, poor grades, and 

people are having difficulty in marketing their grain. 

 

My question that many farmers are calling and asking about is 

whether or not the government and the minister have had time 

to formulate a plan to pay out $100 an acre for the acres that 

weren’t seeded and $150 a head for breeding stock in the 

province so that farmers will be able to keep their herd in place 

and seed the crop next year. Can the minister inform the House 

whether there is in fact a plan in place? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ve been following the Leader of the Opposition’s 

comments in the last six, eight months with great interest. 

 

I find it amazing that now — on top of the $50 an acre for 

unseeded acres in the province through crop insurance and, of 

course on top of that, a $360 million program between the 

federal and provincial government for another $30 an acre 

across the province — the Leader of the Opposition wants an 

additional $100 per acre out there. On top of that, last Friday he 

also asked for $150 per head for cattle across the province. 

When you tally all these asks up, last Friday alone was about 

$1.2 billion on top of everything we’ve done already this year, 

Mr. Speaker. I wonder where all those dollars were when he 

was Ag minister and deputy premier, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, farmers in the province who 

have faced a devastating summer are really asking this minister 

and, more importantly, the federal government to come forward 

with a plan to help protect farmers and farm families. And it 

doesn’t help much for the minister to make fun or mock the fact 

that there’s hurt and families are suffering as they go into this 

winter. 

 

Now my words may not mean much, but the APAS 

[Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan] wrote 

the minister on October 7th. And in the letter they said to him, 



6106 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2010 

and I want to quote, they said they need more support, and I 

quote, “to ensure the survival of those who were most affected 

and who would normally be viable if it were not for a disaster 

of this magnitude and scope.” The debate between the minister 

and I is important, but what’s more important is that farm 

families are hurting, and many of them won’t make it through 

the winter without a payment and support from the federal 

government and the provincial government. 

 

Can the minister indicate whether he has lobbied the 13 

Conservative MPs [Member of Parliament] to help in this 

project of getting money for farmers or whether he intends to 

continue to play politics and not move quickly to help farm 

families as we approach winter? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, for the Leader of the Opposition’s information, we’ve 

probably talked to the federal minister on a weekly basis, this 

summer being that it was so wet and everything else. As the 

Leader of the Opposition would know, and the members 

opposite, this week we announced a feed and forage program. 

Right now in this province, we have about 180 per cent of 

normal feed, the problem being, as the Leader of the Opposition 

has said, it’s not all in the right areas. We came out with the 

feed assistance program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, cattle producers in this province were also asking 

for the $30 an acre to restore pastures and forage and hay land 

right across the province in the wet areas especially, but right 

across the province. We did that, Mr. Speaker. We announced 

that last week at SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities]. And, Mr. Speaker, I have a quote from Dave 

Marit at SARM when we made the announcement last week. 

And he, a quote, says: 

 

“We appreciate the provincial government recognizing the 

difficulty some livestock producers are facing and 

stepping up to provide this new support,” SARM 

President Dave Marit said. “This program will help 

producers facing feed shortages and also help them 

re-establish their hay and pasture land for future years.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are coming to the table for producers across 

this province as we have for the last three years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

[10:30] 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the fact that the 

minister put forward a program for support for moving feed at 

22 cents per tonne per mile. I think it amounts to a few dollars 

per tonne. But as he knows, that money will be split between 

the producer of the hay, the truckers, as well as the farmers and 

families who get the hay, so it’s not very much help. And what 

APAS and other farm organizations across Western Canada are 

calling for is in fact a $150 per head for breeding stock and $75 

per yearling to keep the cattle over this winter because, as we 

know, red meat industry in this province is being devastated. 

Hog production is 50 per cent of what it was when that minister 

became Minister of Agriculture, and beef production is down. 

APAS also identifies, in the letter they wrote to you under the 

heading “Upcoming Credit Crunch” . . . and in this paragraph 

of the letter, they talk about the credit crunch that will come 

next spring. And I quote and they say, “. . . we have begun 

discussing how this year’s disaster may have serious credit 

implications for many producers and the sector as a whole in 

the planting of the 2011 crop and beyond.” 

 

What plan has the minister in place and the federal government 

in place to ensure the crop gets seeded on those 12 million acres 

that were flooded last spring? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I don’t know if the Leader of the Opposition follows 

cattle prices very closely, but if he did when he was Ag minister 

and then he does this year, he’d notice a bit of a difference. 

Cattle prices have improved dramatically right across this 

province, and it was a long time coming. Now are they as high 

as we would like to see them? Certainly not, and every 

producer would like to see them higher. But, Mr. Speaker, from 

last year to this year, we see an increase of about $133 per head, 

what you can receive for a calf from what you could last fall. 

For a 4 to 500 hundredweight, about $157 a head more. Mr. 

Speaker, these prices have improved. We’ve done a number of 

things right across this sector. 

 

And I want to give the member another quote. Kevin Hursch 

says, on our payment announcement last week, “. . . in the case 

of the ongoing excessive moisture problems faced by livestock 

producers, this week’s provincial announcement of 

transportation subsidy is a logical approach.” He also goes on to 

say, “. . . this ad hoc program is taking a targeted, reasonable 

approach to address [producers’] problems [across the 

province].” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are there for producers right across this 

province. And I might remind the Leader of the Opposition, the 

Ag budget in this province, when he was Ag minister, ran 

around $200 million a year. This year, Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan Party Ag budget will be . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. I recognize 

the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facilities 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Yesterday the Minister of Health was asked 

whether the Minister of Justice’s brother has the electrical 

contract to build the Amicus facility in Saskatoon. The minister 

refused to answer the question. We know that Miners 

Construction received a $27 million, untendered contract. We 

know that the company that got this long-term nursing home 

has connections to the Premier’s chief of staff. We know that an 

electrical company with this kind of contract will represent 

millions of dollars. 

 

So to the minister: did the Minister of Justice’s brother get the 

electrical contract for the Amicus deal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 



November 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6107 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve answered this 

question a number of times in the House, Mr. Speaker. The 

Catholic Health Ministry does an absolutely great job of 

delivering health care around the province. The Catholic Health 

Ministry, through Amicus, has decided to put up a long-term 

care facility, a long-term care facility, Mr. Speaker, in . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. I recognize the Minister of 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So Amicus 

has decided to build a long-term care facility that we are going 

to be contracting those beds for, Mr. Speaker. We’ll be paying 

for the provision of care as well as some of capital expenses as 

we move forward, Mr. Speaker. But it is Amicus and the 

Catholic Health Ministry that are moving forward and are 

building this building, Mr. Speaker. If they chose to tender the 

building, that was up to them. If they picked the contract, Mr. 

Speaker, that they wanted, that’s up to them, Mr. Speaker. That 

isn’t our call. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, we know that the Minister of 

Justice was forced to step down as Liquor and Gaming minister 

after it was revealed that he owned shares in Deer Ridge motels 

and one of the directors of Deer Ridge is Michael Stensrud. We 

know that Michael Stensrud has donated $16,000 to the Sask 

Party in recent years and $1,000 to the Minister of Justice in his 

last campaign. And we know that he’s been rewarded for his 

generosity with an untendered building contract worth $27 

million. Now we hear that the Minister of Justice’s brother has 

the electrical contract worth several millions of dollars. 

 

A simple question: what do people across the province that are 

doing bake sales, doing runathons, doing whatever they can to 

raise their 35 per cent, what do they have to do? Do they have 

to give the Sask Party money? Do they have to be connected to 

the Sask Party? What do they have to do to get a nursing home? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, communities around the 

province, in fact 13 of them, found out what they had to do to 

get a nursing home in this province: un-elect the NDP [New 

Democratic Party]. 

 

Thirteen long-term care facilities will be built in this province, 

Mr. Speaker, starting with Watrous which is already . . . 

construction will be starting soon. There will be a number of 

tenders on the other 13 long-term care facilities. 

 

As we move forward in this province, Mr. Speaker, Amicus is a 

deal that has been struck between the Ministry of Health, the 

Saskatoon Health Region, and the Catholic Health Ministry that 

has provided care in communities around this province. I don’t 

know if they . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I’d ask . . . There’s a 

handful of opposition members that are making it difficult to 

hear the response to the member’s question from the minister. 

The minister may complete his answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, Amicus has 

entered into an agreement. They are building the facility. It is 

their facility that we’ll be leasing beds from, with some money 

going towards the capital costs over the next number of years, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s their building. They own the building. If they 

choose to tender or not tender, that’s their decision. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition doesn’t buy the 

minister’s argument one iota. 

 

Let’s review this. Last October the Minister of Health was in 

discussions about the Amicus deal. The Saskatoon Health 

Region knew nothing about this until January. This deal was 

foisted on the Saskatoon Regional Health Authority, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know that this is an inside deal, $27 million 

worth of loan guarantee by the taxpayers of this province for an 

insider Sask Party deal, Mr. Speaker. So I have a question. How 

much money does this insider deal, how much money is it 

going to cost the people of our province when this is all said 

and done, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, for 16 years in this 

province not a new long-term care bed was built on top of the 

complement that we had. That is the record of the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker. They would far rather have people sitting in acute care 

centres, Mr. Speaker, far rather have people in acute care 

facilities instead of proper long-term care facilities. 

 

That’s not the way of the Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. 

Speaker. We are building appropriate facilities, and we are 

partnering with appropriate . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I recognize the 

Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we are making sure that 

the seniors in our province do not have to live in acute care 

centres. We are going to be partnering with the Catholic Health 

Ministry to build a facility that will allow seniors to age 

properly in an appropriate facility, Mr. Speaker. It’s an added 

100 beds on top of the complement that the Saskatoon Health 

Region already has, Mr. Speaker. I know the NDP may not buy 

it, but I can guarantee you when the 100 seniors are in that 

facility, they’re certainly going to buy it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, governments have been 

building nursing homes for decades — decades, Mr. Speaker. 

But it doesn’t have to be an insider deal, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 



6108 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2010 

time the government stopped covering this up. This has been a 

cover-up from the start. They’ve covered up the fact that the 

Saskatoon Health Region had this deal foisted upon it. They 

appoint the people to the board, and they provide the funding. 

Now recently they’ve covered up by redacting 1,800 pages of 

an FOI [freedom of information] request. 

 

My question is simply this: when is the Sask Party government 

going to stop this cover-up for their Sask Party friends? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I mean, sensationalism I 

guess is her mantra, Mr. Speaker. This is no cover-up. This is a 

good deal for Saskatchewan people. It’s a good deal for 

citizens, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I would ask the member, when she was in government, 

sitting in cabinet, how long did they cover up the fact that 

SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company] had absolutely no private partnership whatsoever? I 

believe it was six years, Mr. Speaker, where they absolutely 

deceived the public, Mr. Speaker, on that deal. 

 

This is a good deal for Saskatchewan people. It’s even a better 

deal for seniors. They’ll be able to live the end of their life in an 

appropriate facility, Mr. Speaker, and we’re proud of it. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Out-of-Province Medical Care 

 

Ms. Junor: — We’ll see how the minister can put potatoes into 

this one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Today’s Leader-Post profiled the case of 30-year-old Jeff 

Lukye, an Estevan man who was first diagnosed with colorectal 

cancer two years ago. Jeff had surgery to remove the tumour. 

Now the cancer has returned. The only option available to Jeff 

in Saskatchewan now is chemotherapy, but he’s been told that 

this likely won’t save his life. Jeff has been told by the Mayo 

Clinic that the only option left to him is extremely radical 

surgery. This surgery is not available in Saskatchewan and will 

cost the Lukyes $300,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will his government approve Jeff 

Lukye’s request for coverage for this life-saving procedure? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, any time that there is 

out-of-country coverage there is a process it has to go through. 

A specialist has to recommend or request this type of 

procedure, referral outside of the country, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As of yesterday, we had not received any referral. The ministry 

has been working on it, working with the physicians involved, 

Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to say that that reference letter came 

today. The coverage will be approved. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister has 

promised this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan that 

cases like this will be fast-tracked. There’ll be a faster, quicker 

response from his department and his office. And he has told us 

that there is a review going on for out-of-province coverage. 

That has been going on since 2008. 

 

So cases like this continue to have to hit the newspaper and the 

opposition’s desk before the minister will stand up and say yes 

we will be covering it. So I would like to know, where is the 

review that started in 2008? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I did mention that we 

would be going through a review of the out-of-country 

processes and approvals. That has pretty much been complete. I 

expect something will be going to cabinet in the very near 

future. And after that has gone through the proper processes in 

cabinet, it will be made public. So that review will be made 

public very soon once it goes through the proper procedures. 

 

I don’t know what that member was just implying, though. That 

the fact there had not been a letter from a specialist until this 

morning and it was because it hit the front page of the 

Leader-Post . . . is that why it was approved? Is that what she’s 

implying, Mr. Speaker? Because nothing could be further from 

the truth. We have been working on this for the last number of 

days, Mr. Speaker. We have contacted the specialist directly 

from the Ministry of Health to make sure that this would be 

approved. That’s unbelievable what that member opposite is 

implying. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, what is unbelievable is that this 

Sask Party used a family in their Sask Party ads in the 2007 

election, used that situation to further their own interests, then 

paid the Bonderuds’ out-of-province costs. 

 

Now without any other of these specialists’ letters or without a 

review, now the minister stands and says this is something that 

he’s been reviewing for two or three days. He is inconsistent. 

And it is hypocritical because people are still waiting for 

questions asked a week ago that were taken notice of. I don’t 

have the answers to that. There’s still people waiting. There’s 

still people who are not sure of how they can get 

out-of-province coverage. 

 

The minister only reacts when it comes to the House or hits the 

newspaper. And is that what people have to do? They can’t all 

wait till the next election to get their cases into Sask Party ads. 

Is that what they have to do? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

[10:45] 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a process for 

people that require service out of province. It was a process that 

was in place under the former government. We will be looking 

at . . . have looked at that, and there will be some changes 



November 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6109 

made, Mr. Speaker. In the meantime, there is the process 

involved. I can’t believe, Mr. Speaker, the basis of that 

question. In fact it, quite frankly, does not deserve a response. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Training for Occupational Therapists 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Institute of Health 

Information released a report last week stating that 

Saskatchewan has the lowest number of occupational therapists 

in the country. For every 100,000 people, we have just 25 

occupational therapists. Alberta and Manitoba have 41. 

 

My question is this. We know that an occupational therapy 

program at the U of S is ready to go, but they need funding. 

Why is the Sask Party government refusing to fund the 

program? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education and Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much for an 

opportunity to provide an update. And of course the premise in 

the claim from the member opposite is unfortunate because of 

course we all know . . . And this has gone on for years, Mr. 

Speaker, both under the former government and this 

government. In fact Saskatchewan purchases seats for 

occupational therapists through the University of Alberta and 

has for years. 

 

The discussion, Mr. Speaker, about ways to move occupational 

therapists here, Mr. Speaker, was premised on a couple of 

things, Mr. Speaker. It was premised on making sure that the 

Academic Health Science buildings actually went from rhetoric 

under the NDP to reality under this government, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s premise number one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It was also premised on making sure that we didn’t allow the 

College of Medicine to go back on probation, Mr. Speaker, that 

the members opposite oversaw. It’s a sorry record for the NDP 

on this file, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government has a 

track record of paying lip service to health professionals. We 

know that negotiations with the Health Sciences Association 

are now stalled. Now they’re dragging their feet on 

implementing the program and addressing the scarcity of OTs 

[occupational therapist]. 

 

Margaret Tompson wrote this in a letter to The StarPhoenix: 

“Saskatchewan’s approach of continued inaction has led it to 

being in a worse situation than the Northwest Territories.” She 

goes on to say, “Each year of delay will make it harder, if not 

impossible, to close the gap with other provinces.” 

 

To the minister: what is the reason for the Sask Party 

government’s continued inaction and delay and when will it 

finally stop? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to actually 

taking action, rather than the rich rhetoric that we hear from the 

members opposite of the NDP, let’s just review some recent 

dates. 

 

On March 17th a new provincial agency was opened for the 

recruitment and retention of physicians in this province. On 

July 7th, four medical residents were announced in Swift 

Current. On October 12th, we announced that more than 800 

nurses were already here, Mr. Speaker, a year ahead of 

schedule. Mr. Speaker, on October 15th of this year, we 

announced an extra 170 new nurse training seats for this 

province, Mr. Speaker. On October 21st, an additional $2 

million, Mr. Speaker — we announced it right over here at the 

General Hospital — as third-year medical students are now able 

to practise in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know there’s more to do, but we’re making up 

for the infrastructure deficit and the health benefit deficit that 

the members opposite oversaw for 16 long years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when the minister was shuffled 

out of the Labour portfolio, I thought we might see the end of 

the over-the-top replies, but it never fails that the minister 

doesn’t disappoint. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the lowest number of 

occupational therapists in the country, and the need for them 

will only grow in the years ahead as our elderly population 

increases. Everyone, except apparently the Sask Party 

government, recognizes that the best way to increase the 

number of occupational therapists is to have a local education 

program. Mr. Speaker, what is missing is the political will to 

get it done and the funding to make it happen. 

 

To the minister: can we expect the funding soon, or has the 

Sask Party government spent all their money on untendered 

contracts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Advanced Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve just highlighted a 

number of recent announcements that reflect and reinforce our 

commitment, Mr. Speaker — our commitment to ensuring that 

we’re helping to ensure there are more medical doctors not just 

being trained but practising in this province, that there are more 

nurses not just operating, Mr. Speaker, and serving the interests 

of our communities across the province but that we can actually 

see that there will be increased training seats. And, Mr. 

Speaker, these investments are real. They are ongoing, and 

they’re appreciated, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Regarding occupational therapists, Mr. Speaker, it’s a little rich 

from the members opposite, after 16 years, Mr. Speaker, with 

no action or activity, Mr. Speaker. First we need to make sure 

the building’s in place, that’s the Academic Health Sciences 



6110 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2010 

building. The members opposite never did that. And, Mr. 

Speaker, then we’ll be able to look at the focus on how to move 

forward with occupational therapists. As of right now, Mr. 

Speaker, the provincial government funds these; they’re 

through the University of Alberta. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 

questions 103 through to 239. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers tabled for questions 103 to 239. 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 905 — The Sisters of the Presentation Act, 2010 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 

No. 905, An Act to incorporate the Sisters of the Presentation, 

2010 be now read a second time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 

Melfort that Bill 905 . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. It has been moved by the 

member from Melfort that Bill 905, An Act to incorporate the 

Sisters of the Presentation, 2010 be now read a second time. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Pursuant to rule 100, this Bill stands referred 

to the Standing Committee on Private Bills. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Provincial Finances 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s the 

unfortunate circumstance that arises in the Assembly here today 

to debate something that’s hugely important to Saskatchewan 

people, but something that simply shouldn’t be occurring, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The motion that I’ll be moving at the end of this 75-minute 

debate is: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the Sask Party government 

for its unprecedented mismanagement of our finances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a very important debate for the people of 

this province, Mr. Speaker. What is a shame, Mr. Speaker, is 

that we see such a continuation, Mr. Speaker, of the 

mismanagement. We’ve just gone through question period here 

today, Mr. Speaker. And we had no answers, Mr. Speaker, on a 

project that’s gone untendered, that’s fully backstopped by 

public funds, Mr. Speaker, by taxpayers of Saskatchewan — 

$27 million. And we don’t have a single answer on this project 

and it’s gone untendered to Sask Party insiders, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is but one example, but one example of a government that 

has lost its way, a government that is mismanaging the 

opportunity that it was provided, a government that is 

mismanaging the prosperity of Saskatchewan, a government 

that is failing to deliver on the vision, the plan that 

Saskatchewan people are trying to achieve, Mr. Speaker. And 

we’re going to stand up, Mr. Speaker, and make our points. 

 

If we dial back this just a few years here, Mr. Speaker, we look 

across the way at a Sask Party government that came out of the 

gates offering many things, Mr. Speaker. Of that, Mr. Speaker, 

they offered to balance budgets, Mr. Speaker. They haven’t 

balanced the last two budgets. Two out of three have been 

deficits, Mr. Speaker, and this is of grave consequence to 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

If we look at the dollars that this government has had at its 

disposal — unprecedented resources, unprecedented revenues, 

Mr. Speaker — what we see in fact is an unprecedented 

opportunity that’s been squandered by the Sask Party. They 

have proven themselves utterly untrustworthy to the 

Saskatchewan public as it relates to the management of our 

finances, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we have a shameful spotlight that has now shone upon 

Saskatchewan for the harmless fiscal management that this 

government has provided. We see that spotlight, Mr. Speaker, 

shone upon us by the Fraser Institute. We see it shone upon us 

by The Financial Post, the National Post, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

a place that Saskatchewan shouldn’t be occupying because, Mr. 

Speaker, if we go back just a few years ago, what we had was a 

province where an economy was in full swing, where there’s 

development going on, and all sorts of economic numbers were 

at record highs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we see now, Mr. Speaker, is a government that inherited 

those revenues from that economy, Mr. Speaker, unprecedented 

highs in revenues. And we see a government that has somehow, 

somehow found its way back into debt and deficit, Mr. Speaker. 

Even a modicum, even a modicum of financial responsibility or 

good financial stewardship would have provided and yielded 

huge surpluses to Saskatchewan people, but instead this 

government has squandered that opportunity. 

 

Now the shameful part of this, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s not this 

government’s money, Mr. Speaker, that they’re squandering. 

It’s the people’s money. It’s the taxpayers across 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, who are looking for a more 



November 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6111 

prosperous time, looking for a time where they see the benefits 

of the hard work that they provide, looking for the benefits of 

living in what we frame so regularly as a resource-rich 

province, Mr. Speaker. But we see all of that being undone, Mr. 

Speaker, by a government that can’t manage its finances, a 

government that has inherited record highs in revenues, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

If we go back just three years, this government actually has 28 

per cent more revenues than the previous administration did just 

three years ago, Mr. Speaker — 28 per cent more, Mr. Speaker. 

When you think about it, it’s unfathomable that they’ve found 

their way back into deficit, Mr. Speaker. They’ve outstripped 

somehow, Mr. Speaker, irresponsibly somehow outstripped that 

28 per cent increase in revenues by spending. 

 

They’ve been off in all directions, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard it 

from economists. We’ve heard it from third party validators 

across our nation, Mr. Speaker. And we have a government that 

is now putting at risk the shared prosperity of Saskatchewan’s 

future and Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So when we’re looking at this, Mr. Speaker, we’ve said from 

day one, root of this problem was the lack of ability of this 

government to constrain and to contain spending. It took off 

like a lightning bolt when these guys were elected. Runaway 

spending was instituted, and we have an unsustainable plan 

here within our budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Two consecutive years of deficit. What this government’s going 

to be likely going into an election with, Mr. Speaker, is three 

deficits out of four budgets. Can you imagine that, Mr. 

Speaker? Three deficits out of four budgets at a time of record 

highs in revenues. It perplexes Saskatchewan people how that 

can occur. 

 

And I know we spend regular time travelling this province and 

meeting with Saskatchewan people and business leaders and 

financial officers and sitting down, who are interested in the 

books of our province. And we sit and we look at the revenues 

that are being provided to this government. Nobody can figure 

out how irresponsible this government, how irresponsible this 

government has been. It disgusts individuals when they look at 

the circumstance that this government was provided and the 

fiscal trend line that they’ve put us on, Mr. Speaker — back 

into debt and deficit, debt to GDP [gross domestic product] 

going in the wrong direction, Mr. Speaker. And this is hugely 

unfortunate. 

 

Not only have they spent the revenues that are at unprecedented 

highs, Mr. Speaker; they’ve spent what’s there in government 

reserves, Mr. Speaker. They spent what’s there in the rainy day 

fund, Mr. Speaker. This rainy day fund that’s had billions of 

dollars has been a revolving door from day one, Mr. Speaker. 

At a time of record highs in revenues, they’ve burnt all those 

dollars out of the rainy day fund, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And secondly they’ve stripped all of the equity — in fact, all; 

that’s a fair statement, Mr. Speaker — out of our Crown 

Investments Corporation, our Crown corporations of 

Saskatchewan, at a time where those corporations are requiring 

the equity that they earn, Mr. Speaker, to reinvest in their 

networks and reinvest in the people of Saskatchewan. They’ve 

been starved of that capital, Mr. Speaker, taken by a reckless 

government, stripped all of that equity out, over $1.4 billion 

over the past couple of years, Mr. Speaker. And now they only 

have one place to go, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the consumer. 

That’s the businesses across this province. That’s the families 

across this province. That’s the farms across this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This burn rate on capital and equity, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely 

unsustainable. The fact that this government instituted a 

spending plan 32 per cent higher than it was just two years ago, 

outstripping the massive increases and blessed circumstance 

that we should have had on the revenue side of the equation, 

Mr. Speaker, is hugely damaging to Saskatchewan people. 

 

Not only have they outspent those resources, Mr. Speaker. As 

I’ve said, they’ve had a burn rate on all other capital of 

government, a very short-sighted approach to government, Mr. 

Speaker, and certainly not one that’s building for a prosperous 

tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people, 

legislators, businesses, farms, across communities, across 

Saskatchewan, have worked incredibly hard to right the fiscal 

mess that was the 1980s in this province, Mr. Speaker. The 

work to get this fiscal trend line going in the right direction and 

start to get towards the rightful prosperity that Saskatchewan 

people should be benefiting from, Mr. Speaker, is something 

Saskatchewan people have worked incredibly hard for, 

something Saskatchewan communities have worked incredibly 

hard for, and something they’ve sacrificed for, Mr. Speaker, 

something they’ve sacrificed for. 

 

[11:00] 

 

To see this foolish, reckless government come into office, Mr. 

Speaker, and squander this historic opportunity is absolutely 

upsetting to individuals across this province who thought it was 

Saskatchewan’s time to continue to move forward as they had 

been under the good stewardship and management of the New 

Democrats, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we look at a government that’s outstripping its revenues in a 

completely unsustainable fashion. We look at a government that 

has a burn rate on equity, Mr. Speaker, that has a consequence 

for Saskatchewan people directly when they’re asked to pay 

higher rates in their utilities or you name it, Mr. Speaker, for 

depriving that capital that’s required in those Crown 

corporations, Mr. Speaker. And that’s a concern to all 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

What’s a further concern, Mr. Speaker — not only to 

Saskatchewan people, but specifically to Saskatchewan people, 

but from a national and international perspective, Mr. Speaker 

— is that this government continues to be out of line with 

public sector accounting standards, Mr. Speaker. This is the 

only province, Mr. Speaker, in all of Canada, in all of Canada, 

Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t report from a summary basis. And 

you might think, well why is that, Mr. Speaker? You might 

question, why wouldn’t they simply report from a summary 

perspective? These are the questions that individuals are asking 

all across our province and that financial leaders are asking 

across our country, Mr. Speaker. 



6112 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2010 

What it allows is a deceptive picture of our finances, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s rightful time that we move from two sets of books 

to one set of books. But the problem, Mr. Speaker, for this 

government is it doesn’t match their political ambitions. It 

doesn’t allow them to hide the debt that they’re creating all over 

the place, Mr. Speaker, both outside of government that 

government’s on the hook for — like Amicus, like Northland 

Power, like health care deals, Mr. Speaker — but it doesn’t 

allow this government to hide the debt that they are in the 

Crown corporations when they’ve had this constant drain on 

those resources, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s time for us to be moving to summary finances, Mr. 

Speaker, for Saskatchewan people to be able to see the full, 

entire picture, to be able to compare themselves 

interprovincially, Mr. Speaker. And what they’re going to see 

from that perspective will be something that’s unfortunate, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We hear this Premier, who of course is the biggest cheerleader 

we’ve ever seen, Mr. Speaker, the worst manager we’ve also 

ever seen, Mr. Speaker, who will regularly get up and try to 

somehow compare our budget with other provinces. Well this is 

the most irresponsible and deceptive thing a person could do. 

It’s completely misleading, Mr. Speaker, to take our finances, 

Mr. Speaker, that are accounted for in an inappropriate way that 

are not consistent with public sector best practice, Mr. Speaker, 

and to try to compare that to provinces that comply with those 

accounting standards, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We have a Premier who will do everything he can to try to trick 

the public into not believing that there is a deficit there, Mr. 

Speaker. But all Saskatchewan people have to do is look to the 

minister’s own budget documents, look to his summary. The 

deficit’s pointed out right there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister from Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, is shaking his head 

on this one, Mr. Speaker. He needs to look at his own summary 

financial book, Mr. Speaker, recognize that we have our second 

consecutive deficit, and recognize the huge deficit that we have 

going on. 

 

I’m just looking up at the time, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

disappointed actually in only having 15 minutes here today. 

 

What we need to recognize is that third party validators across 

this province are weighing in on a government that’s lost its 

way, that’s proven itself reckless with our finances. 

Saskatchewan people won’t tolerate this kind of management. 

 

We were focused in here today and we’re going to be focused 

in many more days, Mr. Speaker, on this unprecedented activity 

of untendered contracts going to Sask Party insiders, Mr. 

Speaker. This is a bizarre activity and something that’s 

completely unacceptable — $27 million of taxpayers’ money 

put at risk, Mr. Speaker. And when you don’t tender projects, 

Mr. Speaker — which is absolutely unheard of across Canada, 

across the international community, Mr. Speaker — what you 

do is you make them suspect to corruption, you make them 

suspect to abuse, and you make them suspect to waste, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This is something we need to fight against. We need to make 

sure that procedures are in place such as tendering our public 

dollars, Mr. Speaker, our public projects, that provides 

transparency and accountability, and protects and safeguards 

the taxpaying public, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We laughed last year. The Minister of Finance created what he 

called an efficiency secretariat, Mr. Speaker — he funded it for 

$1 million last year — to deal with a problem of his own 

making. This government instituted a 32 per cent increase on 

spending, then they go to spend $1 million to tell them on how 

to cut spending. 

 

Well first of all, that should be a regular process within the 

Ministry of Finance and Treasury Board, Mr. Speaker — how 

to constrain, how to manage, how to find efficiencies. The 

minister said last year on November 25th that the secretariat 

hadn’t yet found any efficiencies, Mr. Speaker. They had no 

recommendations. He said that in a couple of years, if they 

hadn’t proven themselves effective, they would wind down the 

project. 

 

Well you know what, Mr. Speaker? They wound it down four 

months later. Four months later. By the minister’s own words, 

this was a $1 million flop, Mr. Speaker. A $1 million waste of 

Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money. A $1 million boondoggle, Mr. 

Speaker. And this is just one example, but one example of a 

government that’s lost its way on the side of finances and is 

squandering Saskatchewan’s rightful and shared prosperity, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have a circumstance before us, Mr. Speaker, and a distinct 

decision to make in the next election, Mr. Speaker. Are we 

going to choose a government that’s proven itself responsible 

with our finances? A government — that being the New 

Democrats, Mr. Speaker — who have a record of sound fiscal 

management, a record of improving our debt to GDP ratios, a 

record of providing for Saskatchewan people, a record and a 

plan and a vision and certainly an ability to manage, Mr. 

Speaker, the prosperity that Saskatchewan people and 

communities and businesses so rightfully deserve, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s absolutely unacceptable, Mr. Speaker, to see a government 

that’s increased spending to the tune that it has, outstripping 

unprecedented revenues, burn rate on capital and government 

resources, Mr. Speaker. And all of which this government is 

asking Saskatchewan communities to pay a price for, whether 

it’s in long-term care, Mr. Speaker, in rural communities across 

Saskatchewan, whether it’s in education in rural Saskatchewan 

or in urban Saskatchewan, yesterday in Saskatoon highlighted 

specifically. The shameful aspect of this is that Saskatchewan 

people are being asked to pay the price for this government’s 

mismanagement. 

 

The motion I’m going to be moving here today, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s going to be spoken to and debated and that’s going to 

heard by Saskatchewan people is read as follows. I so move: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the Sask Party government 

for its unprecedented mismanagement of our provincial 

finances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a debate that is hugely important to the 

future of Saskatchewan, the prosperity of Saskatchewan, the 



November 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6113 

communities of Saskatchewan, and the families of 

Saskatchewan. I hope the members across follow this closely. I 

know many people across Saskatchewan are doing so. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly . . . Order. 

The motion before the Assembly is the motion presented by the 

member from Regina Rosemont: 

 

That this Assembly condemn the Sask Party government 

. . . 

 

Order. 

 

. . . for its unprecedented mismanagement of our 

provincial finances. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 

Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to take part in this 75-minute debate, and obviously I 

will not be supporting the motion. 

 

You notice the member from Rosemont did not, Regina 

Rosemont did not have one fact in his speech. I never heard one 

fact in there at all. All he did was try to smear the 

Saskatchewan Party government — innuendo, 

misrepresentation, mis-facts. And I’d like to just straighten 

some of the reality out and put the facts into the record so that 

the people of Saskatchewan can compare what the 

Saskatchewan Party government has been doing for the last 

three years, and what the NDP opposition has been trying, to 

smear us and muddy the waters. 

 

Since taking office, Mr. Speaker, our government has 

undertaken a record amount of investment in key priorities. We 

reduced the debt and lowered the taxes, Mr. Speaker; $2.6 

billion in a single year was the reduction that we had in the 

GRF [General Revenue Fund], reducing the debt to $4.2 billion. 

That’s the largest reduction in Saskatchewan history. I would 

say that’s a very, very important item that we did in 

Saskatchewan in the budgeting process that was headed by the 

former Finance minister from Melfort. 

 

What else did the Saskatchewan Party do? Well we 

implemented the largest education property tax cut in the 

province’s history. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to finish that 

commitment off that we made in the 2007 campaign and reduce 

education property tax even more. Mr. Speaker, this is 

something that wherever I go across the province and in my 

constituency, people come up to me and thank us for what we 

did as far as the education property tax and welcome the 

reductions that are coming in the next budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another item that the Saskatchewan Party 

government has done, we have invested almost $3 billion into 

infrastructure in this province since we formed government in 

2007. This is a record amount of infrastructure that has taken 

place, construction and repairs in this province. It was long 

overdue because of the 16 years of neglect by that opposition 

over there. The nerve of them to stand here and say that we 

mismanaged the budget and money when we have had massive 

infrastructure investment in this province to make up for their 

lack of commitment to Saskatchewan, and to rural 

Saskatchewan in particular, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In 2009-2010 the Saskatchewan Party government increased 

revenue sharing with the municipalities to $167.7 million, a 43 

per cent increase from when we took office — municipalities 

receiving more than ever before, Mr. Speaker. And again, we 

are going to finish that commitment of a 1 per cent on the PST 

[provincial sales tax] to municipalities in revenue sharing. 

That’s another important commitment that we will fulfill in 

next year’s budget. 

 

The opposition, Mr. Speaker, say that the Saskatchewan Party 

never have had a balanced budget. Well we have had three 

balanced budgets, and we will have a fourth balanced budget 

come this spring, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And all the while that we’re reducing taxes and we’re putting 

billions of dollars into infrastructure, we have looked out for the 

people in this province that have some difficulties. We have, as 

an example, we’ve helped families by implementing the child 

tax credit amount by more than 75 per cent. We have also 

lowered income to individuals, to 80,000 individuals in the 

province. That’s another item, Mr. Speaker, that people were 

very welcome and look forward to because that’s money put 

back into low-income families. These people needed that 

money. And they take that money; they invest in the economy, 

and it generates more revenue for the government so we can 

pay for health, education, and helping people that are 

disadvantaged in our economy. 

 

Other things that we’ve done, Mr. Speaker: we doubled the 

Saskatchewan low-income tax credit and make it a higher 

income threshold — the first increase to seniors’ income plan in 

16 years. The opposition NDP, they paint themselves as the 

friend of seniors, the friend of people that are dispossessed in 

Saskatchewan society, and they only had lip service to the 

people of this province while they were in power for 16 years. 

The Saskatchewan party government has consistently looked 

out for seniors and people of low income. 

 

We have doubled the caregivers’ tax credit, as another example, 

Mr. Speaker. And something fundamental that we’ve done, and 

the NDP never give us credit for, is we have funded over 1,600 

low-income housing units and as well as 2,700 new daycare 

spaces in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think that just shows the difference between the 

Saskatchewan Party. We care about the average person in this 

province, where the NDP only ever paid lip service to people in 

this province. All the while we’re looking after the seniors and 

people of low income and the shortage of housing, we also have 

a plan to grow the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to quote from the 

Scotiabank group regional economic outlook, dated November 

7, 2010, and I quote their macro outlook for Saskatchewan: 

 

Saskatchewan is expected to be one of the country’s 

strongest performers in 2011, with real GDP growth of 

3.3%. Their recovery is being led by a resurging potash 

industry (and associated warehousing activity), investment 



6114 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2010 

in the resource sector, and continued expansion of the 

province’s service sector — feeding off strong 

immigration. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the record of the Saskatchewan party 

government in the past three years. We not only look after the 

people in low income and seniors. We have a plan in place to 

have economic growth and development in this province so that 

we continue to have the revenue to build long-term care homes, 

which we are going to build 13 new long-term care homes in 

this province. 

 

[11:15] 

 

We have the money to invest in a children’s hospital, which 

again the NDP only paid lip service to, Mr. Speaker.  

 

Also from the regional economic outlook, trends to watch, and 

again I quote: 

 

Reversing declines of the early 2000s, Saskatchewan has 

seen its population steadily climb to a growth rate of 1.6% 

in 2009. A booming economy has supported an increase in 

both international and inter-provincial arrivals, a trend that 

is expected to continue, supporting above-average 

population growth and retail sales trends in 2011. 

 

What a wonderful record for any province to have. And it’s a 

thank you to our past, our former Finance minister from 

Melfort’s track record in budgeting, lowering taxes, investing in 

infrastructure in this province. And this province is growing. 

 

Just look at the immigration piece, the nominee program that 

we have expanded dramatically since the Saskatchewan Party 

government came into power in 2007. You only need to look at 

the town of Biggar itself. There is now approximately 80 people 

living in Biggar that have come through the nominee program. 

Most of them are from the Philippines, but we have people 

from India that have come through the program, east central 

Europe. 

 

And I know these people first-hand; we go to the same church. 

They have put their children in the local school at St Gabriel’s 

School. There’s 18 more children have enrolled in St. Gabriel’s 

School this year than was expected. And as the families 

continue to come into Biggar, there’s more children enrolling in 

the school. That’s what economic development is all about, is 

to have the families working and living in a community and 

having their children go to the schools. And, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s a record that I’m very proud of to be part of. 

 

To see the bustling community in Biggar and Landis and other 

communities around the constituency, they have immigrants 

coming and finding jobs. And not only finding jobs, many of 

these people have been in only, in the community of Biggar, for 

two years or two and a half years. And now they’re going out 

into the community, and they’re buying homes in record 

numbers. They’re buying real estate, homes in the town of 

Biggar, in Landis, in Delisle, in Vanscoy, and around the 

constituency. Mr. Speaker, that is a very proud record that we 

all should recognize, that the NDP seem to always forget, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I only have a few more seconds, but I can make it very clear 

that the people of Saskatchewan, they look to the Saskatchewan 

Party for good financial management, a good track record, 

investment in the communities, investment in infrastructure. 

And the NDP, all you hear from the NDP are . . . Well let’s just 

say things that aren’t quite true and they’re not factual and . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to enter into 

the debate. And of course I’ll be supporting the motion. 

Because actually over the summer I’ve seen the results of the 

fiscal mismanagement which is what I will probably focus all 

my remarks around. 

 

The member from . . . My colleague from Regina Rosemont set 

the stage about how he described the financial situation. And it 

is nowhere more apparent than in the health system. When this 

government underfunded the health district, the health regions 

in this last 2010 budget . . . The health regions need 7 per cent. 

They need 7 per cent to maintain the level of service that they 

provided to citizens of Saskatchewan last year. They got 3.5, 

Mr. Speaker. So when my colleague and I, my colleague from 

Saskatoon Fairview and I were travelling the province this 

summer, we were seeing the consequences of that 

underfunding. 

 

And just for a flavour of who was told what that they have to 

cut, in Yorkton, the Yorkton region — that’s the Sunrise Health 

Region — they were told they have to find $2.8 million worth 

of savings. In Kelsey Trail, which is around Tisdale, they’ve 

been told to find almost 1 million. In Saskatoon they’ve been 

told to find more than $25 million worth of savings. And in 

Regina, $11 million worth of savings. In Prince Albert, 2.8. 

And in Heartland, they’ve been told to find $1 million. 

 

So all these health regions then consequently started putting 

their budgets together and started looking at what they could do 

to find efficiencies or make cuts. And of course service cuts 

were what resulted. 

 

And we saw, my colleague from Saskatoon Fairview and I saw 

and heard from many of the staff in 55 communities that we 

visited, and many more actual facilities than that, the 

consequences of those budget reductions. We saw anticipated 

cuts or actual cuts happened already in lab services. Either the 

lab services . . . for sure were hours cut, reduced hours, reduced 

staffing. Ambulance cuts, sometimes taking the ambulance 

totally out of the community. Long-term care beds cut. Acute 

care beds cut. And laundry, housekeeping, and dietary services 

cut. Therapists positions hours reduced. And different things to 

deal with staffing costs where LPNs [licensed practical nurse] 

and special care aides were not being replaced on sick time or 

compensation days, and vacancies were not being filled. 

 

So efficiencies were being looked at on the backs of the staff. 

 

And interestingly enough, in some of the districts the direction 

from the government to find efficiencies in sick time and 

overtime and workers’ compensation were actually targeted 

amounts. Like a certain percentage was attached. So in one 

district we heard — and I’m sure it’s probably not just 



November 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6115 

particular to that district — they had actually hired somebody to 

do that, a job that was referred to basically as a sick cop, to 

police all the staff uses of sick time and overtime. 

 

And when we saw these communities, when we went to visit 

these communities, they told us about things that were 

happening in their communities. We mostly visited bigger 

centres . . . Not bigger centres. We mostly visited small centres 

and looked at rural hospitals and rural integrated facilities and 

rural special care homes. The only two that we actually saw that 

were in the larger variety was Lloydminster because that’s an 

unusual circumstance, and Swift Current because it’s new, the 

hospital. Otherwise we saw long-term care facilities across the 

province in various communities and in various states of repair. 

 

We actually visited 10 of the 13 that the government announced 

in 2009 to be built, and in 2010 budget took the funding away 

from those communities. We actually saw the plans for many of 

those facilities either taped on the walls or sitting on tables, and 

communities just described to us the great deal of enthusiasm 

they had for those new facilities. And for sure we agree. A lot 

of the facilities we saw definitely are in need of repair or 

reconstruction. 

 

And basically the infrastructure deficit . . . And it’s been 

pointed out to me many times that when we hear the phrase 

infrastructure deficit, we should tie it to the financial deficit that 

our government was faced with in 1991 when the province was 

almost bankrupt. So to recover the finances of the province and 

the financial footing of the province, not much could be built. 

And even though we were in those dire straits, there were 

long-term care facilities and hospitals built and refurnished and 

replaced and roofs done and health issues, safety issues done 

because some of the things had to be done. 

 

But also we chose to do things carefully, and we spent our 

money wisely. As my colleague from Rosemont has said, this 

government came to power with $2.3 billion in the bank, and 

nobody knows how wisely that was spent because nobody 

knows where the money is. And now continuing to run deficit 

budgets. 

 

If things are this bad in our health facilities because each health 

region has to find those reductions and they’re scrambling . . . 

And one health district told us, if plan A doesn’t look good or 

doesn’t work, plan B’s even going to be less, less . . . People 

aren’t going to like plan B very much better. 

 

So if health districts can’t find those reductions, of course then 

they run deficits too and that becomes part of the public debt. 

 

So when we’re looking at the long-term care facilities in our 

tour, we definitely talked to people out there about the Amicus 

deal. And we said, do you know about this? None of them did. 

None of them did. They were all starting to do their bake sales, 

raise their money from the communities, that community or 

surrounding municipalities all contributing money. Some of 

them were even putting on health levies, taxing the citizens. 

 

And I said, well this deal in Saskatoon, this is a new way of 

doing business, a new financial arrangement, and the minister 

categorizes it as that. So do you know about that? And no, they 

didn’t. So I sent a letter to each paper and said, you should 

know about this. Your community should know. You deserve 

the same kind of consideration for a new deal as Saskatoon did. 

 

And the member from Lloydminster said I was scaring people 

silly. Well when you talk to people about the truth, I don’t think 

they’re scared silly. They just start asking questions. And 

maybe that scared the member from Lloydminster silly, but 

people appreciated knowing what was out there and what the 

truth was about the long-term care facilities. 

 

And do they now still have to raise their 35 per cent? That’s 

still the question out there. Why do they, in Biggar and Tisdale 

and Melfort and Meadow Lake and Rosetown and Kipling and 

Redvers and Tisdale, why do they have to raise their 35 per 

cent? I don’t know if the members that represent those areas 

have told their communities. I don’t think so because they 

didn’t know. 

 

And when we were in certain communities we asked, do you 

know when these plans that are sitting on the desk or hanging 

up on the walls, do you have any idea, any indication from the 

government when these facilities will be built? And they said 

yes, some of them did. Some of them said November of 2011. 

 

Well isn’t that interesting, Mr. Speaker? November of 2011 is 

the next provincial election. That’s pretty crass. And light bulbs 

go on. And other communities said, fall of 2011. So I don’t 

think it took much for me to stand there and go, do you know 

what’s happening in the fall of 2011? And they do. And they 

can connect the dots. I mean they understand this. 

 

And our summer tour took us to everywhere in the province. So 

it wasn’t that we just got a flavour of one place or talked to 

certain disgruntled people. We were in almost every health 

district and we saw, like I said, 55 . . . We were in 55 

communities. And we started off the tour, we picked the 

communities we wanted to go to based on what we’d heard was 

happening in those communities. By the time we were done, the 

communities were picking us. And they were phoning us and 

saying, please come here. Please come here. We want to talk to 

you about this. We want you to talk to a group of people in the 

community. We want you to see our facility. We want you to 

help us with our issue. 

 

I found that extremely interesting. And I think it speaks 

volumes to what people in rural Saskatchewan are feeling. And 

they actually told us, and this was a theme, that rural 

Saskatchewan feels like they’ve been . . . They’re on their own. 

They’re abandoned. They said that: we’re on our own. In 

particular they were talking about the doctor shortage and the 

recruitment of doctors. 

 

I asked them in all those communities that had issues or 

concerns about doctors, do you know about the provincial 

recruitment agency, the physician recruitment agency that the 

minister has announced? And they said, no we have no idea. 

Sometimes our health region . . . Some of them have a 

recruitment facilitator, and they weren’t getting much help from 

there either. 

 

Most of the communities we talked to understood that they 

were on their own and said so. And they said that being on their 

own, it depends on how much money you have. If you’re in a 



6116 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2010 

rich area where you have oil fields around you, your municipal 

tax base will be richer, and you’ll be able to buy more to . . . or 

spend more to recruit a doctor or doctors to your community. 

 

What does that say for communities who aren’t in a richer area? 

They don’t get a doctor? It depends on whether you have a rich 

municipal tax base whether you can afford a doctor, whether 

you can afford to build a clinic, staff it, equip it, offer incentives 

to come — cars, houses — incentives yearly to stay. What does 

that say to communities who don’t have the money? 

 

And we saw one community get two doctors from a community 

who lost them. And it was clear, you know, that here’s the 

bidding war. If you have the money, you can build your clinic 

and doctors will come to you. But it also raised the question . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has elapsed. I 

recognize the member from Saskatchewan Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to be 

able to participate in this debate and discuss the investments our 

government has done to grow and ensure quality of life for all 

Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

The Conference Board is forecasting economic growth of 4.5 

per cent for Saskatoon this year. That is tied for second among 

Canada’s major cities. Saskatchewan jumped from eight to 

second place in the ranking of best performing labour markets 

prepared annually by the Fraser Institute. Again we are second 

in Canada, third in North America. That is wonderful news for 

the citizens of Saskatchewan. 

 

Wages paid to Saskatchewan employees are up over 5 per cent 

compared to last July. Again we are third highest in Canada. 

That’s above the national average of 3.9 per cent. Drilling 

numbers compiled by the Ministry of Energy and Resources 

show a 96 per cent increase in wells drilled so far this year as 

compared to 2009. Mr. Speaker, we are looking forward and 

moving forward, and I’m proud to work for the people of 

Saskatchewan who tell me often that we are making a 

difference. 

 

[11:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, our financial record indicates our budget is on 

track. The first quarter financial report shows this when 

unexpected flood costs are taken into account. We expected an 

additional 161.7 million in expenses as a result of widespread 

flooding; yet in spite of all this, our government’s revenue 

increased by 194.9 million. That’s good economic 

development. 

 

On the expense side, there was 144 million increase in the 

Agriculture budget to cover the province’s share of the $30 per 

acre payment for unseeded farm land and an additional 18.5 

million for higher claims through the provincial disaster 

assistance program, called PDAP. Many farmers have told me 

their stories, and they are so proud of this government, that we 

came to their aid, and very quickly. This increased expense is 

entirely offset by higher revenue due to higher than expected 

revenue from the first three land sales in the fiscal year. Now at 

the same time, the rest of the economy appears to be 

performing at least as well as anticipated in the 2010-11 budget. 

Mr. Speaker, our population is now at an all-time high of 

1,045,622. It has grown by 16,498 people in the past year, 

making Saskatchewan the fastest growing province in Canada. 

Saskatchewan’s population has now grown by more than 

50,000 people since the start of 2007, the fastest and most 

sustained period of population growth in decades. I myself 

helped contribute with two new grandsons and a future 

son-in-law from South Africa. So we are growing the province 

one by one at a time. 

 

New employment numbers from September show 6,300 more 

people working in Saskatchewan than one year ago, setting an 

employment record for the month of September. 

Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate now stands at 5.5 per cent, 

the second lowest in Canada and well below the national rate of 

8 per cent. 

 

The value of building permits issued in Saskatchewan totalled 

176.4 million in August, up by 16 per cent from the previous 

August. Over the first eight months of 2010, building permits 

totalled 1.34 billion, an increase of 10.5 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here in Regina, Regina’s on track to set another 

record for building permit values. Building permits in the first 

eight months of 2010 were up 10.6 per cent compared to the 

same period last year. Year over year the increase in Regina 

was 35.8 per cent. In the first nine months of 2010, Mr. 

Speaker, housing starts in Saskatchewan urban centres 

increased by 68 per cent compared to the same period in 2009 

— the third highest per cent increase amongst the provinces. 

 

RBC predicts Saskatchewan will lead the country in economic 

growth this year with an astonishing real GPD of 6.3 per cent. 

Growth would even be higher save for the unfortunate weather 

conditions for the farmers which we had no control over. 

 

The Conference Board is forecasting economic growth of 4.5 

per cent for Saskatoon this year, tied for second among 

Canada’s major cities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my own community and constituency of 

Saskatchewan Rivers has benefited from our government’s 

responsible spending, and I would like to put on record some of 

the community’s projects and the amounts. Here we have the 

RM [rural municipality] of Torch River, 169,598; the RM of 

Shellbrook, $177,975; the RM of Buckland, $373,030; the RM 

of Garden River, 68,862; the RM of Canwood, 166,987; the 

RM of Paddockwood, 106,175; the RM of Lakeland, 113,464; 

and the RM of Big River, 92,577. 

 

Also in the constituency of Sask Rivers is the provincial park of 

Candle Lake. They received 489,237; Christopher Lake 

preschool, 84,000; Spruce Home Seniors Club, fourteen 

hundred and sixty-two thousand; Big River & District 

Recreation Improvement, 17,000; Choiceland Torch River Rail, 

30,000. 

 

So as you can see, Mr. Speaker, we are moving forward. And 

I’m so proud of our government. We are very economically 

stable. 

 

I would also like to put on record a motion that is here in my 

hands. I move: 



November 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6117 

That all the words after the word . . . 

 

Okay, I will be moving an amendment. There’s one more thing 

I would like to add, though. Saskatchewan leads the West in 

supporting entrepreneurship, 79 per cent of Saskatchewan’s 

small businesses being confident in their provincial government 

that has a vision that supports small business compared to 56 

per cent of small businesses in BC, 44 per cent in Alberta, and 

only 21 per cent in Manitoba. 

 

Saskatchewan also had the highest per cent of businesses — 89 

per cent — who said they would recommend starting a business 

within their province. We are very proud of this government’s 

record here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan ranks second in Canada with a 1.1 per cent 

increase in new motor vehicle sales of the summer of 2010. 

New car sales were up to 9.3 per cent, the second-highest 

increase amongst the provinces. 

 

Our government is moving forward on the new road, and the 

people of Saskatchewan are telling us that we are going in the 

right direction. 

 

Now I am going to do the motion. I move: 

 

That all the words after the word Assembly be deleted and 

the following substituted: 

 

praise the Saskatchewan Party government for its 

unprecedented management of our provincial finances. 

 

I will not be supporting the opposition’s motion. I will support 

the amendment. And I thank you for this time, for all the people 

in the province that are listening to us in Saskatchewan, and 

especially the people of my great constituency called 

Saskatchewan Rivers, where there is so much tourism . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member has moved 

a motion. We will have to address the motion. The member has 

given up their rights to further speak. 

 

Order. Order. I’d ask members to allow the Clerk and I just to 

have one quick word on this issue. 

 

Order. Order. Order. The member from Regina Rosemont and 

the Minister of Energy and Resources will . . . Order. 

 

I have conferred with the Clerks on the motion and the 

amendment substantially changes the original motion, and I 

find the amendment out of order. Next speaker. Member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

real privilege to be able to stand in this House and speak to this 

75-minute debate where the opposition has condemned the 

Saskatchewan Party government for its unprecedented 

mismanagement of our provincial finances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened to the Sask Party members, private 

members speak to this motion, and I found their comments 

startling. And let me say why. When that party came to 

government in 2007, what were they greeted with? They were 

greeted with $2.3 billion in cash that was left to them by the 

previous NDP government. No government in the history of our 

province had been left with that much money basically at their 

disposal. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what was fascinating was that one of the 

first utterances out of the Premier’s mouth was that he had 

received a briefing that the finances were stark. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I know having been the last Finance minister of an 

NDP government that they were far from stark, and no other 

government has ever left an incoming government with that 

much money. 

 

Now I listened carefully to the member from Biggar saying that 

his government has put out over $3 billion in infrastructure 

projects in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there is 

something that we all as people of this province need to be 

concerned about, and that is, Mr. Speaker, that billions of 

dollars are being spent on goods and services in this province 

and contracts in this province. 

 

And we need to be assured as taxpayers and citizens that there 

is no hanky business going on over there. And we’re not so sure 

about that, Mr. Speaker. And if the members opposite were 

paying attention, and they need to pay attention — how are 

those contracts being let, and who are those contracts being let 

to? — because, Mr. Speaker, there are many citizens that are 

coming forward. And they’re not too sure about the Sask 

Party’s tendering process, and they’re not too sure that that 

tendering process is fair. And we’ve had people advise us that 

we need to follow the money, because money is going out the 

door and people aren’t convinced that it’s going out the door 

fairly. 

 

[11:45] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have raised in this Assembly, in the 

spring and in the fall, the whole Amicus deal. Let’s review the 

Amicus deal which represents a significant amount of money 

that will be paid for by the people of our province. 

 

Now this government had conversations going back to October 

of 2009 about the long-term care facility in the city of 

Saskatoon — private conversations, private conversations. 

Fast-forward to sometime in January when this project was 

foisted upon the Saskatoon Health Region and, Mr. Speaker, 

the Saskatoon Health Region has serious concerns about this 

project. And a lot of conversation went on between the 

Saskatoon Health Region and the government of Saskatchewan. 

 

But, but when a member of the opposition asked — under FOI 

— for the contents of that discussion, it was absolutely blacked 

out and denied, Mr. Speaker. But here’s what we’ve learned. 

Here’s what we’ve learned. The proponent, one Rod Donlevy, 

also happens to be the brother of the Premier’s chief of staff, 

Joe Donlevy. And conversations were going on back and forth. 

 

We’ve learned that once this deal that was foisted upon the 

health region was approved — because it’s a Sask Party board 

of governors at the Saskatoon Health Region — was approved 

by the health region, what happens? Miners Construction was 

given the contract. A $27 million contract and it wasn’t 

tendered, Mr. Speaker. 



6118 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2010 

And Mike Stensrud has donated $16,000 to the Sask Party over 

the last several years, plus gave a $1,000 contribution to the 

Minister of Justice in the last election, Mr. Speaker. And what 

does one Mike . . . Oh, and I happened to forget. Mike Stensrud 

is on the board of the Saskatoon Health Region, appointed by 

the Sask Party. 

 

Now he was supposed to have recused himself from the 

discussion, all discussion. But what happens on May the 12th I 

believe, or maybe it’s May the 17th, what happens is that Mike 

Stensrud sends a draft copy of a letter to the editor from Paul 

Ellis. And Mike Stensrud’s not supposed to be involved in this, 

Mr. Speaker. But Mike Stensrud is sending out draft letters to 

other members of the board and also staff at the Saskatoon 

Health Region because they’re trying to get a spin out in the 

public that this was all above board. Now Mr. Speaker, I heard 

the Premier say, during his Throne Speech and other 

discussions, that there’s going to be more of these kinds of 

deals done. And I think there might even be one in Swift 

Current because the Premier is trying to get a nursing home in 

Swift Current. 

 

I have a suggestion for the members opposite. They can make 

the public policy decision that third parties are going to operate 

these facilities; they’re not going to be affiliates to the health 

region. They can make that decision. But ultimately we know 

that there will be a loan guarantee given by the health region in 

order for this facility to go and get the money at the bank. And 

we know that those contracts will be given. 

 

We want to make sure that those contracts are tendered — 

tendered. Because when we came to government in 1991, there 

was all kinds of stuff that went on in the Grant Devine 

government and there were no tenders. There were no tenders. 

And there was lots of questionable practices and in fact, some 

would say, corruption. Now I would suggest to the Sask Party, 

if you are good fiscal managers — which I’m not convinced 

you are, but if you are — you put an end to all of this suspicion 

by tendering, tendering those contracts, making sure that 

whoever is going to develop these facilities tender the contracts. 

Because, Mr. Speaker, at the moment, this deal smells. It 

smells. 

 

And people are saying, how could it be? Big Sask Party 

contributor gets an untendered contract; he gives the electrical 

contract to the Minister of Justice’s brother. The Minister of 

Justice is a partner with this man from Miners Construction. It 

is all too much, Mr. Speaker. And they get rid of the smell test; 

they get rid of the smell test by making sure contracts are 

tendered. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there is billions of dollars going out the 

door, billions of dollars that the Sask Party is bragging about. 

We want to be assured as citizens and as members of this 

opposition that all of that money that is going out the door is 

done fairly and openly and transparently. That’s what we want 

to be assured because there’s too much room for corruption. 

And if the Sask Party is not prepared to do this, Mr. Speaker, 

then questions will continue to be asked by the members of this 

opposition because we know what happened in the ’80s. And if 

this government wants to be beyond the smell test, beyond the 

smell test, this will be the last insider deal because we’re going 

to be watching. 

Follow the money, Mr. Speaker. I learned that from my dad: 

always follow the money. And we know where the money is 

going at the moment: $27 million going in an untendered 

contract to Miners Construction who then turns around and has 

an electrical contract with the Minister of Justice’s brother. We 

know that electrical contract is worth about 10 per cent of the 

overall cost of the project or $2.7 million. Not bad. Not bad 

money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there’s profit in those contracts. There are profits in those 

contracts, and we want to be assured as citizens, as citizens that 

there is no skulduggery going on in the province of 

Saskatchewan because we’ve been there. We’ve seen it. We 

saw the movie. Oh, we saw the movie in the Grant Devine 

government. That’s why we put the tendering process in place 

— to protect the public. 

 

And I’m looking at the SaskTenders. And I’m not quite sure 

that everything is above board when it comes to you people. 

And you don’t want to be accused and be . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member’s time has 

elapsed. I recognize the member from Carrot River Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to 

stand today and speak on this motion, of which I do not 

support, from the member from Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have seen and I have listened to the NDP put 

spin on finances, put spin on just about everything. Fact is, Mr. 

Speaker, you know what it reminds me of? It reminds me a lot 

of a washing machine that’s on its spin cycle. And you know, 

the load’s out of balance, and it’s vibrating and going across the 

floor. That is like the NDP. They’re spun out of control, Mr. 

Speaker. They know not what they’re doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you actually sit back and when you look at 

it, when you actually look at the finances of the province, you 

know, the government, the province of Saskatchewan was $6.8 

billion in debt when we took over office in 2007. And now it’s 

4.1. I don’t know how you’re going to spin that, how you’re 

going to spin it that we are, we are in a financially unstable 

shape and our province is going downhill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, things are going, things are going great. Things 

are going great in this province. Is there work to do? Absolutely 

there is. Because I can tell you why there is. We have to fix all 

the infrastructure deficit that that government left behind after 

their 16 years of mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ll just talk about a few things, such as up in my constituency. 

The member from Saskatoon Eastview said that she had 

travelled all around the province. Well that’s good. Maybe she 

noticed the roads were getting fixed for a change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, in just Carrot River Valley alone, 

major work has been done. And I actually had to have this 

marked out, Mr. Speaker, because I couldn’t remember all the 

roads that were being done. There were so many of those. 

Highway 23, Highway 23 is a great improvement. Highway 55 

between Carrot River and Nipawin and then on to Prince 

Albert. Highway 3 between Crooked River and Hudson Bay 

and also between Tisdale and Melfort. Highway 35 south of 



November 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6119 

Tisdale. Mr. Speaker, our highways under the NDP 

administration were in absolutely terrible shape. We have a 

wonderful minister that did a great job on fixing up the 

highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do not have enough time to get through 

everything that is going on, but I want to go back to the 

Saskatoon Eastview minister who said how our health system 

was going downhill. Nipawin, Nipawin from 2007, Mr. 

Speaker, to now, a 54 per cent increase in doctors. Is that going 

downhill? No sir, Mr. Speaker. Eight hundred and thirty nurses, 

830 nurses in the province of Saskatchewan. An increase. Is 

that going downhill? No, Mr. Speaker. And this all takes 

money, and, Mr. Speaker, we’ve done it and still kept a 

balanced budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t go back and ask or talk a 

little bit about spin. And in the Report of the Provincial Auditor 

in 2007 volume 2, if you take a look at it, on page 32 . . . Is the 

member from Regina Rosemont listening? On page 32 in this, it 

has the government liabilities as of March 31st from 1993 to 

2007, including liabilities of government business enterprises. 

Mr. Speaker, in 1993 the government’s debt was $20.4 billion. 

In 2007 it was $21.6 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how can you have all these consecutive balanced 

budgets and yet, and yet the debt went up? This is from the 

Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention to that member from 

Regina Rosemont, he should be very happy that the province, 

the province is increasing in population. With the province 

increasing in population, guess what? Our school enrolment’s 

gone up for the first time in 17 years. Isn’t that amazing? It 

started going up . . . Just think, when it was going down was 

very shortly after the NDP got into power because all the 

people were leaving. Now I know that the member from Regina 

Rosemont is an educator by trade and now an MLA, but it’s 

going to be great after November the 7th of 2011 that that 

member will have a job to go to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have done, we have done all sorts of things for 

the people in this province. And I would like to talk about 

agriculture, which is another one that is up in our area. Now we 

had obviously a lot of flooding, the same as a lot of the other 

areas. Now contrary, contrary to the NDP who kind of forgot 

about rural Saskatchewan since they closed down 52 rural 

hospitals, I might add, Mr. Speaker, we have looked after the 

farmers under disaster assistance on agriculture better than any 

previous government ever did. And not only that, Mr. Speaker, 

not only that. We also lowered the education portion of tax on 

farm land, which was a discriminatory tax on capital tax that 

people were paying. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have done many things for this province. I’ll 

tell you one thing we didn’t do, Mr. Speaker. We didn’t invest 

in things like SPUDCO, Navigata, Channel Lake, bingo, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have been moving along. We got our new children’s 

hospital going, contrary to all the ads last summer which came 

out from the NDP saying we had cancelled it. Two hundred 

million dollars for our children’s hospital, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, yes, that spin is on. The spin is coming from the 

other side, and like I said, it’s very similar to that washing 

machine and its bouncing around. And you know, Mr. Speaker, 

what I would suggest, what I would suggest to the NDP is, 

when they put a full load in, although I don’t know if they’ve 

got a full load, but when they put a full load in, I would suggest 

that they balance it so it wouldn’t vibrate across the laundry 

room floor. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do not do spin. We do not do spin. We come 

across, Mr. Speaker, and we do things that the public in 

Saskatchewan want, the people in Saskatchewan want. And we 

were very fortunate, very fortunate and pleased to represent the 

people of Saskatchewan because they knew, they knew that 

when they got rid of that old government, that tired, old NDP, 

they got a new Saskatchewan Party who were going to move 

forward, do things for the people of this province, things that 

these people in this province have wanted for years and years. 

 

I have seen the neglect that was done by the previous 

administration. I will not be supporting the motion from the 

member from Regina Rosemont, Mr. Speaker. I definitely have 

got up to show that our Saskatchewan Party is a far better 

government than that was or ever will be . . . 

 

The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. The 

65-minute debate has elapsed. Why is the minister on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With 

leave to introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave. We’ll stop 

the clock on the 10-minute question period. The minister has 

asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to 

all members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce over 50 

students that have joined us on this snowy morning. They’ve 

worked their way here on treacherous roads. They’re from 

Holliston Elementary School. They’re joined by their teachers, 

Stephen Vincent, Shauna Perreault, and Lisa Danaher, as well 

as chaperone Dominic Turley. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re delighted to welcome them into their 

Legislative Assembly and we’re delighted to have them here. 

And I’ll be speaking with them in a few more minutes. So, Mr. 

Speaker, if I could ask all members of the Assembly to join me 

in welcoming these students from Holliston here to their 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place on his feet? 

 

Mr. Broten: — With leave to join in the welcome, please. 



6120 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2010 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Massey Place 

has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

Mr. Broten: — I thank the members for leave, knowing that 

the clock is stopped. I simply want to add, Mr. Speaker, a 

special welcome to Stephen Vincent who is my first cousin. So 

it’s good to see Stephen today here in the Assembly. Welcome. 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

(continued) 

 

Provincial Finances 

 

The Speaker: — We will now begin the 10-minute question 

period in the 75-minute debate. I recognize the member from 

Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tendering is 

not just commonplace as it relates to public finance. It’s 

expected and required to protect public money, to protect the 

taxpayer. This Amicus project is fully funded and backstopped 

by the Saskatchewan taxpayer. Does the member from Sask 

Rivers think it’s appropriate to not tender this $27 million 

taxpayer-funded project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you to the 

member from Regina Rosemont for the very valuable question. 

However since taking office, our government has undertaken 

record investment while reducing debt, lowering taxes, and 

improving the quality of life. We care about the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The child tax credit amount has increased by more than 75 per 

cent during that same period. Additional 80,000 lower income 

individuals no longer on tax rolls. First increase to the seniors’ 

income plan in 16 years. We care about the people of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very proud of our 

government’s record. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Regina Rosemont talks about boondoggles and 

he talks about misuse and he talks about fiscal management. 

He’s got a short memory, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP misused taxpayers’ money in their misguided 

SPUDCO scheme. Taxpayers were on the hook for over $30 

million. Subsequently the former NDP government was 

successfully sued by SPUDCO for $5.7 million. To the member 

for Regina Rosemont: why did the NDP financially mismanage 

tens of millions of dollars on this project alone, noting the 

incompetence which led to the additional loss of millions of 

taxpayers’ dollars from the subsequent lawsuit? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that they’d 

hang out the new member from Saskatoon to ask questions on a 

project and a nature of that, Mr. Speaker, when we have in 

question a project that’s untendered with $27 million worth of 

taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker. Completely unacceptable. 

 

The question back to the member is: we have a government that 

inherited the healthiest financial circumstance of any 

government in the history of transitions. And in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, had they only kept their own fiscal promises here, Mr. 

Speaker, as it relates to spending, right now, Mr. Speaker, we’d 

have an accumulated surplus of $7 billion — not two years of 

deficit, not $4.2 billion of debt growth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In the 

discussion, we’ve talked about fiscal mismanagement. And I 

want to ask the member from Biggar whether he agrees with the 

opposition that when public money is being put at risk and 

public money is being used to backstop nursing homes, whether 

there should be tendered contracts so that there is no hint of 

impropriety. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very glad to 

answer these questions concerning long-term care homes. Our 

government made an announcement some time ago to build 13 

new long-term care homes in the province — and one of them 

is going to be built in Biggar by the way — and we’re very 

proud of that commitment. Our commitment is to fund 65 per 

cent of the construction costs of long-term care homes in this 

province. The community needs to raise 35 per cent. 

 

In the town of Biggar, in the community of Biggar and the 

catchment area, they are well on their way to getting 

commitments from the municipalities involved to raise the 35 

per cent. And if the member would like to come out to a 

fundraiser on November 27th that’s being put on by the Knights 

of Columbus to raise funds for the long-term care home, I 

certainly will bring a ticket. And I’ll even pay for the ticket to 

the member. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP have a long 

history of ignoring the people of Saskatchewan. The NDP 

turned their backs on rural Saskatchewan. They pillaged the 

coffers of municipal governments by cutting their grants. They 

raided the Crown corporation dividends and equity strip, Mr. 

Speaker. In 2003 right after the election, those members across 

the floor raised the PST without warning. And the Finance 

minister of the day said well you can’t talk about tax increases 

during an election. 

 

To the member from Regina Rosemont: with such a long record 

of leaving the people of Saskatchewan with nothing but an 

empty barrel, with the NDP’s provincial numbers at less than 



November 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6121 

29 per cent and dropping, why would those few people continue 

to trust the NDP when they complain about infrastructure debt 

and irresponsibly call for another 1.2 billion in spending? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised to take that 

question from that member, Mr. Speaker, from Cannington, 

who in his own community at a time where there’s record 

revenues flowing into this government . . . is closing long-term 

care facilities in his community — both in Carlyle, Wawota, 

White Bear — Mr. Speaker, an individual who’s creating 

bidding wars within those communities, creating RMs and 

double taxation to fight against other RMs and communities to 

put doctors in these communities when it should be his 

responsibility to take care of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’ll just quote one of the columnists, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

the financial mismanagement of this government that has 

squandered a $7 billion financial opportunity, enough to in fact 

pay off the entire GRF debt, Mr. Speaker. And I quote from The 

StarPhoenix: “Unquestionably it smacks of incompetence well 

beyond anything voters should ever have to tolerate,” Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what the third party validators or the 

columnists are saying about this government. 

 

Saskatchewan New Democrats have a proud record of 

balancing budgets while balancing the priorities of 

Saskatchewan people, and we’re excited to put forward that 

plan for prosperity for Saskatchewan people. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking about 

untendered contracts, and we’re talking about public money. 

And the public were promised accountability and transparency 

in the budget speeches and the Throne Speeches of the Sask 

Party. They’ve seen none of that. 

 

My question is to the member from Carrot River. Does he 

believe that the public’s money should be put at risk with 

untendered contracts? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very happy to 

answer, to talk about . . . [inaudible] . . . contract. Like, let’s go 

back to the NDP’s record. Of course SPUDCO’s been 

mentioned many a time. But what about the stuff? What about 

Channel Lake? What about Guyana? How about SGI’s 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] Coachman Insurance? 

Mega bingo, Mr. Speaker? How many of these — Belle Plaine 

ethanol deal — how many of these were tendered, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

It came right down, Mr. Speaker, that when you go through all 

of these. Like I mean there’s more of them. There’s Retx. 

There’s Craig Wireless, NST [NST Network Services of 

Chicago], Click-a-Bid. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, how many of 

these were ever tendered? Because this was public money spent 

by the NDP. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, this question is to the member 

from Regina Rosemont, and actually I had already talked about 

it before, Mr. Speaker. How come that member keeps on 

claiming that the NDP had a balanced budget all the way 

through for — I think it was — something like 13 years? When 

on page 32 of the report from the Provincial Auditor, it says 

that in 1993 the government’s debt was $20.4 billion and in 

2007 it went to 21.6. How do you call that balanced, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d be very happy to sit down with that member and explain 

summary finances and the finances of our province, Mr. 

Speaker, and the record of New Democrats. And in fact that 

Finance minister could probably help that member back there 

before he stands up and looks so silly in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What we know by their own budget document, Mr. Speaker, is 

that the Sask Party is increasing debt by $4.2 billion over the 

next four years, Mr. Speaker, a 55 per cent increase. What we 

know and what I would say to that member over there is . . . I 

will highlight what the Leader-Post has said, Mr. Speaker, a 

columnist who says, “The debt graph presented by Wall’s 

strategists in their propaganda was at best misleading and at 

worst downright deceitful.” Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people 

deserve something better. They deserve their share of prosperity 

that these guys are squandering. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, there’s some very fine people who represent 

constituents, Sask Party constituents, in this Assembly, and I 

know those fine people don’t like insider jobs. And, Mr. 

Speaker, the Amicus deal at the moment smells to high heaven. 

I want to ask the member from Sask Rivers, who is this fine 

person, can she support the notion that any third party deals that 

happen in the province, particularly in the Premier’s riding 

where he wants a nursing home, that those deals will be 

tendered? 

 

The Speaker: — The 75-minute debate has elapsed. 

 

Order, order. Members, earlier this afternoon in the 65-minute 

debate, normally when motions are moved and when 

amendments are made, amendments that would substantially 

change a motion have been ruled out of order. I have noted, 

however, and through some research through the Clerk’s office, 

we have found that it has been ruled in the past by Speakers — 

and I’m looking back to April 30th, 2004 — that in 75-minute 

or private members’ debates there has actually been latitude 

allowed. And therefore it would have been appropriate to 

accept the amendment that was presented by the member from 



6122 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2010 

Carrot River Valley. 

 

We will remember this for further private members and 

75-minute debate. Thank you. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 

 

Motion No. 1 — Responses to Provincial Emergencies 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In reflection upon 

the events of this past summer with the exceptionally wet year 

we’ve had affecting our agricultural partners, our farmers, and 

affecting our residents in our cities, Mr. Speaker, I have some 

comments today. And at the end of my comments, I will be 

making a motion that this Assembly recognize the dutiful 

efforts of the many volunteers, organizations, and different 

levels of government’s swift response to the emergency 

situations of this past summer, and also reflecting on the 

disaster assistance program. 

 

I hear the member calling across the floor about their visit to 

Yorkton. And as time allows, I really want to comment on some 

of the things I heard from that visit to Yorkton, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[12:15] 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I ask the member from Regina 

Rosemont to allow the minister to respond and not impute ill to 

other members. The member for Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 

member’s questioned my integrity and I will bring . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I’d just ask the member to go 

directly to the speech. The member from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. 

 

June 18th, Maple Creek; 29th and 30th, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatoon; July 1st, my home of Yorkton; July 2nd, 

Kawacatoose Cree nation; 22nd, The Battlefords; in that time 

period, the town of Carlyle, Mr. Speaker; on or about August 

10th, Hudson Bay; August 10th to 12th, Regina — Mr. 

Speaker, many, many areas were affected by the events of this 

past summer. And it’s my pleasure to be here representing my 

constituency for the Sask Party government and speaking to 

some of these issues. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to start, I want to just do a brief overview. Many 

people, especially the people affected by the flood, are very 

aware of the provincial disaster assistance program and are 

aware of the efforts by community organizations, groups, and 

governments in order to alleviate some of the stresses and aid 

those in distress from those storms. But for those that maybe 

aren’t aware, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to do a bit of an 

overview on the PDAP program. 

 

As many do know, the program provides financial assistance to 

communities, businesses, non-profit organizations, individuals, 

and other people and groups that incur substantial loss or 

damage to — we have to make this clear — essential, 

non-insurable property caused by specific natural disasters. And 

all the case work that we’ve had to do and help our local 

constituents in dealing with some of the issues through the 

storms, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was one point we had to make 

very clear — essential items not, you know, bicycles and the 

thing but essential items for life quality, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and uninsurable property. We ran into that situation quite a 

number of times where people would come because they didn’t 

have insurance. They didn’t have a tenant pack, that they 

weren’t covered. 

 

And unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is the case. If 

insurance is available on the open market, truly it isn’t right that 

the general public would pick up that risk by somebody taking 

risk by not carrying insurance. And admittedly a lot of those 

cases are through the fact that some of these residents weren’t 

aware of buying insurance. And that is a sad fact, Mr. Speaker, 

although many organizations and groups did step up — 

Salvation Army, Red Cross, community people donating items 

to cover the losses and get those people back on their feet. So 

where some of the, you know, some of the shortcomings might 

be in insurance or possibly disaster assistance, Mr. Speaker, the 

communities, the towns, the villages, the volunteers were there 

to pick up and fill the gaps where needed. 

 

Most common disasters which we are aware of as well . . . 

Specifically we saw this summer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, floods. 

We saw tornadoes in Kawacatoose, plow winds, severe storms, 

effects of nature that are — or acts of God — that are 

uninsurable. And once an area is deemed a disaster area, Mr. 

Speaker, the program cuts in. They can apply. Residents can 

apply for disaster assistance. And again it provides assistance to 

Saskatchewan claimants in an area that has been designated 

eligible for assistance due to losses, damages of essential 

uninsurable, tangible property caused by specific natural 

disasters. Again once the area is deemed a disaster area by the 

local authority, then the government steps in. The Corrections 

and Public Safety minister steps in with the PDAP program. 

 

And before I go on in mentioning the minister, his role, his title, 

I want to again, as I talked about in my Throne reply, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker . . . that it’s so proud of this government, the 

communities, the volunteers. But the lengths that this 

government went to, to address some of these situations . . . The 

Premier, as I’ve stated, was out I think weekly right after the 

storm. The minister, the member from down south . . . I forgot 

his constituency. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Wood River. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Wood River, that’s it. It’s a great 

constituency, down by my uncle’s home of Assiniboia. So 

many good things to say about him. The mayor of Yorkton, a 

lot of community members that had the opportunity to meet 

with the Premier, the minister, very happy with the response 

time and the attention and care given to the area. 

 

Also the PDAP program covers assistance for immediate 

actions undertaken to reduce the effects of an imminent disaster 

such as sand banging, so preventative measures which . . . 

Proactivity we know quite often is a very good investment. So 



November 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6123 

that’s another thing covered by the PDAP program. Eligible 

items under PDAP include cleanup, essential household items, 

structural repair, restoration, and again preventative measures 

taken during the disaster, so again proactivity. 

 

The assistance helps claimants restore eligible property to 

pre-disaster conditions which is important, Mr. Speaker. To be 

fair, we don’t really need to be funding improvements. If 

there’s betterment involved, that’s sort of up to the individual 

homeowner, the individual property owner. But to at least bring 

it to pre-disaster conditions is the intent of PDAP, and it has 

been filling that void very well with the changes that have been 

implemented. 

 

Again the assistance does not include payment for economic 

losses, reimbursement for either loss of income or production. 

So again only tangible capital losses are covered. PDAP is 

intended to restore the essentials of life, not lifestyle, which is a 

good point. So unfortunately items like recreational property 

are not covered. Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s limits to 

how far you can go without making the cost of programs so 

exorbitant that it isn’t deliverable, and it does strike a very good 

balance. 

 

People have asked what kind of coverage is available for 

individual property owners, so I’ll run through some of those. 

The maximum assistance per principal residence is now at 

240,000. I’ll get in, drill down into this a little bit better later, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. What we saw when we formed 

government, the maximum allowable per residence was 

$100,000 which we knew was totally inadequate. Everything 

had been, you know, there’s . . . Costs have increased for 

construction and the like. So shortly afterwards, an increase was 

put into place to $160,000 per residence. But very quickly after 

the disaster in specifically Maple Creek, shortly after Yorkton, 

it was realized that it just wasn’t enough as well. So there was 

increases quickly put into place to 240,000 per residence and 

numerous other increases as well. So we’ll again drill down to 

that a bit later. 

 

What we found was a very detrimental part of the program was 

the deductible, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 20 per cent deductible on 

claims. It’s very hard for some of these areas. I know 

specifically in Yorkton, a lot of these areas are lower-income 

rental property. They just didn’t have the 20 per cent. They 

couldn’t absorb that 20 per cent loss, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Again, very quick action by our government and directed 

through the Minister of Corrections and Public Safety, that 

deductible reduced down to 5 per cent from 20 per cent. So we 

see a 15 per cent lift in the claims coming into the ministry, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

So who else is eligible for PDAP? Well that was expanded as 

well. We saw that there was limitations for out-of-province 

property owners. And this really became prevalent in Yorkton 

where, as we see an out-of-province owner of a rental property, 

it is a residence for a person in the city. Unfortunately they 

weren’t covered. So what happens in a case like that? There’s 

no insurance. There’s no disaster assistance, out-of-province 

business owner or a property owner. We see a loss of a door 

that may not be replaced. We see the loss of income for a 

business where they may be an out-of-province employer, 

owned out of province, but it’s an employer within our 

economy in Yorkton or in some of our other surrounding areas 

where we have two, four, or possibly 10 or more employees. 

That business is no longer viable without support. We see a loss 

of jobs in the community. 

 

Where we saw the changes made to the disaster assistance 

program, where that was addressed, where some of these issues 

were covered, and we see viability put back into these 

businesses by coverage through PDAP and some definite 

positive improvements. 

 

Agriculture enterprises, there was a lift in coverage for those as 

well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

To charitable and non-profit organizations, boards, park 

authorities, and local government authorities, local municipal 

governments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where the deductible was 

capped at, I believe, is a point one five per cent cap on their 

deductible. So they were, once they hit that limit, they no 

longer need to top up their deductible. And again for these 

claimants as well as with private residences, deductible’s 

reduced from 20 per cent down to 5 per cent. 

 

So why did we make these improvements? Why did the 

Premier come out to Yorkton and Maple Creek and some of the 

other areas around the province? Why did the minister make so 

many visits? Why was there so many phone calls figuring why 

do we need to make these improvements? Well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the first reason is we listen. 

 

Right after the storm in Yorkton was over specifically — I 

know the member from Cypress was in a similar situation — 

we got out. The flood waters hadn’t receded yet. I got out in my 

big old diesel Suburban and we got out looking around to see 

what was the damage. And quite honestly it was a lot wider 

spread than I would have imagined. I’ve been asked by people 

— they saw the devastation from not only our province or 

country but around the world — I was getting emails and phone 

calls, what the heck is going on? 

 

Specifically for me was Yorkton. There’s no real specific river. 

There’s no lake. The truth of the matter is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

the rain fell . . . I think the official counts were four to five 

inches, but I’ve talked to specific people in areas of the city 

where they received in their rain gauges seven inches. The 

official timeline was one hour, whereas I witnessed myself in 

my area of the city in the east, where it drizzled a bit for 15 

minutes, it came down for about 25 minutes to half an hour, and 

then it tapered off again. So really we got in areas seven inches 

in half an hour. 

 

So what that did is overflow the storm sewer system, 

overflowed on the streets, effectively creating every street into 

a river, overflowing into the sewer systems, sewer systems 

backing up, and we see the widespread devastation. My 

community again specifically, 70 per cent of homes affected in 

one way or another, and hundreds affected very significantly 

with not a matter of inches but a matter of feet of either seepage 

or sewage backup in the homes. 

 

So again we listened to property owners. They told us what 

they felt was inadequate. We listened to the claimants and they 

informed us about exorbitantly high deductible levels, 



6124 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2010 

eligibility levels, and some of the depreciation that was just 

unfair. Those were addressed in short order. 

 

Another thing that I was very pleased to see happen, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, was those initial payments of $3,000 within a 

matter of days or weeks to PDAP claimants. Now I know the 

members opposite have criticized, and I’ve had a few phone 

calls from local people, you know, what’s $3,000 going to do? 

Well you know, it is a specific amount, a significant amount 

that upfront gets you on your feet and start addressing some of 

the immediate concerns. 

 

One thing I would point out, Mr. Speaker . . . And I’ve been 

asked, why that amount? Well the task force the Premier put 

together, the Premier himself, the minister put their heads 

together and found that the average claim for PDAP in the years 

previous, any previous claims, was around $3,000. The decision 

was made to get those $3,000 cheques out to the people right 

away to make sure they had some short-term income to start 

addressing some of their concerns. 

 

You know, criticism that I’ve heard about, you know, what’s 

that going to do, and it took too long. Well unfortunately when 

you look in the past . . . I mean, Vanscoy was a case we looked 

at — one person on staff to address some of these concerns 

with PDAP, payments taking anywhere from 12 to 18 months, 

and specifically the same amounts, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So you 

know, although $3,000 up front for a significant claim isn’t 

enough, those claims are being processed. There’s money up 

front and people had money in their pockets very quickly. 

 

And again these improvements are retroactive. We see some of 

the issues that went back a little ways, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Improvements to PDAP remained retroactive to April 1st. So 

again, good advice for people to put their claims in and make 

sure their claims are in as soon as possible, but that is a 

retroactive payment. 

 

What is the total cost of these storms? Well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, to date we can say that the uninsurable losses through 

PDAP are roughly about 40 million and a further $40 million 

for the government’s responses including social services, 

highway repair, and the like. 

 

Just taking a break, a sip of water. My own members are 

heckling me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So let’s move on to some of the issues with the claims, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the timing. And admittedly some of these 

claims do take a little bit of time. Some of these claims are very 

complicated. There’s an issue, you know, if there’s seepage; it’s 

clear cut. If there’s sewer backup, it’s clear cut — sewer backup 

insurable, seepage not. 

 

When we get cases like we saw, I describe as ground zero in 

Yorkton, where significant flooding — four or five, six feet of 

water in certain areas, people being evacuated from their homes 

with canoes, with wheel loaders by the city of Yorkton, Mr. 

Speaker, police and fire getting on the scene and getting people 

evacuated. You have a mixed condition, a mixed situation 

where there takes a little bit of time to figure out exactly where 

the damage is, what was it caused by, and who it’s covering. So 

there has been those issues as well. But we are working through 

those and the ministry and the insurance companies working 

together to address those concerns. 

 

Additionally some of these timelines have been long, but the 

minister has put independent adjusters, a lot more independent 

adjusters on the ground. I know specifically in Yorkton we have 

a lot. There was initially a lot in Maple Creek, and more staff to 

process these claims. 

 

And another . . . It’s not specifically PDAP, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. I’m very proud of SGI, Sask Government Insurance, 

the Minister of SGI. Instantly I’d call him. If he wasn’t able to 

answer my call, he’d call back right away. And to a certain 

extent, a large extent, SGI was setting the bar for a lot of these 

other insurance companies that were maybe waffling a bit on 

their responsibilities. Through the minister’s direction, SGI is 

setting the bar fairly high and people having to follow suit and 

step up to that level. So again insurance is never a fun thing to 

deal with. People aren’t always happy, but significant 

improvements there as well. 

 

[12:30] 

 

I’ll go through some of the timelines now, Mr. Speaker, of 

specific damage to these communities. Maple Creek, June 18th, 

the RM and the town of Maple Creek experienced flooding to 

both public and private partnership and was designated an 

eligible disaster area. 

 

Now I know we’ve seen some criticism around the province as 

well, but I do know for a fact that shortly after this event in 

Maple Creek, the Premier was on the ground, speaking 

specifically to community leaders and town people, and the 

mayor was given direct access to the Premier’s office. Just a 

phone call away and any issues could be brought right to the 

Premier through the Premier’s office. Again being open, I 

think, and cutting out all that red tape and getting to the bare 

bones of the issues very quickly. 

 

On the 24th of June, in response to the devastating damages in 

Maple Creek, an unprecedented and early advance payment in 

the amount of $3,000 authorized, which I just spoke about. 

Officials from CPSP [Corrections, Public Safety and Policing] 

attend the Maple Creek town office regularly to meet with 

residents to help them with any questions they may have related 

to their claims. An intensive review of residents’ files was 

undertaken, and it still is ongoing to determine the immediate 

need for furnaces, hot water heaters, payments for those who 

were expedited for those identified. 

 

And that’s one thing. I’ll probably jump ahead a little bit, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, here that it is an issue with the oncoming cold 

weather that we were brought to our attention through residents 

that, you know, they are waiting for their claims to be 

processed. They need a furnace. They need a hot water heater. 

The minister recognized that quite quickly. The Minister of SGI 

realized that quite quickly, so these claims were put to the top 

of the priority list to ensure that at least people had hot water 

and heat in their homes very close to when the cold weather is 

hitting, if not before. So a very positive direction from . . . I’m 

proud of our ministers that got that initiative going. 

 

The flooding was due to a severe storm system, which we all 



November 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6125 

know we heard about. It can’t be predicted and prepared for in 

the same manner as spring flooding can. So I mean it is an 

extreme event that happens quickly. You have to respond fairly 

quickly to that. The event caused damages resulting from a 

combination of sewer backup, overland flooding, and seepage. 

 

And the program continues to provide relocation assistance to a 

number of people that are displaced, which includes assistance 

with room and board and meal allowances. That’s a specific 

change that was made as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where prior 

to this program, prior to the changes again put in by the 

Minister of Corrections, we saw that the relocation allowance 

was part of the overall payout. A hundred thousand we knocked 

off the living allowance; 160 we knocked off the living 

allowance. When it was brought up to 240,000 maximum 

claim, the living allowance was brought out of that. So 

effectively you have a $240,000 maximum coverage through 

PDAP for the non-insurable loss as well as $30,000 for 

relocation — so effectively close to tripling from what the 

previous administration had in place. 

 

The staff continue to work with the town and other government 

and non-government agencies to identify any immediate 

concerns that require attention. Over the last three weeks of 

October, ministry officials have been working with local 

officials and others including SaskPower, SaskEnergy, and 

others to respond to the urgent needs for furnaces and water 

heaters again. The building standards unit of CPSP is 

coordinating on-the-ground inspections of homes and is 

forwarding information on furnaces back to PDAP officials to 

be prioritized for payments. Information on SaskEnergy’s 

high-efficiency furnace programs has been relayed to these 

people. So we are seeing improvements in some of the heating 

systems in these homes, so there is a silver lining around some 

of these dark clouds. 

 

They’re also working with the town to help facilitate meetings 

with Saskatchewan Watershed to better understand the risks of 

potential flooding for the next spring — which we see 

significant amounts of snowfall and moisture again — so 

preparing, trying to be as proactive as we possibly can for 

events that may happen this spring. CPSP are also aware of the 

need for additional structural engineers on-site and the need to 

inspect 67 properties required for structural inspections. We 

have engaged additional structural engineers to complete 

assessments of building structural concerns and has prioritized 

the properties that need urgent inspection — again prioritizing 

on a need basis. 

 

The ministry has been looking into particular concerns in regard 

to the needs for furnaces and hot water heaters again. These 

possible needs are being identified and linked to the claims so 

they can purchase these essentials. So a lot of good work being 

done there. And again, the mayor of Maple Creek specifically 

having access to the Premier through his office if the need be. I 

don’t know how much that has been exercised, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, as the response I know on behalf of ministry officials 

and the minister has been very speedy. 

 

Saskatoon, June 29th and 30th. Heavy rainfall causing overland 

flooding, damage to homes in the area. July 2nd, the city was 

designated for eligible assistance under PDAP. Early advance 

payments in the amount of 3,000 again were issued, and PDAP 

continued to work with the city and answer inquiries. Again not 

as significant as Maple Creek and possibly Yorkton, but that 

quick response and efforts there are continuing as the claims get 

put through. 

 

My home of Yorkton, I’ll drill down into this maybe if the time 

allows it at the end, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a little bit more. I’ll 

go through some of the notes I have and then I’ll just talk about 

some of my specific issues later, and experiences. 

 

July 1st, my family actually was at July 1st celebrations and 

looking forward to going to the lake for maybe a couple of 

weeks, commuting if the need be, and spending some time at 

the lake. Shortly after the Canada Day celebrations at the 

Western Development Museum, we went to the Dairy Queen 

for a quick ice cream. Only a matter of hours later, our city was 

flooded, the Dairy Queen was a writeoff, and as well some of 

the significant flooding and damage that we saw at Good Spirit 

Lake where my cottage is. So save it to say that there wasn’t a 

whole lot of holiday time at the lake. 

 

There was a lot of time working out of our office in Yorkton, 

again flooded with sewage probably a foot deep there, but still 

operating as best we could. Having my staff displaced but still 

operating remotely by phone and by computer, and myself in 

the office as much as I possibly could. So not the way you want 

to spend a holiday, Mr. Speaker, but it’s pretty hard to take a 

holiday when people are in need. 

 

We were designated as eligible for disaster assistance under 

PDAP. Again early advance payments were out. The severity of 

Yorkton was something that was not usually experienced within 

Saskatchewan. Again pretty much every road became a river, 

and the lower areas of town became catch basins and lakes. 

Significant area again around Dairy Queen was effectively a 

lake, probably a half a mile by a half mile or a mile long. The 

whole centre downtown core of Yorkton was flooded in areas 

over the door handles of cabs and above. 

 

One instance there I know of a church, they had their main floor 

flooded, basement flooded. The rectory that they use was 

flooded and another property they had was flooded. So the 

church was pretty much put out of commission and is only now 

getting back on their feet. The event again caused damage 

resulting from sewer backup, overland flooding, and seepage. 

 

And by July 3rd to 9th, the ministry officials were present in the 

city to assist private property claimants in completing 

applications and addressing questions and concerns. We 

continued to provide relocation assistance to a number of 

people that are displaced — I’ll speak about that a bit later as 

well — which includes assistance with room and board and 

meal allowances. And I guess jumping ahead, hats off to the 

Travelodge, the old Travelodge in Yorkton, which is now 

Society for Involvement of Good Neighbours, who had the 

capacity for housing and a kitchen in place to help with these 

efforts. So I very appreciated the input that they had and the 

help that they had. 

 

The officials continued to work with the city and other 

government and non-government agencies to identify any 

immediate concerns that required attention and some future 

programs that may help us in the future to alleviate heavy rain 



6126 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2010 

amounts. The ministry, through the building standards unit, is 

working with the city on a proposal for the city to purchase 

certain properties that were severely damaged and redevelop 

them into stormwater holding pond to mitigate damage from 

future flood threats, which is a positive move. 

 

Again listening. The mayor talked to me. I made a phone call to 

the minister, and we’ve got some of this work under way. And 

it’s looking quite promising that we can be proactive and 

alleviate some of these flooding concerns in the future. 

 

The BSU [building standards unit] officials are continuing to 

coordinate with the ministry’s PDAP process with the city, the 

proposal to facilitate the implementation of this within the 

city’s plan. 

 

Kawacatoose Cree Nation, a devastating event, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, July 2nd. Tornado touched down to Kawacatoose, 

causing damage to homes, leaving 82 people homeless. CPSP 

staff attended a council meeting on July 6th to inform them of 

the process and requirements under PDAP. On July 21st, the 

Cree Nation was designated eligible under the assistance 

program. A payment of thirty-two thousand six thirteen was 

issued to the Kawacatoose, care of Indian and Northern Affairs 

Canada, on September 10th. The payment was for cleanup costs 

and was based on uninsurable debris cleanup as per the adjuster 

report. Any other information from the band and the insurance 

company were reviewed and dealt with separately from this 

payment. 

 

The Battlefords. July 22nd, the city of North Battleford 

received heavy rainfall in the amount of 23.5 millimetres, 

causing overland flooding damage to homes in the area. By the 

23rd, the city of North Battleford was designated eligible and 

efforts there continue. 

 

Now again, what are we doing about the delays in some of 

these properties? Well again additional adjusters have been 

contracted, additional structural engineers are moving forward 

to assess more and more properties. I think there’s about 46 in 

Yorkton at last count, my last count. I know those have 

depleted quite a bit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the engineers and 

inspectors have been doing great work there. 

 

The ministry is also hiring additional staff to review files to 

assist in residents’ concerns. And PDAP, we know, was 

inefficient due to extremely long wait times and again, as I said 

previously, unfair depreciation being applied specifically to 

furnaces and the like, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where we saw 60 

per cent depreciation on those items which makes a lot of them 

virtually unaffordable for some people. They couldn’t come up 

with the difference. That depreciation was cut just about in half 

by the minister responsible, and again very appreciated. And 

now through some of the programs, through SaskEnergy and 

through the ministry, we’re seeing a lot of new furnaces and 

safer furnaces put in some of these homes. 

 

Under PDAP as of November 15th, we saw 4,016 private 

claims received, 62 municipal claims, 2,820 payments made, 

$9.7 million paid out, 443 files closed. And we took a number 

of steps to quickly help flood victims this summer starting with 

the delivery of the cheques — the $3,000 advance cheques — 

as quickly as possible. 

Payments in Maple Creek area were made within 24 hours of 

the mayor requesting it. Again, direct line to the Premier’s 

office which I guess never hurts. 

 

Officials have also been on the ground from the beginning in 

hard hit communities to help residents. And I’ve seen that in 

my own hometown where officials were just about up to the 

elbows helping where they can. And in fact one call we had, 

short of manpower, going door to door in Yorkton to see 

seniors that maybe hadn’t called or unaware of how bad things 

were, the minister allocated I believe it was 25 firefighters from 

the North. These predominantly First Nations men came down 

and they were amazing, helping people empty out homes if 

need, relocating them, getting them out of their homes, getting 

them to safety. Again very appreciated. The minister doing an 

amazing job. And the public servants from the North — those 

firefighters were very appreciative and I’d just officially like to 

extend my thanks and appreciation for their help. 

 

Again our government has been listening to the needs of these 

flood victims, and there have been numerous changes made. As 

of August 10th . . . In August, pardon me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

these are some of the following changes. I’ve touched on some 

of them, but I’ll again go through them in detail. 

 

Deductible for private claims reduced from 20 to 5 per cent. 

Deductibles for businesses, farmers and groups and 

municipalities, 20 to 5 per cent. Maximum amount for financial 

assistance available for residents increased from 100 to 160, 

again to 240, again breaking out that living allowance to be 

additional to that. Maximum amount of assistance eligible for 

small businesses increased from 160 to $500,000, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Again as I touched on, Saskatchewan residency requirements 

for small business and agricultural enterprises eliminated. 

Maximum of $30,000 relocation payment, again separated. And 

regional park authorities’ eligibility was deemed the same as 

municipalities. Deductibles for municipalities and regional 

parks, as I touched on earlier, point one five per cent of their 

current taxable assessment is a cap. 

 

We didn’t stop there. September and October of ’10, our 

government announced further changes to help flood victims, 

including again the depreciation of furnaces was capped at 35, 

not 60 per cent. Depreciation rate on tangible property such as 

drywall, hot water heaters, and concrete reduced. Additional 

structural engineer firms put in place. Additional independent 

claims adjusters were hired. 

 

A 20 per cent increase in the advance payment from 40 per cent 

to 60 per cent of the total claim upon PDAP receiving the 

adjuster’s report. All claims involved in replacement furnaces 

and hot water heaters put as a priority, first come. 

 

[Inaudible] . . . on a new road. We’re going where it wasn’t 

travelled before. PDAP staff are working diligently to reduce 

the waiting times for claimants, eliminate the backlog, those 

arising during the NDP terms in government from ’05 to ’07. 

 

During the 2009-10 fiscal year and prior to this summer’s 

flooding, the average wait time for an advance payment, as I 

said, 12 to 18 months. Wait times under this government, under 



November 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6127 

12 to 18 days for initial payments. 

 

To respond to the unprecedented severe weather this summer, 

the government has increased PDAP staffing levels to ensure 

that progress is not lost due to the record number of claims, so 

flood victims can continue to be paid as quickly as possible. 

There is more to do, but we’re getting there. We’re doing more 

to reduce the wait times, improve the program. And again 

progress is being made. 

 

[12:45] 

 

Where do we come from, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Under the 

NDP, the program completely failed to help people where they 

needed it most — 20 per cent were deductible, not 5; $100,000 

cap, not 240 to 500. Just draconian depreciation rates; 60 per 

cent on furnaces, now down to 35. There was no coverage for 

small-business owners or rental property owners from outside 

the province who provide employment and housing in our 

towns. 

 

Most shockingly again, that 12- to 18-month waiting list before 

any money arrived, which is just shocking. The shocking wait 

time was entirely due to the complete lack of compassion. How 

could you let these people languish in this hardship? I feel bad 

enough we’re weeks and months . . . And you’re trying to get 

these people help. I can’t imagine at this point, months past the 

event, six months past the event, we’d still be waiting six 

months to a year for the initial cheques. That’s just 

unreasonable. 

 

A good example is the Vanguard flood which I referred to 

earlier, where two years later there were still people waiting for 

assistance under the NDP’s administration. The response in an 

inquiry to the delay, the minister at the time, the former 

member for Regina South provided the following explanation 

on July 2nd of ’02: 

 

There are a number of reasons here that affect the ability 

to pay out individual claims. I want to assure the House 

though, that we have had a person working on this 

full-time since the flood, and indeed we . . . [need] another 

person in September. 

 

A flood event of that magnitude, and you have one person 

working on it. The NDP cared so little about the flood victims 

in Vanguard. Again they had one person. 

 

Fourteen months for some of the initial claims: contaminated 

drinking water, damaged roads, buildings, crops, flooded 

homes, several million dollars of damage that occurred. And 

they had one person. In Saskatchewan today, there are more 

than 20 people working extremely hard to process these PDAP 

claims as possible. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve got a few minutes left here so I 

want to really drill down into some of the events that I 

personally saw in Yorkton, which I feel are probably fairly 

indicative. Now just to give you a bit of a background on these 

notes I drafted, the reason I drafted these notes . . . I was out of 

town at a meeting, and I got a phone call from my constituency 

office. And as it happens, we had a couple of constituents, they 

were affected by the flood. They were low-income, not quite 

seniors. I think one was a senior. They come into my office, and 

they are totally upset with my constituency assistants, with 

myself, and they’re saying — I’m quoting, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker: “Brad Wall doesn’t care; Greg Ottenbreit doesn’t care. 

They’ve done nothing. They haven’t returned phone calls.” And 

it went on and on and on. 

 

I took offence to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and here’s why. 

Because in my office, phone calls are returned either by myself 

initially or my constituency assistants. If they need my direction 

after that, I return the calls. Whether it’s email, I try and make 

contact with my constituents as much as I can. 

 

So I was kind of floored when there was this allegation that I 

don’t return phone calls; I don’t care. Initially right after the 

flood, again, I jumped in my truck with some of my family 

members, checking out my daughter’s house, my daughter’s 

boyfriend’s house, areas around the city to see where the 

damage was. Shortly after that, I was in conversation with the 

Premier. 

 

And the next day, the Premier called. It might have been the 

night before or the next day, early the next day I believe, he 

called the mayor. He says, do you need me there? And this is 

the mayor’s story. And the mayor says, no, you know, we’ll 

deal with it. We’re okay for now. If we need, we’ll call. The 

Premier’s on holidays with his family, camping, a needed 

holiday. That phone call terminated. Within two hours, the 

Premier was on the front steps of the city hall looking for the 

mayor. Now is that somebody that doesn’t care? That’s where I 

. . . and I’m wondering where . . . 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — Yes. Well-deserved applause. 

 

The thing that I took offence to . . . And I mean I shouldn’t get 

defensive, but the thing I took offence to, I know how hard 

you’re working. You’re under stress. People are under stress. 

And a little bit to my own fault, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When I 

operated my company, I wouldn’t go and say, I’m going to do 

the job, then I’m going to come and ask for the pat on the back 

and say, I did the job. Or go and do the job, and then come back 

later and ask for a pat on the back. I did the job. Do what you 

need to do. Keep on moving. 

 

If I’m walking around looking for accolades, you’re wasting 

valuable time you can be dealing with cases, phoning the 

minister, phoning the minister, phoning the Premier, talking to 

other members, talking to people in the community, helping out 

where you can. It’s all my fault. I should have been down 

maybe being more self-promoting. I don’t know. 

 

When I hear, I wonder, where do these allegations come from? 

So where would these people get these ideas? Well in the 

course of the conversation that my constituency assistant was 

having with these people, their story: the Leader of the 

Opposition, the member from Rosemont I believe, and a couple 

other members possibly, were at the SIGN [Society for the 

Involvement of Good Neighbours ] on Broadway. And to their 

credit, that’s their job. Opposition, keep the government 

accountable. Where are we falling short? I want to know about 

it so we can address it. 



6128 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2010 

They go down, and what do I hear? The people there said, they 

told us you don’t return phone calls. You don’t care. Brad Wall 

doesn’t care. It got me a little bit angry. These are quotes, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — [Inaudible] . . . the member to refer to 

members from their constituency. 

 

Mr. Ottenbreit: — And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m referring to 

a quote, so I apologize. That was a quote. These are the words 

of the people that came to my office. 

 

So I said, well you know what? I’ve got a . . . I drafted some 

notes. I’m thinking, well I haven’t been taking notes. I haven’t 

been keeping a log. What have we done? So I drafted a bunch 

of notes, specified what we have done, what the Premier had 

done, went down to talk to these people. 

 

My constituency assistant, in the course of this, in the course of 

this conversation, starts questioning the lady: well what do you 

mean your call was refused? It wasn’t returned? So what she 

got out of this lady, she starts typing on the computer. She says, 

what number did you call from? Well I called from SIGN on 

Broadway; that’s where I’ve been put up. And to kind of, to 

jump ahead a little bit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people were 

displaced in school gyms and all over the place. SIGN on 

Broadway, the facility they had there, they opened up their 

doors. They allowed these people in. There are supportive 

services in the building. There’s rooms in the building. There’s 

kitchens in the building. The Victory Church in Yorkton ran the 

kitchen. We had these people looked after as well as could be 

expected outside of their homes. 

 

So I went down. I was going to go down and see these people. 

So my constituency assistant was a bit upset. And she’s 

tracking this down, and she says, well I called from there. Well 

she’s typing and she says, what number? Well I can’t 

remember. She says well . . . They’re continuing this 

conversation. It went on for about 5 minutes, and the lady says, 

well I didn’t, I didn’t send an email; I phoned. And my assistant 

said, that’s fine; we track everything on the computer. Phones 

come in. They’re all logged. The numbers are recorded, and all 

the messages are there. Well, as the conversation went on, well 

maybe I called from my friend’s room. Maybe I called from my 

friend’s house. Maybe I didn’t leave a message. By the time 

we’re all done, they never called. They never left a message. 

How am I to return a call that doesn’t come in? 

 

So my assistant was a bit upset, and I said, no you’ve got to 

understand where they’re coming from though. They’re under 

duress. They’re under stress. They’re displaced from their 

home. Somebody comes in and tells them this kind of stuff that 

is probably not quite . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m not 

going to go there. It wasn’t right.  

 

So I said, you’ve got to understand where they’re coming from. 

In their mind, three days previous or whatever it was, they hear 

this. It bounces around in their head for a few days before they 

get some initiative to come down to the office and complain. I 

know I’m not a psychologist, but I do understand how the 

human mind works. By the time they came to our office, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in their mind, this was truth. I never returned 

their calls. 

So I drafted up these notes, and I talked to them about it. And 

they apologized and said well, you know, maybe it wasn’t the 

truth and they kind of jumped to conclusions. So these are my 

notes, my log that I put together here. 

 

Immediately after the flood, I toured Yorkton to see the damage 

first-hand and began to help where able. Contacted and talked 

to the Premier and informed him of the level of damage and 

impact. The next day the Premier arrives to witness first-hand 

and speak to some of those affected. Began developing a plan 

with the Premier and minister in how to best help flood victims 

of the city of Yorkton area. And again, I think this story is 

pretty indicative of the whole province, but these are, these are 

my notes. 

 

Personally I started attending the emergency meetings put on by 

the city of Yorkton, facilitated by the city of Yorkton, and again 

credit to them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The city, the mayor, and 

council — amazing. Mayor James Wilson did an amazing job 

showing leadership there and facilitating a lot of what had to 

happen. Chief Dean Clark of the Yorkton fire department — 

amazing man — could run a meeting like nobody’s business. 

No straying off-topic. Just kept things on task, kept everybody 

on task. Staff Sergeant Joe Milburn of the RCMP [Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police] city detachment, amazing job of 

keeping the police where they needed to be. 

 

Again, city of Yorkton, Salvation Army, Red Cross, community 

volunteer groups, church groups, Kinsmen, all these different 

groups, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We had some of the Mennonite 

Christian organizations coming out of Manitoba, all over 

interprovincially coming to help. We had an amazing amount of 

help helping people out of their homes and very appreciated. So 

again, I can’t put into words how appreciative I am of all the 

help that we got from around the province. 

 

Again, attended emergency meetings. The initial emergency 

meeting at the Gallagher Centre attended by 1,000, 2,000 

people to get some information. And we had representatives 

there from victim services, the city, emergency services, Social 

Services, Ministry of Public Safety. We had representation 

from across the gamut, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to make sure 

everybody got the information they needed. 

 

Realized people needed financial aid ASAP [as soon as 

possible], made this known to the Premier — and they had 

already been working on this for Maple Creek — 12 to 18 

months, unacceptable. Within a week or two, people were 

receiving checks of $3,000 to tide them over. 

 

Volunteers were desperately needed. Twenty-five provincial 

firefighters brought in by the minister to help evacuation 

cleanup. Attended emergency organizational meetings every 

morning at the fire hall, personally, to help up to date with the 

needs and shortcomings to address where possible. 

 

One need that surfaced during these meetings was proper 

long-term shelter. It was felt that being housed in schools was 

not a good option if other accommodations could be found. So 

through the work of the Minister of Social Services and 

emergency social services and CPSP, we got those affected 

housed in SIGN on Broadway. And again, a lot of thanks to 

those people down there. 



November 18, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 6129 

Constituency office was flooded with sewage, and staff was 

displaced out of the city. So we operated remotely for them, and 

I operated out of the office as best as I could. 

 

Family holidays were cancelled. Ran the office the majority of 

the time single-handed through July into August to keep up 

with disaster-related cases as quickly as possible, usually within 

an hour or two of when they came in. Met with virtually all 

victims as requested. If they asked me to come, I’d come. I 

don’t want to stick my nose in if they’re under duress. Last 

thing you need is a politician walking in patting himself on the 

back. I didn’t want to do that. You need me, I’m there. 

 

Our office continues to deal with PDAP issues — although 

they’re getting fewer and further between; we’re catching up — 

shortcomings as they arise, which as of late consumed, this is 

back again in late July, most days and weekends. Shortly after 

the flood, when we looked at PDAP, it was realized the 

program fell short. Again, I’ve touched on a lot of those 

improvements. 

 

Now keep in mind everything I’ve talked about here happened 

within the first four weeks after the fact of the flood, a lot of it 

three weeks. It took about a few days to get everybody kind of 

organized, see what the heck was going on there, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The mayor and I spoke daily, if not multiple times a day, and 

continue to speak daily on issues that . . . these issues and other 

issues, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but specifically, a lot of the PDAP 

issues with, again, the plans that they have in place to expand 

the catch basin area of the city. In the past, there was meetings 

that were held with all of the PDAP officials and minister and 

the task force to keep addressing these concerns. As we see, 

these changes continue to come in. 

 

Now again as I touched on, I wrote in my notes here, it has 

come to my attention that the Leader of the Opposition and his 

colleagues were recently here to visit. And I understand 

statements were made about the Premier, myself, the 

government, and how this issue has been handled, and further 

questioned if we were doing anything. 

 

Again these insinuations that I don’t return phone calls. And I 

found out afterwards, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there was one 

call I didn’t return. I found out through a minister. The call was 

made, no message left. When I did finally hear about a call 

being made, I called this person to get, basically, railed on for 

20 minutes. And every time I talk about the improvements 

being made and how we’re helping people, jump to a different 

subject and again rail on me again. So I allowed her 20 minutes 

or so till she was done. And that might have been the source of 

information, the one person that didn’t possibly leave a 

message. So it’s hard to address those. So I got a little bit upset 

when I heard that. 

 

But I mean, people are people and, you know, I find these 

statements a little bit offensive. And you know, to hear 

concerns and hold us account where needed, exactly I 

understand that and I totally want that to happen. 

 

But by him coming to my city, making these statements, I feel 

was to further his own political interests, do nothing, have 

nothing to do with caring about people. And I personally find it 

disgusting and deplorable that he would use a crisis in our city 

and use those hardships for that reason. The term I was given 

by somebody in that situation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was they 

felt emotionally manipulated. So you know, I just find that it’s 

just uncalled for. 

 

But with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m running short on time. I 

just want to find my motion to read it specifically, through my 

many, many, many notes of improvements and the notes we 

have. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I make the motion: 

 

That this Assembly recognize the dutiful efforts of the 

many volunteers, organizations, and different levels of 

government’s swift response to the emergency situations 

of this past summer, as well as our continued efforts to 

enhance and expand the provincial disaster assistance 

program to the benefit of those who must rebuild their 

lives after the disastrous flood of 2010. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Yorkton has 

moved a motion: 

 

That this Assembly recognize the dutiful efforts of the 

many volunteers, organizations, and different levels of 

government’s swift response to the emergency situations 

of this past summer, as well our continued efforts to 

enhance and expand the provincial disaster assistance 

program to the benefit of those who must rebuild their 

lives after the disastrous flooding of 2010. 

 

It being 1 o’clock, this House now stands adjourned until 1:30 

on Monday afternoon. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 13:00.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6101 

  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 6101 

  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 6101, 6102 

  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6101 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6102 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6119 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6120 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6102 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6102 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6102 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6102 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6103 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6103 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Technology Week Keynote Speaker 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6103 

 National Child Day 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6103 

 Honouring the Memory of Al Johnson 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6104 

 Nation Builders and Community Recognition Awards 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6104 

 Saskatoon Business Turns 100 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6104 

 Champion of Change 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6105 

 Green Week in Regina 

  Morin ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6105 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Support for Agricultural Producers 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6105 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6105 

 Arrangements Regarding Long-Term Care Facilities 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6106 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6107 

 Out-of-Province Medical Care 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 6108 

  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6108 

 Training for Occupational Therapists 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6109 

  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6109 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6110 

PRIVATE BILLS 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 905 — The Sisters of the Presentation Act, 2010 

  Gantefoer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6110 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Provincial Finances 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 6110, 6120 

  Weekes ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6113, 6120 

  Junor .............................................................................................................................................................................. 6114, 6121 

  Wilson ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6116, 6120 

  Atkinson ......................................................................................................................................................................... 6117, 6120 

  Bradshaw ....................................................................................................................................................................... 6118, 6121 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6120 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6120 

 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Responses to Provincial Emergencies 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6122 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


