




















































Hansard: November 09, 2010


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Honourable Don Toth 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 53 NO. 8A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 2010, 1:30 p.m. 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Don Toth 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Dwain Lingenfelter 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Allchurch, Denis SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Atkinson, Pat NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Hon. Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Chisholm, Michael SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
D’Autremont, Dan SP Cannington 
Draude, Hon. June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Furber, Darcy NDP Prince Albert Northcote 
Gantefoer, Rod SP Melfort 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harper, Ron NDP Regina Northeast 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Hon. Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Higgins, Deb NDP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Hutchinson, Hon. Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, Hon. D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Iwanchuk, Andy NDP Saskatoon Fairview 
Junor, Judy NDP Saskatoon Eastview 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lingenfelter, Dwain NDP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMillan, Hon. Tim SP Lloydminster 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Morin, Sandra NDP Regina Walsh Acres 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Hon. Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Greg SP Yorkton 
Quennell, Frank NDP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Hon. Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Schriemer, Joceline SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Stewart, Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Taylor, Len NDP The Battlefords 
Tell, Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Toth, Hon. Don SP Moosomin 
Trew, Kim NDP Regina Coronation Park 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Yates, Kevin NDP Regina Dewdney 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5929 

 November 9, 2010 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 

and through you to all members of the Assembly, it‟s a pleasure 

for me to introduce two distinguished individuals that have 

joined us on the floor of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Joining us 

are two federal members of parliament: Andrew Scheer, the 

member for Regina-Qu‟Appelle, and Tom Lukiwski, the 

member for Regina-Lumsden-Lake Centre. In addition to their 

duties as members of parliament, Mr. Scheer is also the Deputy 

Speaker in the House of Commons. Mr. Lukiwski is the 

Parliamentary Secretary to the House Leader. 

 

And more importantly from the perspective of Saskatchewan, 

especially over these last number of weeks, we know that while 

they were prevented because of federal regulations in the 

Investment Canada review process from commenting publicly 

on the very sensitive hostile takeover deal by BHP Billiton of 

the Potash Corp of Saskatchewan, they were making 

Saskatchewan‟s case — making the case for our province and 

its people and our potash resource where the case needed to be 

made, at the very centre of things in Ottawa and with the 

minister. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan, 

on behalf of the government, Mr. Speaker, we want to thank 

them. And through them, we want to thank the other members 

of parliament from this province who helped make the case and 

have got us at least about 25 days closer to a very historic 

development that is very much in the interests of not just our 

province but of our country. 

 

And I‟d ask all members to join with me in welcoming those 

that helped in this case, the members of parliament that have 

joined us today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your 

gallery are two distinguished members of the legal community, 

Karl Bazin from Swift Current and Terry Kimpinski from 

Saskatoon, who are down meeting with me this morning on 

legal issues. And, Mr. Speaker, I think neither one of them have 

been here for our question period, so I‟m expecting the 

members opposite to be especially polite and courteous today so 

that we can demonstrate how fine and co-operative that we are 

in this House — and productive, Mr. Speaker. I‟d ask that all 

members welcome them to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Mr. Quennell: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the Minister 

of Justice in welcoming the two gentlemen in the Speaker‟s 

gallery. Karl Bazin and I were classmates at law school and Mr. 

Kimpinski and I practised law together, so I can be as nice as 

the minister wants me to be in question period. I won‟t be 

fooling those two gentlemen. They know me too well. 

 

Mr. Bazin, you‟ll note, is not a Provincial Court judge and so 

the minister has been guilty of some exaggeration in suggesting 

that all my classmates now are appointed to the Provincial 

Court. Didn‟t quite manage to pull that off. Anyways, I would 

like to welcome both Karl and Terry to the Legislative 

Assembly. If they hang around for question period, I hope they 

enjoy it. 

 

While I‟m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 

you and through you to all members of the Assembly a grade 8 

class from Caswell Community School in the east gallery and 

their teacher, Sarah Myers, and chaperone, Angie Jansen. And 

other than the obligatory meeting with the MLA [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly], I trust they will enjoy their stay here 

and their time in the Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I must join 

in with the member from Meewasin in welcoming the students 

from Caswell. It‟s a very special connection of mine. They 

occupy my former classroom at Caswell School. So when I 

walk my dog, we‟ll walk by Caswell School and I think a lot 

about Caswell and how important it is. In fact what‟s interesting 

is this year they‟re celebrating their 100th anniversary. So it 

plays an important part in Saskatoon‟s history. So I too want to 

welcome them to their legislature. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today on behalf of concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who are 

concerned over the safety of our highways and the need for 

improvement to our highways to provide safety for 

Saskatchewan‟s motoring public. And I‟ll read the prayer, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the Government of Saskatchewan to construct passing 

lanes on Highway No. 10 between Fort Qu‟Appelle and 

the junction of Highway 1 in order to improve safety for 

Saskatchewan‟s motoring public. 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 

Pasqua Lake and Fort Qu‟Appelle, Saskatchewan. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 



5930 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2010 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of eliminating poverty in 

Saskatchewan. And we know that freedom from poverty is an 

enshrined human right by the United Nations and that all 

citizens are entitled to social and economic security. And 

Saskatchewan‟s income gap between the rich and the poor 

continues to grow, and now one in five children in 

Saskatchewan live in deepening poverty. I‟d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to act as quickly as possible to develop an 

effective and sustainable poverty elimination strategy for 

the benefit of all Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I present this for the people who signed this 

from Regina, Hepburn, Saskatoon, and North Battleford. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

 

Mr. Iwanchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I stand to present a petition in 

support of occupational health and safety. Mr. Speaker, the true 

cost of human suffering or loss of human life cannot be 

measured in dollars and cents. And the government allows the 

fines levied against companies for violations under The 

Occupational Health and Safety Act to be treated as tax 

deductible expenses. And the government continues to allow 

companies to treat such violations of fines which would then 

appear to be just a regular cost of doing business. Mr. Speaker, 

the petition reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 

the government to amend the law so companies will not be 

allowed to get a tax deduction for fines levied against 

them under The Occupational Health and Safety Act and 

regulations, and to remove the existing cap on fines levied 

against such companies. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And the petitions come from Aberdeen and Saskatoon. I so 

present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present petitions 

once again today on behalf of concerned residents from across 

Saskatchewan as it relates to the unprecedented 

mismanagement of our finances by the Sask Party. They allude 

to the two consecutive deficits tabled by this Sask Party and the 

billions of dollars of debt growth that‟s accruing under their 

stewardship, Mr. Speaker. This mismanagement costs all of us. 

We‟re talking about $4.2 billion of debt growth over the next 

four years. And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly condemn the Sask Party 

government for its damaging financial mismanagement 

since taking office, a reckless fiscal record that is denying 

Saskatchewan people, organizations, municipalities, 

institutions, taxpayers, and businesses the responsible and 

trustworthy fiscal management that they so deserve. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Now these petitions today are signed by concerned citizens 

from Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 

 

Year of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Citizens across our 

great nation go to bed knowing they will be safe at night. This 

is largely due to the work of our Royal Canadian Mounted 

Police force. It brings me great pleasure to announce that this is 

the Year of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. The RCMP is 

unique in the world due to the fact that it is a national, federal, 

provincial, and municipal policing body. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the RCMP pride themselves on being a 

progressive, proactive, and innovative organization. They 

provide the highest quality of service through dynamic 

leadership, education, and technology in constant partnership 

with the diverse communities they serve. 

 

Our Royal Canadian Mounted Police hold themselves to a 

higher standard of accountability. Building on its 130-year 

legacy, the RCMP has set its sights on being recognized around 

the world as an organization of excellence. They have made it 

their mission to raise the barometer of public safety to maintain 

their mandate of safe homes and safe communities for 

Canadians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is impossible to have an organization reach this 

level of achievement without core values such as honesty, 

integrity, professionalism, and compassion. I would ask that all 

members of this Assembly join me in recognizing the Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 

 

New La Ronge Seniors Centre 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m rising today in honour of 

La Ronge Seniors Club. On September the 18th, Mr. Speaker, 

the club officially opened its new centre in La Ronge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say I am rising in honour, because the total cost 

of the centre was raised by sweat and hard work of the La 

Ronge seniors members. A total of approximately 250,000 was 

fundraised through bake sales, rummage sales, bingos, and 

donations from local support and from businesses. The balance 

of 50,000 was secured through a mortgage which the club will 

pay off over the next few years. Not one single dollar came 

from the government coffers. 

 

I was fortunate to attend the opening ceremony, Mr. Speaker, 

and hear a few comments from Len Fallows, the president of 



November 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5931 

Saskatchewan Seniors Association Inc. Mr. Fallows expressed 

his delight at attending the opening ceremony because he has 

witnessed so many centre closures over recent years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the centre will provide a variety of activities for 

the seniors in La Ronge area, activities such as the exercise 

program, cooking, nutrition classes, and their fall prevention 

classes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in applauding the 

good work, dedication, of the La Ronge Seniors Club. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Battling for Children’s Hospital Fund 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, over the last month or so, 

the people of Saskatchewan have been cheering on our very 

own Kelly Chase. I know Kelly personally. I know it was 

probably difficult for him to trade in his hockey skates for a pair 

of figure skates. After all, during his hockey career Kelly was 

better known for his toughness and his grit than he was for his 

grace and beauty on blades. 

 

But I also know Kelly had a big heart. He put on the figure 

skates in an attempt to raise $100,000 for the children‟s hospital 

of Saskatchewan. Paired with Kyoko Ina, Kelly has gladly 

strapped on the skates to compete in CBC‟s [Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation] Battle of the Blades competition. 

 

Kelly was born in Porcupine Plain in 1967. And after playing 

for both the Saskatoon Blades and the IHL‟s [International 

Hockey League] Peoria Rivermen, Kelly went on to play 458 

games in the NHL [National Hockey League]. On the ice, Kelly 

was quintessentially the tough guy, digging in the corners and 

dropping his gloves when it needed to be done. But off the ice, 

Kelly always had a big heart. 

 

In 1997-98, Kelly received the King Clancy Memorial Trophy, 

the NHL‟s award for making significant humanitarian 

contributions to the community. He received the award for 

helping intellectually challenged children get involved in sports. 

 

He‟s received . . . the recipient of the Order of Canada for his 

contributions to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Battle of the Blades is seen by Kelly as yet another 

opportunity to give back to his home province. On behalf of all 

members, I would like to congratulate Kelly and Kyoko on 

making it this far in the Battle of the Blades, and I also would 

encourage everyone to vote often and to show their support for 

this great pair on Sunday night. To vote for Kelly and Kyoko, 

call 1-877-844-8156. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Massey Place. 

 

University of Saskatchewan Alumni Awards 

 

Mr. Broten: — On November 4th, I had the pleasure of 

attending the University of Saskatchewan‟s 2010 Alumni 

Awards gala. This was a special evening for the alumni 

association as the community gathered to recognize six 

distinguished graduates. 

 

The Alumni Award of Achievement was given to Dr. Ernest 

Olfert, who recently retired after a 40-year career in veterinary 

medicine on campus. Among his many accomplishments, he is 

viewed as a world expert on the humane care of animals used in 

research. 

 

The Aboriginal Initiatives Award was given to Cecil King. Mr. 

King founded the Indian teacher education program. Most 

recently he served as the dean of the Saskatoon campus of the 

First Nations University of Canada. 

 

The recipient of the Humanitarian Award was Garth Herbert, a 

graduate of the College of Commerce. Mr. Herbert is a 

chartered accountant and a civil servant in the Ministry of 

Health. He has served his professional association, has been a 

member of the national board of the Canadian Diabetes 

Association, and is an active member of Holy Family Church. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Mentorship Award was granted to Dr. William Frischke, a 

graduate of the Western College of Veterinary Medicine. His 

practice in Ponoka, Alberta has a focus on welcoming many 

students and interns over the past decades. 

 

The recipient of the Outstanding Young Alumni Award was 

Kelly-Anne Reiss. Ms. Reiss began her training in engineering 

but soon switched to English. She is based in Moose Jaw and 

works as a freelance journalist, is an accomplished author and 

poet, and recently completed her first film script. 

 

The Service Award was granted to Laurel Krause, a retired 

educator from Swift Current. Ms. Krause has served on the 

university senate and the president‟s round table on outreach 

and engagement. Ms. Krause cares deeply for her students and 

has attended dozens of convocation ceremonies. She was also 

my wife‟s high school teacher. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 

recipients of the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] Alumni 

Awards and thank them for their outstanding contributions to 

our province. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. 

 

Diwali Festival 

 

Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. November 5th 

marked an important celebration for our Hindu and Sikh 

communities in Saskatchewan. This year‟s festival was one that 

was extra special. It was the first time in history that the city of 

Saskatoon, that fireworks permission was given to the Sikh 

community for the celebration of their event. 

 

The Diwali festival is one that is celebrated by Indians 

worldwide. It was with great honour that our Minister of 

Advanced Education, Employment and Immigration was able to 

attend this year‟s celebration in Saskatoon, and the Minister of 

Government Services, who was also privileged to attend the 



5932 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2010 

Regina celebration. 

 

Most Diwali celebrations are focused on spending time with 

family and friends. It is a time to reflect on the past and 

envision a better future. As Diwali approaches, families clean 

their homes to escape bad luck in the upcoming year. These 

families believe that the Hindu goddess of good luck will visit 

all homes that are brightly lit. 

 

In preparation for Diwali, children make many small clay lamps 

called diyas. Diyas are created to invite the good luck goddess 

to the homes of Indian families. Mr. Speaker, this is especially 

important to Indian children because the good luck goddess is 

the provider of new clothes and toys. One family may have 

thousands of these diyas decorating their home. 

 

I would ask that all members of the Assembly join me in 

congratulating the Sikh community for a historic Diwali 

festival. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Sacrifice and Service 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to 

recognize all the men and women that currently serve and have 

served our proud nation, not only at this time of remembrance, 

but always. 

 

Similar to so many across our province, a history of service to 

one‟s nation is part of my family‟s story — in my case, my 

grandfather, leaving Saskatchewan a young farmer to serve our 

nation with the distinguished Regina Rifle Regiment. It is with 

pride that I have tucked within my suit jacket here today my 

grandfather‟s soldier‟s service and pay book. This pay book 

was carried by my grandfather from his departure through his 

landing in Normandy and throughout the Second World War. 

 

It is signed from 1941 through ‟42, ‟43, ‟44, and ‟45. The final 

entry is signed by a captain by the name of Orchard, dated on 

February 18th, 1945, and simply states, “wounded Germany.” It 

was the battle of Molyland Wood that ended my grandfather‟s 

service. 

 

These countless stories of sacrifice and service run deep in this 

province. They cross political divides in communities, and they 

in part shape us as a nation, a province, as families, and 

individuals. It is with pride that I not only remember my 

grandfather but remember all who have served and currently 

serve our proud nation. 

 

I ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in extending 

our thanks. To quote John McCrae, “the torch; be yours to hold 

it high.” Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Saskatoon Primary Care Health Bus 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Canadian 

Health Services Research Foundation is currently hosting a 

conference in Montreal. Delegates from Saskatoon health 

primary care unit will be there to present on the primary care 

health bus. 

 

This team is the only Saskatchewan delegation presenting at the 

conference, Mr. Speaker. Members will recall that our 

government launched the health bus pilot with the Saskatoon 

Health Region and MD Ambulance in August of 2008. The 

health bus is a converted RV [recreational vehicle] that contains 

a fully equipped examination room. It brings health care right to 

the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the six-month pilot was such a success that our 

government committed in 2009 to make it an ongoing project, 

receiving $350,000 in annual funding. This past year, almost 

6,000 clients have accessed services on the bus as it travels into 

core neighbourhoods eight hours a day, seven days a week. 

 

Paramedics and nurse practitioners perform health checks, 

blood pressure, and blood sugar checks. They offer information 

and treatment for chronic diseases, chronic disease 

management, and disease prevention. They provide health 

education on topics ranging from bike safety to stop-smoking 

programs and nutrition. They offer wound care and follow-up 

care. In addition to improved health outcomes for residents, the 

health bus also relieves pressure on EMS [emergency medical 

services] and emergency rooms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m sure all members will join me in 

congratulating the Saskatoon Health Region and MD 

Ambulance on their continued hard work and success with the 

health bus program. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

Foreign Investment in Uranium Industry 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier. One of Saskatchewan‟s members of parliament, 

Conservative MP for Saskatoon-Humboldt, Brad Trost, has 

introduced Bill C-436 in the federal House of Commons. This 

Bill would see the ending of restrictions on foreign ownership 

of Saskatchewan‟s uranium. 

 

In a press interview he indicated that the Premier of 

Saskatchewan fully supports this Bill. My question to the 

Premier is: does he in fact support Bill C-436? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks for the question. Mr. Speaker, the 

federal government had indicated in a recent Throne Speech 

that it was their intention to make adjustments to what‟s known 

as ENRA [environment and natural resources accounting] that 

restricts ownership in certain mining operations, obviously 

significantly uranium. 

 

This is something we‟ve quite publicly said as a government we 

support. Mr. Speaker, the analogy would be this. We have 

American-owned potash mines in Saskatchewan today through 

Mosaic. That‟s certainly the case. Mr. Speaker, we have the 

French invested in the uranium industry in the province today 

through Areva. What was very different about a PotashCorp 



November 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5933 

takeover was the amount of resource in play and the loss of a 

Canadian champion, a Canadian company. Mr. Speaker, fully 

30 per cent of the world‟s potash reserves were in play in that 

one takeover. 

 

Do we still welcome foreign investment into the province of 

Saskatchewan? Yes we do. Do we welcome foreign investment 

in terms of our uranium industry? Yes we do. Would we want 

to see the reserves, the vast reserves of uranium in our province 

come under foreign control? No, Mr. Speaker. And that‟s not 

what this Bill would prescribe. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the province of 

Saskatchewan produces about 30 per cent of the world‟s potash 

and about the same percentage of the world‟s uranium. And 

many people in this province believe that both are strategic to 

the future economy of the province. In fact some would argue 

that uranium is even more strategic in the world economy than 

potash. And while I don‟t take that position, I think there is a 

fair degree of debate going on about what is strategic in terms 

of the economy and how much foreign ownership we should 

have. 

 

My question again to the Premier is, if there is a takeover move 

by a foreign entity as encouraged by Brad Trost while he was in 

Australia — he comments on inviting companies similar to 

BHP to come and invest — if that were the proposal, would the 

Premier allow a takeover of the potash . . . of Cameco or other 

Canadian-owned entities in uranium? Would that be allowed 

under his guidance, or would he advise the Prime Minister to be 

opposed to that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Cameco, as the member will 

know, is the product of the merger of two Crown corporations 

— a federal Crown, Eldorado Nuclear, and the provincial 

Crown, Saskatchewan Mining and Development Corporation. 

Those two Crowns were merged. There was an IPO [initial 

public offering], and the private company Cameco, 

headquartered in Saskatoon, is the result. 

 

There are significant protections for the interests of the province 

and the country prescribed, written into the DNA of this new 

company, including a golden share this province maintains that 

mercifully the previous administration wasn‟t able to dismantle, 

but requires the head office of that company to stay in the 

province. Point number one. 

 

Point number two, Mr. Speaker, is there are protections from 

the federal government that prevent the takeover, the foreign 

takeover of this company. Moreover, my understanding of the 

member‟s Bill is that there are protections in it that prescribe 

the National Defence minister can step in on any particular 

takeover. 

 

Today in Saskatchewan, we have foreign investment in the 

uranium mining industry. We have a French company involved. 

They can only own 49 per cent of an interest in a mine, so they 

do that on a number of occasions. Do we think that Areva 

should be able to own majority control of a uranium mine? Yes, 

Mr. Speaker, we‟d welcome that kind of investment and those 

jobs to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, to be clear. While the 

federal member was in Australia touting that the resources of 

Saskatchewan were open for sale to foreign investment, he 

referred to uranium and obviously was referring to potash. That 

has obviously changed at the federal level because even though 

the member was there asking for investment in potash, because 

of the work done by the Premier and the province of 

Saskatchewan, that was changed. 

 

My question to the Premier is this. Very specifically, if BHP 

came and wanted to buy Cameco, the Premier then would 

approve that kind of deal? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Let me be very clear here. The position of 

the province of Saskatchewan, and then the position of the 

Industry minister, was that this particular takeover be refused. 

The position of the Government of Saskatchewan remains this 

with respect to BHP: we welcome their intention to build a new 

mine in Saskatchewan. 

 

A new mine represents new investment. It‟s not a takeover. It 

doesn‟t represent a third of the world‟s potash reserves. It‟s a 

new mine for the province much like Mosaic owns and operates 

mines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are protections in place with respect to 

Cameco. We believe the uranium resource is significant. We 

would not want the resource, the majority of the reserves to fall 

into foreign control. But do we welcome foreign investment as 

the previous administration welcomed in the uranium industry, 

in uranium mining? Yes we do. If BHP wanted to build a 

uranium mine in the province of Saskatchewan, would we 

welcome that? Yes we would. We‟re interested in jobs in the 

North. We‟re interested in wealth creation for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Road Ambulance Service 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, as of December of this year, the 

road ambulance service in Neilburg will be cut. Ambulances 

will be dispatched out of Cut Knife which means people in 

Neilburg will wait an extra 20 minutes for an ambulance 

response. Mr. Speaker, when a person‟s life is at risk, 20 

minutes can mean the difference between life and death. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is, why is he putting 

more people‟s lives in danger by cutting road ambulance 

services instead of supporting road ambulance services and 

enhancing them and saving more people‟s lives? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I‟ll 



5934 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2010 

take notice of the question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Because of the Sask 

Party‟s failure to adequately fund health regions, the Prairie 

North Health Region has to find $5 million in savings or 

efficiencies, as the minister has called it. The need for the health 

region to find savings has cost the people of Neilburg their 

ambulance service. Neilburg isn‟t the only rural community 

experiencing ambulance service cuts; there‟s also Cudworth and 

Coronach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party‟s financial mismanagement is 

putting people‟s lives at risk, especially in rural Saskatchewan. 

To the minister: how can he and the Sask Party put a price tag 

on people‟s lives? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, again I‟ll take notice of the 

question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Well perhaps since it‟s a financial question and 

it‟s a question about mismanagement, it would behoove the 

Minister of Finance to actually give us some input on how the 

budget helps rural Saskatchewan and helps ambulance services 

and helps save people‟s lives. 

 

The minister‟s own report in 2009 said that 2,390 emergency 

ambulance calls in rural Saskatchewan failed to meet the 

30-minute-or-less response time. That means an average of 

more than six rural ambulance calls per day failed to reach 

people within the recommended national standard of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is appalling. The minister‟s own report says 

there‟s a crisis in rural road ambulance coverages. Mr. Speaker, 

what is minister doing to ensure that rural road ambulance 

services meet the national standard of 30 minutes or less for 

response to an emergency call? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, again I‟ll take notice of the 

question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Long-Term Care Facility Funding 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, in the 2007 Sask Party election platform, a number of 

commitments and promises were made by the Sask Party. One 

of those promises reads as follows: a Saskatchewan Party 

government will provide Saskatchewan people with more 

transparency and accountability than any other previous 

government. That was the promise made. I‟d like to ask the 

government today to tell us how they‟re doing with that 

promise. Are they keeping it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting to listen to a question from that 

member — the member, Mr. Speaker, who in this Legislative 

Assembly, I understand, held the portfolio of Minister of 

Finance, but is the only Minister of Finance to never have 

delivered a budget in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the previous budget of 2007. The member makes 

mention of 2007. Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting that in 2007, the 

last year of the NDP [New Democratic Party] government, Mr. 

Speaker, that the normal projection of a four-year plan, a 

four-year plan would be outlined by the Ministry of Finance to 

indicate what would be happening over the course of the next 

four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the last year of the NDP government, no 

four-year plan, no projections, no evaluations of where the 

economy was going. In fact, Mr. Speaker, not even a projection 

of where the debt was going to go because of the lack of 

infrastructure that that NDP government did. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I do note that as the last 

Finance minister under an NDP government, we did leave the 

government with $2.3 billion in cash. And I understand it‟s not 

enough because the debt‟s going up. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what the government needs to know is that I 

requested, under freedom of information, a number of . . . a lot 

of information regarding Amicus. And so my question is this: if 

the government is so committed to transparency and 

accountability, why did they respond to a freedom of 

information request about the Amicus deal by releasing 900 

pages of documents with most of the information blacked out? 

What is that government hiding? And most importantly, who 

are you hiding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ll take notice of that 

question. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. 

Speaker, we have a government that promised the citizens of 

Saskatchewan that they would be the most open and transparent 

government in the history of the province. 

 

Now we have a government that promises in their Throne 

Speech that they‟re going to introduce new, innovative funding 

models to long-term care in the province. Well let‟s talk about 



November 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5935 

that innovative funding model. Now, Mr. Speaker, last spring 

this government refused to answer questions about this deal that 

they have with Amicus and how much this deal would cost 

taxpayers. They said that the final operating agreement, 

particularly the cost per diem, still had to be negotiated. But we 

do know this: they guaranteed $27 million worth of a mortgage 

for Amicus, and we do know that the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan are going to pay for it. 

 

So this is a government that promises to be accountable and 

transparent. Can they tell us today how much is this loan 

guarantee ultimately going to cost the people of our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

this government makes no apologies for looking at innovation 

and health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opposition critic for health care sent letters to 

communities all around this province telling them that their 

long-term care facilities were going to be cancelled. Mr. 

Speaker, that is not true. Shame on them for doing that. Mr. 

Speaker, that was included in my own community of Rosetown 

where the project will be tendered in a few months. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not . . . 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I recognize the Minister 

of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, not 

only is this government building long-term care facilities, like 

the members opposite didn‟t, but also unlike the members 

opposite, we‟re building highways to get to those long-term 

care facilities. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Speaker, the member didn‟t answer 

the question. And it‟s the third time the member didn‟t answer 

the question. 

 

The question is this: how much is your sweetheart deal with 

Amicus going to cost the citizens of our province? Will you 

keep your promise to be accountable and transparent, or are you 

going to continue to hide the truth? What are you hiding and 

who are you hiding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m proud of this 

government‟s record on transparency, unlike the members 

opposite. Again, in health care we‟ll look at innovative ways of 

providing services that the members opposite didn‟t. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we‟re building long-term care facilities all around 

this province. And I‟m proud of that record. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that member may be 

proud of that record, but that record is not transparent, and it 

certainly isn‟t accountable at the moment. 

 

Now in their Throne Speech, they called the Amicus project 

innovative. Well let‟s take a look at what they call innovative 

and new. The lawyer for Amicus, Rod Donlevy, is the brother 

of the Premier‟s chief of staff. The CEO [Chief Executive 

Officer] of Amicus was on contract with the minister‟s 

department. A major Sask Party donor received the untendered 

contract to build the facility, and the government guaranteed 

Amicus his mortgage without knowing how much it‟s going to 

cost the people of our province. 

 

So to the minister: if the Amicus deal is so innovative and new, 

why are they going to all of this trouble to hide the details from 

the public? What are they hiding, and who are they hiding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Catholic Health Ministry owns and operates a number of 

facilities around the province: St. Paul‟s Hospital in Saskatoon, 

St. Peter‟s Hospital in Melville, Radville Marian Health Centre 

in Radville, St. Joseph‟s Hospital in Estevan. Mr. Speaker, they 

own and operate a number of them. 

 

In regards to the new facility she‟s talking about, I have a quote 

from the Chair of the health authority from August 6th, 2010, 

Mr. Jim Rhode, Mr. Speaker. And it says: 

 

The new facility will help address the need for additional 

long-term care services in the province, contribute to 

freeing up hospital beds, and help reduce acute care 

hospital service wait times for surgery and other services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don‟t know what the member opposite has 

against this facility being built or the Catholic Health Ministry. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — I‟m pleased that the minister today is sticking 

to the speaking points, but it doesn‟t answer the question. The 

fact is this: that Amicus is neither innovative or new. It‟s the 

same, old, tired cronyism that turns people off politics. 

 

Now this past summer the Minister of Justice was forced to step 

down as Liquor and Gaming minister after it was revealed that 

he owned shares in Deer Ridge motels. One of the directors of 

Deer Ridge is Michael Stensrud, the same Sask Party donor 

who received the untendered contract to build the Amicus 

facility. Yet another connection between the people involved in 

this deal and members of the Sask Party. 

 

So to the minister: how many, just how many connections are 

there between members of the Sask Party and Amicus? What is 

the government hiding and who are they hiding? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 

 



5936 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2010 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I find that kind of sad. She 

talks about the same old way of doing business. This is from the 

NDP who, when they were in power, eliminated 136 long-term 

care beds. Mr. Speaker, it is a new and innovative way of 

providing health care services. It‟s going to test a new fiscal 

arrangement that most importantly, Mr. Speaker, doesn‟t 

require the provincial government to provide upfront capital. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Crown Corporation Revenues 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, since becoming the government, 

the Sask Party has taken over $1 billion from our Crown 

corporations. As a result, today our Crowns are weaker and less 

stable, and the Saskatchewan people will have to pay a price for 

many years to come. 

 

My question is to the new Minister of CIC [Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan]: does the minister intend to carry 

on with the Sask Party practice of the past by weakening our 

Crowns and stripping all of their profits? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Crown 

corporations in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are more focused 

today than they ever have been in the past. We‟ve seen more 

investment in our Crowns in the last three years than were seen 

under about 16 years, Mr. Speaker, of that government. 

 

The dividends paid to the GRF [General Revenue Fund], Mr. 

Speaker, we see coming into GRF, budgeted at $393 million 

this year, Mr. Speaker. We‟ll be retaining over 164 million, Mr. 

Speaker. That‟s a ratio of about 70 per cent dividend payment, 

30 per cent retained earnings, Mr. Speaker. That‟s well within 

the norm of what the Crown corporations have paid in the past, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, the official opposition has received 

credible information from insiders that says the Sask Party 

government plans to strip 100 per cent of SaskTel‟s profits for 

at least the next five years. That‟s what insiders are telling us: 

for the next five years, the Sask Party government will take 

every penny from SaskTel. 

 

To the Minister Responsible for CIC: is this part of the Sask 

Party‟s plan for our Crowns, and what other Crowns will have 

every single penny stripped from them over the next five years? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, 

Mr. Speaker, the Crown corporations pay dividends to the 

Government of Saskatchewan. That‟s a long-standing tradition. 

This year we budgeted about a 70 per cent dividend payment, 

30 per cent retained earnings. 

 

The good news, Mr. Speaker, is that we have seen the profits in 

the Crowns grow to a point that our retained earnings this year 

will be over 30 per cent. It will only be about a 66 per cent 

payment with current forecasts, Mr. Speaker. That is good news 

for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the members opposite would be interested 

in this. We have a 70 per cent dividend this year. In the past, 

Mr. Speaker, in 2002 under that government, 114 per cent 

dividend; 2001, Mr. Speaker, 181 per cent dividend. Mr. 

Speaker, 1998, 114 per cent dividend. Mr. Speaker, this 

government believes in strong Crown corporations, investing in 

infrastructure, investing in SaskTel, investing in SaskPower. 

And we will continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, this coming from a government 

that took 212 per cent — 212 per cent last year, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, we‟ve seen this show before. You gut a Crown 

corporation and then you sell it off. That‟s exactly what Grant 

Devine did with the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. He 

weakened it and then used its weakened state as an excuse to 

privatize it.  

 

My question to the Minister Responsible for CIC is this: is the 

Saskatchewan Party‟s long-range plan to weaken our Crowns so 

much that they can privatize them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — No. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, last year, 212 per cent stripped 

from our Crown corporations. Mr. Speaker, 212 per cent. Mr. 

Speaker, we see continued stripping of our Crown corporations, 

and we hear that it‟s going to continue for several years to come 

at unsustainable levels, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we are 

hearing from various sources that portions of our Crown 

corporations are either going to be sold off before or 

immediately after the next election, Mr. Speaker. Will the 

minister confirm for us today that they plan to strip our Crowns 

and sell them off? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Crown Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If that 

member, Mr. Speaker, would like to discuss what is 

unsustainable, 16 years of not investing in our Crowns, Mr. 

Speaker, is unsustainable. When our government inherited 

SaskPower, Mr. Speaker, their government had invested 

roughly $200 million a year in SaskPower. Over the last three 

years, we‟ve invested upwards of 600 million a year in 

SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If these members want to talk about weakening the Crowns, Mr. 

Speaker, I think investments in items such as Channel Lake, 

that would be one way to weaken the Crown sector. SPUDCO, 



November 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5937 

Mr. Speaker, those would be ways of weakening the Crown 

sector.  

 

Investing in infrastructure, paying a reasonable rate to the 

people of Saskatchewan of 70 per cent — actually it‟s 66 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker — that is the way of sustaining the Crowns. 

Taking their dividends, Mr. Speaker, bad investments, that is a 

way of weakening the Crowns. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we saw the government one year 

ago take 212 per cent. Mr. Speaker, Crown employees and 

individuals within the Crowns are telling us that this 

government intends to take 100 per cent of SaskTel‟s revenues 

for the next five years, Mr. Speaker. It‟s not sustainable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see in SGI [Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance] destabilizing SGI Canada by removing the 

requirement that you sell SGI products, to have an SGI dealer to 

issue licence plates and licences. Mr. Speaker, taking market 

share away, weakening our Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We hear after the 2011 election that the portion of auto 

insurance, not injury protection but auto insurance, will be 

removed from the licence plate. Mr. Speaker, this government 

is destabilizing and going to sell off the Crown corporations. 

Will the minister confirm it today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 

Investments. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMillan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t know 

if the members opposite have run out of questions or ideas, Mr. 

Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, I think they‟re to a point where 

scaring the people of Saskatchewan is their only tactic. 

 

Our government believes in maintaining the Crowns, Mr. 

Speaker. We have a reasonable return on equity, Mr. Speaker. 

We have demonstrated that in years past. Those members did 

not. We are going to stand by our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. And 

I‟m proud to do so. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Whitecap Dakota First Nation Affordable 

Housing Initiative 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, today our government 

marks the beginning of an unprecedented partnership in 

Saskatchewan history. Our government announced that it is 

investing $1.7 million in Whitecap Dakota First Nation to 

develop 12 affordable housing units for its members, 12 units so 

that more of Whitecap Dakota‟s members can work and live at 

home. 

 

Today‟s groundbreaking ceremony marks the first provincially 

supported on-reserve affordable housing project in 

Saskatchewan‟s history — the very first ever. 

 

Over the years Whitecap has become a model of economic 

independence and ingenuity. Under the leadership of Chief 

Darcy Bear and the band council, Whitecap has experienced an 

astounding period of growth. In the space of a very few years, 

Whitecap has developed a world-class golf course and a 

world-class casino. 

 

But they‟ve also made practical investments. They‟ve 

developed . . . built new roads, a new school, and expanded a 

health clinic just to name a few. And now there are more jobs at 

Whitecap than there are people. Whitecap has clearly embraced 

growth, and Whitecap embodies the spirit of the new 

Saskatchewan. That‟s why today‟s announcement is so very 

exciting. 

 

Today we mark a partnership between two like-minded levels 

of government. Today the Government of Saskatchewan and 

Whitecap came together because of a shared belief in the power 

of economic growth and a shared resolve to rise to its 

challenges. Mr. Speaker, it‟s yet another milestone on the road 

of economic growth and prosperity, and it‟s another partnership 

that will bring people back home. And people are coming back 

home. Saskatchewan‟s population is growing in record numbers 

and Whitecap is growing. People at Whitecap and across the 

province now have more economic opportunities to work and 

live in places that they call home. 

 

It should be remembered, without growth we wouldn‟t have to 

make this announcement. Without entrepreneurship and 

innovation of the people of Whitecap, there would be no 

opportunities for the members of the reserve to come home. 

Today‟s announcement recognizes that economic growth needs 

to be accompanied by innovative partnerships and smart 

investments in areas like affordable housing. But first and 

foremost, it‟s a celebration of the opportunities Saskatchewan 

citizens now have to come home. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we know there are still affordable housing 

issues in our province, and we will continue our efforts to meet 

these challenges. Today‟s announcement is a good example. It‟s 

an unprecedented partnership in our province‟s history, and it 

demonstrates that our government looks at things a little 

differently. We are looking to create innovative partnerships 

that help us rise to the challenges of growth rather than avoid 

them. That‟s exactly what today‟s announcement was all about 

— rising to the challenge of growth and embracing economic 

prosperity as a tool that allows people to live and work in the 

communities that they love. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I‟d 

like to thank the minister for sending over an advance copy. I 

appreciate that. And of course our congratulations go out to 

Whitecap Dakota First Nations on this very exciting housing 

initiative. This is very exciting in that they were able to secure 

support from Sask Housing, is very, very important. 

 

This is indeed positive news, and we know that housing plays 



5938 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2010 

an important part especially when it comes to sustainable 

economic development. In fact yesterday the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow and myself were in Moose Jaw at a 

conference about economic development and housing 

development, how they go hand in hand, and this is very 

important. 

 

On our side of this House, when we were government, we were 

very pleased and proud to work with Whitecap Dakota First 

Nation and Chief Darcy Bear and the council, especially the 

work around the casino and Highway 219. This was very 

important work, and it was very exciting that we were able to be 

part of that. But I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I would 

urge the minister to temper her words a bit and remember that 

actions speak louder than words. 

 

And I‟d like to quote from a news release, January 6th, 2009, 

“Muskeg Lake pilot project supports First Nations long-term 

care needs.” And I quote, “Draude says the pilot project is an 

exciting „first‟ for Saskatchewan.” And we know what 

happened this summer with the Muskeg Lake project, and we 

need to see action. Action speaks louder than words. 

 

Yesterday at the housing symposium, though, we were 

reminded, Mr. Speaker, what we really need. All these 

announcements are very, very good, but what we really need 

and we‟ve been asking for over three years now, a full, 

comprehensive housing strategy where all levels of government 

meet. 

 

And it was exciting, interesting to see some members from the 

government here, from the federal government. We need a 

housing, a comprehensive housing strategy that involves all 

levels of government, that meets all the needs of Saskatchewan 

residents, including First Nations people. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 147 — The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister Responsible for 

Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 147, 

The Public Interest Disclosure Act now be introduced and read 

a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for Social Services that Bill No. 147, The Public 

Interest Disclosure Act be now read the first time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? Minister of Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Draude: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 614 — The Autism Spectrum Disorder Strategy Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 614, The Autism 

Spectrum Disorder Strategy Act be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview that Bill 614, The Autism Spectrum 

Disorder Strategy Act be now read the first time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 615 — The Seniors’ Bill of Rights Act 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 615, The Seniors’ 

Bill of Rights Act be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview that Bill No. 615, The Seniors’ Bill of 

Rights Act be now read the first time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this Bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall the Bill be considered a second 

time? I recognize the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Ms. Junor: — Next sitting of the House. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 



November 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5939 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table answers to 

questions 36 through 38. 

 

The Speaker: — Answers to questions 36 through 38 are 

tabled. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Gantefoer, seconded by Mr. 

Wyant, and the amendment moved by Mr. Broten.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

it‟s a pleasure to again have the opportunity to address the 

Throne Speech. I had barely had the opportunity to get started 

last night before we adjourned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the Cannington 

constituency. The Cannington constituency is seeing a 

significant amount of growth, Mr. Speaker, that‟s been 

happening since 2007 and in large part because of the election 

of the Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the oil industry in the Cannington constituency 

continues to grow at a very fast rate, and because of that 

growth, we‟re seeing growth in all of the communities 

throughout the Cannington constituency. As you drive along the 

highways, Mr. Speaker, it‟s not unusual to see a new building 

going up in virtually every community every week when I 

travel back and forth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we even have a new hotel built in Stoughton, a 

three-storey hotel, Mr. Speaker, that‟s very welcome in the area, 

Mr. Speaker. And fact is, all of the rooms in that building were 

rented out before the facility was even built. That‟s the kind of 

growth that‟s happening in our communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — It‟s time to cut beds. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — The member opposite from Rosemont 

wants to get involved in the debate, you know, and he‟s talking 

about cutting beds. Well there‟s one small fact that he overlooks 

every time and so does the former associate minister of Health. 

They were the ones who actually closed the hospital in Wawota, 

Mr. Speaker. They had no concerns at that point in time, Mr. 

Speaker. They closed the hospital. 

 

In Redvers, the associate minister of Health, the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview at the time, comes down to another 

community — Redvers, Mr. Speaker — and cuts the ribbon on 

the new hospital, Mr. Speaker, the new acute care facility, and 

the NDP [New Democratic Party] government didn‟t put a 

nickel into that facility. Not one red cent, Mr. Speaker. Not one 

red cent did they invest in that community. The community paid 

the entire cost of that health care facility, Mr. Speaker, because 

the members opposite when they were in government 

completely ignored rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, one of the first ribbon cutting events I 

had the opportunity to participate in was the opening of the 

acute care facility in Oxbow. That facility opened on April the 

1st, 1992, and then, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government on April 

the 14th of 1992 shut the doors to that facility. That‟s the kind 

of concern those members had, Mr. Speaker, for the people of 

rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Not only did they close those two facilities in my constituency, 

but they went across this province and closed 52 rural hospitals, 

Mr. Speaker. They closed the Plains hospital, and they cut 

long-term care beds across this province, Mr. Speaker, 

including 10 beds at Carlyle. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when the member opposite from Rosemont 

wants to chirp about health care in Saskatchewan, he totally 

ignores the record of his own former government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, but that wasn‟t what my speech was about. My 

speech, Mr. Speaker, is about the good things that are 

happening in Saskatchewan now. Mr. Speaker, we have 

subdivisions, new subdivisions going up in many communities 

across my constituency, something that hadn‟t happened under 

the NDP governments, Mr. Speaker, for decades. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an unprecedented growth in Saskatchewan 

that we‟re seeing. And fact is, in 1905 when Saskatchewan was 

formed into a province, the premier, Premier Scott at the time, 

had a vision that this province would have 6 million people, Mr. 

Speaker. He built this beautiful legislature to be a legislature to 

govern a province of 6 million people. 

 

Well under the former administration and their predecessors, 

the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation], this 

province declined. We reached a maximum of nine hundred, I 

think, and about thirty-seven thousand. Then we grew very, 

very slowly. And that 937,000 was about 1929, 1936 

somewhere in that time frame, and we grew to slightly under 1 

million by 2007.  

 

So in the 60-some years that they were in and out of 

government, Mr. Speaker, there was no growth in this province, 

but that growth is occurring now. We‟re over, Mr. Speaker, 

over 1,045,622 residents, Mr. Speaker, of this province. We‟ve 

set a new record, Mr. Speaker, and we continue to grow. And 

that‟s because of the vision of this Premier, Mr. Speaker, and 

the Saskatchewan Party government. 

 

[14:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, our municipalities in Cannington, the urban 

municipalities continue to expand. They have new businesses in 

town. They have new homes being developed, Mr. Speaker, as 

fast as they can develop them. And fact is, we‟ll be looking at 

redistribution after the next election. And while I‟ll be sad to 

have this happen, there is the possibility that my constituency 



5940 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2010 

could actually shrink, Mr. Speaker, because of all the new 

people moving into that constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I did mention yesterday that I had the opportunity 

to go hunting on Saturday. And I just wanted to note, Mr. 

Speaker, that coming up on November the 15th this year will be 

the first Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Heritage Day in this 

province. I think this is something that we need to recognize, 

that that‟s part of our heritage, Mr. Speaker, to recognize all 

those hunters, fisherpersons, and trappers across the province, 

Mr. Speaker, who contribute to our way of life and to our 

economy. And I would like to congratulate and thank them for 

their participation and their enjoyment of our great outdoors, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟d also like to take the opportunity to congratulate our Premier 

on the potash decision that was made. It was certainly a trying 

time, a challenging time for Saskatchewan, for this government, 

and for the federal government, Mr. Speaker, in dealing with 

the potential takeover of Potash Corporation by BHP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier toured the country, speaking in 

Regina and Saskatoon and Toronto and many other places, Mr. 

Speaker, about the benefits of potash to Saskatchewan and how 

the takeover by BHP of Potash Corporation would not be in the 

best interests of Saskatchewan and would not be a net benefit to 

the country of Canada. 

 

And the federal government, at the end of the day, after much 

gnashing of teeth by the provincial citizens and legislature, Mr. 

Speaker — because it was an anxious moment — did the right 

thing, Mr. Speaker. And I‟d like to take this opportunity to 

thank and congratulate Prime Minister Harper and his cabinet, 

and especially the members of the House of Commons from 

Saskatchewan, for speaking on our behalf, for looking after the 

interests of Saskatchewan. And I mean all 14 members, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was critical to Saskatchewan and I believe 

critical to Canada that the decision that came down to block 

BHP was the proper decision and the right decision to be made, 

Mr. Speaker. And I have no doubt that that decision will stand 

after the time period runs out for appeal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I did note one item of interest, and I think it was in 

question period, by the member from Prince Albert Northcote 

when he talked about First Nations taxation, accusing the 

Saskatchewan Party of promoting First Nations taxation, 

namely the PST [provincial sales tax]. And indeed we did that 

in the campaign in 2003. But it‟s also worth noting, Mr. 

Speaker, that immediately after the 2003 campaign, the NDP 

government of the day implemented the PST taxation of First 

Nations, Mr. Speaker, on off-reserve purchases — which was 

exactly the policy that the Saskatchewan Party was promoting, 

Mr. Speaker. So we would like to take credit for having brought 

forward that idea, but we can‟t take credit for actually 

implementing it because the NDP did it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some of the other interesting things in this Throne 

Speech, I think, that are worth noting and that are a benefit to 

the people of Saskatchewan and continue to provide for growth 

in our province, is the number of highway miles that are being 

rebuilt and new construction, Mr. Speaker. 

For too many years, for too many years, Mr. Speaker, the roads 

and highways of this province were left to deteriorate. In fact is, 

one of the former Highways ministers from the NDP had a 

policy of turning the roads back into gravel, Mr. Speaker — 

back into gravel. Now there are circumstances where that still 

happens, Mr. Speaker, because we have so many highways that 

need to be reconstructed that we can‟t get to them all at the 

same time, Mr. Speaker. But we‟re moving ahead very quickly. 

 

We‟ve had two record years, Mr. Speaker, of investment into 

our highway infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. And we are going to 

continue to reinvest in our highways. In fact is, the Minister of 

Highways does drive around and tour this province 

significantly. And I know that he does get approached by the 

other MLAs to make sure that he is aware of the highways in 

each and every constituency. And, Mr. Speaker, I won‟t go 

down a list of highways that I would like the minister to take a 

drive on, but I have indeed mentioned a few of them to him 

from time to time — like 318 and 361 and 47 and 48, Mr. 

Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Somebody hollered 

from behind me, 35. But 35 doesn‟t go through my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. I will let that member talk about his 

own highways, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the other issues that‟s positive in this Throne Speech, 

Mr. Speaker, is the number of new licensed child care spaces. 

My communities have benefited from this as well. There are 

2,900 new licensed, long-term licensed child care spaces since 

2007, Mr. Speaker. And some of those are taking place in my 

constituency. I know that Carlyle has a new facility. I know that 

Oxbow has been expanding, Mr. Speaker, because there are a 

lot of new employees, a lot of new people who need these kind 

of services in our constituencies, Mr. Speaker, and that is of 

benefit. 

 

This year was a challenge in agriculture, Mr. Speaker. And 

while I would say Cannington was one of the more fortunate 

areas when it came to heavy rainfall, we did have significant 

rainfall but not near as much as, say, the northeast part of this 

province had. But even so, the $360 million that we invested — 

in part with the federal government — across the province of 

Saskatchewan to help out with the flooding will be a real 

benefit to the agriculture producers of this province. 

 

But agriculture with the good weather that we had in the last 

month has had the opportunity to get their crops off in pretty 

good shape, Mr. Speaker, at least in our area. I know some of 

the others are still struggling. But that means that the farm 

economy will be better off than it looked like they were going 

to be the first week of September, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the things that is showing results, Mr. Speaker, because 

of this government, is in some of the areas of health care in my 

own constituency. We have new doctors that have come into 

both Redvers and Arcola, Mr. Speaker, after struggling for 

some time because of the lack of doctors. 

 

Under the previous administration, we were training 

significantly less doctors than we needed in this province. We 

were relying very heavily on IMGs [international medical 

graduate], immigrant doctors coming in, immigrant medical 

graduates to come into this province, Mr. Speaker, to fill in the 

needs. Well everybody else in the world was looking for those 



November 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5941 

very same people, Mr. Speaker, and we had to compete. 

 

We‟ve now increased the number of seats for training the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Our students, Mr. 

Speaker, can go now to the U of S and train to be doctors, and 

that will greatly benefit Saskatchewan because these are the 

people who best know Saskatchewan. And so they will 

hopefully stay here and go into our city clinics, our rural clinics, 

and provide for the medical services that we need. 

 

In Redvers where I do my medicine — when I go to the doctor, 

that‟s where it‟s at — we have two new doctors, Mr. Speaker, 

there. The new doctor that I frequent comes from South Africa. 

And just as a little aside, I went in there a couple of weeks ago 

and she comes in first thing in the morning and she has her 

parka and gloves on when she comes into the room where 

patients go. And I kind of looked at her and wondered what‟s 

going on. She says, well I‟m still not used to Canada. And it 

was like 45 or . . . That‟s Fahrenheit; I‟m still thinking in 

Fahrenheit. So about 10 degrees Celsius, Mr. Speaker. It really 

wasn‟t cold yet, but to her it was cold. 

 

But she and the other doctor in Redvers are more than welcome 

and the community is more than happy to have them in the area. 

We have three doctors now practising in the Arcola area and 

they‟re just as welcome, Mr. Speaker. They are making a huge 

improvement to the medical services available in those 

communities. And they will help to relieve some of the pressure 

as well on the Wawota community. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the physician recruitment is improving in this 

province. And the new physician recruitment agency that the 

Minister of Health has implemented will carry on further 

benefits for all of us across the province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we are seeing growth in Saskatchewan 

because of the vision brought forward by the Premier of 

Saskatchewan, brought forward by the Saskatchewan Party. We 

have already accomplished over 100 of our campaign promises, 

Mr. Speaker, with the rest going to be accomplished soon, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So I will be voting against the amendment. 

 

Now last night one of the members opposite was speaking and 

at the end of their speech indicated that they would not be 

supporting the amendment. Now I had a flash of hope there that 

maybe one of the members on that side had come to their 

senses, had understood the benefit of this Speech from the 

Throne and the benefit to Saskatchewan that was being 

projected for and to be delivered. But, Mr. Speaker, that flash of 

hope was quickly dimmed when that member restated her 

position that she would not be supporting the Throne Speech. I 

will be supporting the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 

very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Northeast. 

 

Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to enter into this debate, the debate 

on the Throne Speech, and to do so on behalf of the people of 

Regina Northeast that I‟ve had such a pleasure in representing 

for a number of years. 

 

I know I‟ve said this before in this House, Mr. Speaker, but I do 

believe it bears repeating that — and I think we‟ll all agree — 

that wherever you travel in Saskatchewan, you meet warm, 

friendly, hospitable people. And it doesn‟t matter whether it‟s in 

Regina or Saskatoon or Canora or Yorkton or Humboldt or 

Rosetown or Unity. Wherever you go, you‟ll be warmly 

welcomed with friendly faces and friendly people who are 

always there to answer any questions you may have or, if on the 

rare occasion you have to ask directions, they‟d be more than 

happy to give you those directions. 

 

And I can say that, Mr. Speaker, that the fine people of 

Saskatchewan, but equally there are no finer people anywhere 

than the fine people of Regina Northeast. And it‟s been truly an 

honour as well as a privilege to have the ability to represent 

them in this fine, fine Chamber and to get to know them, I 

guess, through visiting them at their doorstep. 

 

It was something I‟ve always enjoyed doing each and every 

summer, is getting out and visiting people at their doorstep. I 

always tried to maintain a quota of a minimum of 14 polls, and 

after a while it‟d come to a point where a number of people 

would certainly recognize me at the . . . As soon as I rang the 

doorbell, they‟d come to the door and they would greet me by 

my first name. And that was very warm and reassuring, and 

able to have a conversation with them and to find out how 

things are going for them and their family since the last visit, 

and hear from them any suggestions or ideas that they may have 

as far as the role of the MLA and as far as the input into the 

direction of government. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And I think it‟s safe to say that we all, Mr. Speaker, when we 

seek political office, we do it with the intentions of making a 

change, making things better for those who we serve today, but 

also better for those who will be coming in the future. And I 

think we, regardless of political stripe, I think we all strive to do 

that. So, Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s . . . I just want to say that I‟m 

honoured and privileged to have had the opportunity to 

represent Regina Northeast. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to take this moment to congratulate the 

new member of this legislature, the member from Saskatoon 

Northwest. I have yet to get to know the member. I‟ve had the 

opportunity of meeting him and having a brief conversation, but 

I‟m looking forward to getting to know him better. I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that he will find his new role both interesting and 

challenging. And we will certainly be looking forward to 

working with him over the next few months to once again 

further the cause of people in this great province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think also at this time of year we need to take a 

moment or two to remember. With Remembrance Day not too 

far away, it‟s time for us to take a few moments out of our time, 

out of our busy day which we think is so, so busy and so 

important, to remember those who have given us the 

opportunity to have a democracy where men and women can 

gather as representatives of the people of the province and to 

debate, to put forward ideas, to debate those ideas and thrash 



5942 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2010 

out those ideas and to come up with policy, regulations that will 

in the long run benefit people of Saskatchewan and to make this 

a better place for the citizenship. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, we need to reflect on that because it‟s 

I think something that many of us, my generation and those 

even younger who never really experienced the conflict of 

battle, never experienced the decision to risk everything and to 

do so for the future . . . And I think we need to remember those 

within our families who have paid the ultimate sacrifice. 

 

We have to remember those who were willing to make that 

decision to put their life on the line for this great country of 

ours, for those who did so and came back either wounded or 

perhaps suffering a disability of some type and paid the price 

for the rest of their life. So, Mr. Speaker, we owe those men and 

women a great deal. And I think that taking the opportunity 

once a year is a small, small responsibility we have to 

remember and honour those who gave so much. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in all likelihood this will be the last Throne 

Speech that I have the opportunity to speak to. As you know, 

Mr. Speaker, I have indicated last spring that I would not be 

letting my name stand for re-election, nor would I be seeking 

re-election. Now I say that, Mr. Speaker, that this is likely — I 

say, you note I say likely — the last Throne Speech in which I 

will participate because you never know in this game, Mr. 

Speaker. I, 12 or 16 years from now, may decide to make a 

comeback and come back in this legislature. You just never 

know those things. So we‟ll leave that open. But in all 

likelihood, Mr. Speaker, this will be my last Throne Speech 

debate but not my last speech in this House. To the chagrin of 

the members opposite, I plan to make a couple more speeches 

before my time is up here, Mr. Speaker. But you just never 

know what 12 or 16 years‟ absence from this place might cause 

you to return. You never know those things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Regina Northeast most recently, as a result of 

my indication that I would not be seeking re-election, the New 

Democratic Party held a nominating contest. The contest was 

contested by three very, very good candidates. The political 

process worked, and we selected a candidate — a very fine 

young gentleman, Dwayne Yasinowski — who will be the 

carrier of the flag of the New Democratic Party in Regina 

Northeast in the next election. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Yasinowski will certainly serve both Regina Northeast and the 

province of Saskatchewan very well as the MLA for that 

constituency after the next election. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s something that I‟m sort of looking 

forward to, the next election, because it‟ll be one that I‟ll be 

able to work in without the same amount of pressure as I‟ve 

normally had in the past. 

 

But I find it, Mr. Speaker, interesting that the Throne Speech, 

theme of the Throne Speech, is taken from Robert Frost‟s poem 

where he suggests two roads diverged in the woods and he took 

the one less travelled. Well, Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting when 

you look at the history both in this province and in other 

jurisdictions where conservative-minded political parties have 

gained power. They have enjoyed a smooth, new road for a 

period of time after they gained power. In this particular case, I 

can envision that that road would be a four-lane highway, well 

paved and in good condition because that was a road that was 

left to them by the former government. 

 

But as you travel down that road and as time went on and they 

start to become more responsible for their own actions, you start 

to notice that that road starts to deteriorate, and it goes from a 

four-lane highway down to a mere two-lane highway. And you 

notice that it‟s patch upon patch already and that the signage 

isn‟t as well signed as it was before. And you notice soon that 

the lines aren‟t painted. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the shoulders of 

the road are starting to crumble and deteriorate. Then you go a 

little further down that road as time goes on, and you notice that 

that road now narrows even more so because it doesn‟t even 

have shoulders any more. And soon you come upon the only 

sign, the only sign on that highway, and that highway sign 

indicates that the pavement ends and the gravel starts. And Mr. 

Speaker, as time goes on under a conservative-minded 

government, you notice that that road simply deteriorates from 

a gravel road to a dirt road to a narrow path. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, that‟s been the history of the results of 

conservative-minded governments, whether it be in this 

province or whether it be in our great nation federally. And we 

see that, Mr. Speaker, as an indication of what happens to an 

economy, what happens to the province when the 

conservative-minded policies take hold and start to bear fruit 

and the government starts to reap the seeds of its own sowing. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, we can probably start to, I can start to 

relate to some of my experiences this summer. As the Highways 

and Infrastructure critic, I took the opportunity to drive around 

Saskatchewan. Now I didn‟t travel every highway in 

Saskatchewan. I‟ve tried to travel many of them over the last 

three years. And each summer, I‟ve always taken a few weeks 

and travelled in different areas of the province over different 

roads just to experience them myself, to see them myself, and to 

stop and talk to folks in the community. 

 

Some cases, I‟ve set up meetings ahead of time. In some cases, 

I just simply took the opportunity to stop in either at the town 

office or the RM office and in many cases in local coffee shop 

and have a conversation with the local people there just to get 

their feedback. And that‟s why I can say with a great deal of 

confidence that the people in Saskatchewan are certainly fine 

and warm and hospitable people. And I‟ll be the first to admit 

that not everybody I spoke to was supportive of the New 

Democratic Party, but they were certainly all willing to share 

their ideas and their thoughts and, in some cases, many of their 

experiences. 

 

But what we‟re seeing, Mr. Speaker, is a lot of the highways 

that are certainly important highways that are not being looked 

after, just for example, No. 4 Highway north of North 

Battleford which is a very important economic thoroughfare 

because it supports the movement of the finished product from 

the plants at Meadow Lake to the railhead at North Battleford. 

And I understand from those in the area that you can expect 

about 40 B-train loads of product each and every day travelling 

down that road from Meadow Lake to the railroad to be loaded 

on the railcars. And that road, Mr. Speaker, certainly shows the 

wear and the tear of that weight as well as the normal traffic 

outside of that. And that is certainly one of the highways that 

has been neglected by this government. 



November 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5943 

And certainly Highway 35, if you‟ve travelled on Highway 35 

certainly you‟ll notice that that highway is . . . Well to call it a 

highway, I think, is being very generous. It‟s certainly short of 

that. 310 once again has been ignored by this government, 

despite the fact that it‟s been brought to the government‟s 

attention on more than one occasion, 310 particularly between 

Ituna and Foam Lake. As one of the local residents told me, it 

should be called a tow road — not a toll road but a tow road — 

because if it rains and you drive on that road, you‟re going to 

need a tow, according to the local residents. 

 

Highway 22, Highway 22 from Southey through Earl Grey, 

certainly a main artery to a major grain inland terminal there, 

but that road has been referred to as a cobblestone road with 

every second stone missing. And I‟ve talked to people who 

travel that road each and every day, and they tell me the horror 

stories of the number of windshields that they‟ve had to replace 

in short periods of time. In some cases, in a matter of weeks 

they‟ve had to replace a multiple number of windshields. So the 

story simply goes on. 

 

Most recently I had the opportunity to accompany a couple of 

my colleagues, or some of my colleagues actually, to 

Cumberland House for meetings there. And one of the issues 

certainly in Cumberland House was the Highway 123 which . . . 

While we were there, while we were there, a rain came up and it 

rained for probably an hour and a half, two hours, before we 

were able to leave. Come around for the end of our meetings 

and we were able to leave Cumberland House, and I‟m glad that 

I was riding with one of my colleagues who had a truck. I 

believe it was . . . I think it might be a four-wheel drive. I don‟t 

know that for sure, but he certainly had a truck. And I‟m glad it 

was his truck on that road and not my car on that road because 

after the rain it was a challenge, let me say, a challenge to drive 

on that road and to be able to do so without hitting the ditch on 

those occasions when you met a vehicle and had to pass. It 

became a bit of a, you know, holding your breath for a moment 

or two while you actually made it past a particular oncoming 

car. Certainly Highway 135, Pelican Narrows, is something I 

had an opportunity to be at not too long ago with my colleague 

from Cumberland constituency. 

 

And I have been on that particular highway in the past, and it is 

an interesting highway to drive on, to say the least. When I say 

it‟s interesting, it‟s dangerous. It‟s a very dangerous highway. 

The first, maybe, 10 or 15 kilometres isn‟t bad. But after that, 

it‟s blind curves, sharp turns, hills, dusty conditions — 

extremely dusty conditions — and very, very dangerous. We 

had the experience of driving on that stretch of road around 5 

o‟clock, 5:30 in the evening when the sun was just setting, and 

there was times that you just . . . I mean, you held your breath 

when you‟re going around a corner because you couldn‟t see if 

there was another vehicle there. And that other vehicle could 

have very easily been a semi trailer unit because the semi trailer 

units run up and down that road each and every day. 

 

And that‟s just to Pelican Narrows. And from Pelican Narrows 

to Sandy Bay, it‟s even worse. We didn‟t get to Sandy Bay this 

time, but I‟ve been to Sandy Bay. I‟ve been on that road and the 

curves are sharper. The hills are very blind. And it‟s very, very 

dangerous, Mr. Speaker, and yet this government fails to act 

upon that. This government fails to put safety first. This 

government fails to take into consideration Saskatchewan 

people‟s need for safety in their motoring, for the motoring 

public. And it‟s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, because all citizens 

of Saskatchewan should be able to share in this province, share 

in the prosperity of this province. And certainly those people in 

the North, certainly those of Highway 123 and 135, are not 

receiving their fair share. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we were in Cumberland House one of 

the things that I noticed — pardon me, in Pelican Narrows — 

one of the things that I noticed was that Pelican Narrows 

community basically straddles the highway on both sides, quite 

close proximity to the highway. Being a gravel highway and 

being in an extremely dusty condition, the air was simply full of 

dust. I can‟t help but think that day after day after day of that 

would be certainly a health problem for those folks who have to 

live there and who breathe that air each and every day. 

 

[15:00] 

 

And it was so bad, Mr. Speaker, that when you drove by you 

could just see the dust that had settled on the houses and the 

outbuildings, and the vehicles perhaps sitting in the yard were 

just coated with that dust. I can only imagine what the inside of 

the lungs of the people who live there, particularly the children 

who play outside and breathe in that air on an ongoing basis, 

what condition . . . That has to be a health problem. It simply 

has to be a health problem, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And yet this government withdrew the funding that was in 

place. When the governments changed, there was funding in 

place to pave 7 kilometres of that highway that rolls right 

through the centre of that community, Pelican Narrows. Not 

only would it have been a safety factor as far as people driving 

there, Mr. Speaker, but it would have been an improvement and 

a health factor if that pavement would have gone ahead. This 

government cancelled that out, took the money and spent it 

elsewhere. And, Mr. Speaker, that I think I find very 

unfortunate. It‟s very unfortunate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we noticed recently that there is certainly 

indications that this government is looking at furthering their 

privatization agenda. We see that within the highway 

maintenance system. There are certainly ads on television. It 

was stories in the newspaper that suggest that we could be 

looking at this government‟s moving its privatization agenda 

over to the Department of Highways which would include the 

maintenance crews that we have in this great province who do a 

wonderful job, a wonderful job in this province despite the 

weather conditions, whether it be a blizzard in the winter or 

whether it be a hot summer day. Certainly you‟ll see the 

maintenance crews out there maintaining our highways. 

 

And this government is moving down the road of privatization, 

similar to what has happened in British Columbia where you‟ve 

seen the quality of roads and the hours of maintenance simply 

drop under privatization. And I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that 

this government would reverse its privatization agenda, but 

we‟ll be certainly watching that very, very closely and being 

prepared to notify the people of this great province once the 

government moves in a more official capacity to privatizing the 

maintenance crews on our highways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health care, which has always been a stable for 



5944 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2010 

Saskatchewan people and an issue that they have always been 

concerned about and an issue that . . . And they should be 

because there is probably the most important part of our living 

is being able to enjoy good health. And for those of us who do, 

we‟re very blessed. But there are many in our province that 

don‟t enjoy the same level of quality of health. And when they 

need that health care system, when a situation occurs that they 

need to draw on the health care system, they deserve to have a 

system that will be there to support them, to benefit them in 

their time of need, and to provide them the services that they 

require. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the present government was in opposition, 

they were concerned — and they sputtered it out in Hansard 

many times — they were concerned about the number of rural 

doctors in this great province of ours. And what we are seeing 

now is a decline in those doctors, Mr. Speaker. Though the 

government‟s in place, the decline in rural doctors is certainly 

evident. 

 

We‟re seeing that, I guess, all over the province, Mr. Speaker. 

But I keep a little bit of an eye on the issue of health care in the 

communities of Kamsack, Canora, and Preeceville, where we‟re 

getting fed a steady diet of bypass announcements. And it 

seems like it‟s certainly increased. The number of bypass 

announcements have certainly increased in the last three years 

under this government. 

 

The doctor shortages is the reason. We have a number of those 

communities simply are experiencing doctor shortages. The 

doctors that are there simply can‟t maintain it on an ongoing 

basis so that they have to have a break, and when they have to 

have a break, that particular community goes on bypass. 

 

Well that‟s fine, Mr. Speaker, if nothing serious happens. But 

what happens if there is a serious incident? What happens if that 

particular community is on bypass, the hospital doesn‟t have the 

doctor that they normally can rely on because the doctor has 

had to take a break, and that community goes on bypass and a 

situation happens that could be extremely dangerous as far as 

the well-being of the people there? 

 

We‟ve seen that, Mr. Speaker, to the point where the 

communities have now become so concerned about it that this 

summer there has been public meetings held, public meetings 

held in Kamsack in regards to the doctor shortage and the 

number of times that hospital in Kamsack has gone on bypass. 

We‟ve seen petitions circulated around the town of Canora 

calling on the health district to ensure there‟s an adequate 

number of doctors available to ensure quality health care to the 

people of Canora. Mr. Speaker, this is concerning, concerning 

to us who want to ensure that the people of Saskatchewan enjoy 

top-quality health care because that is something that they 

deserve. 

 

It‟s also concerning, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to that 

particular part of Saskatchewan. I know from past experiences 

that somewhere around 13 per cent of Saskatchewan‟s 

population are senior citizens. And as I understand it, in that 

area of the province — the Canora, Kamsack, Yorkton area of 

the province — about 26 per cent of that population there are 

senior citizens. So that area has almost twice the provincial 

average of senior citizens. And yet most recently we hear an 

announcement of the closure of 18 long-term care beds in the 

town of Canora — 14 of them in the lodge and four in the 

hospital. Mr. Speaker, in an area of the province that has twice 

the provincial average of senior citizens, we should be 

expanding long-term care beds, not reducing them. But this 

government has seen fit to reduce long-term care beds in 

Canora by 18. That announcement‟s been made. 

 

On top of that, Mr. Speaker, they‟ve announced the reduction of 

services in the kitchen at the hospital. No longer will meals for 

the hospital be prepared in the hospital kitchen. The meals will 

be prepared in the kitchen at the lodge, transported across to the 

hospital, and simply served out of the kitchen, hospital kitchen. 

Hospital kitchen in the Canora Hospital will simply become a 

staging area and no longer an active hospital, no longer an 

active kitchen. Mr. Speaker, my fear here is it‟s what we‟re 

seeing as this government is setting the stage for the closure of 

the hospital in Canora. It‟s only a matter of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is not what Saskatchewan‟s people deserve. 

Saskatchewan people deserve the best of health care services, 

top-quality health care services, services that react in times of 

need, react to serve the people of this great province of ours, 

particularly our seniors. For they are the people who have 

sacrificed, worked hard, to build this great province of ours and 

they should, in their senior years, they should have adequate 

housing. They shouldn‟t have to fear for housing. They should 

have the ability to live in a reasonable quality of life. Mr. 

Speaker, you don‟t do that by shutting down 18 long-term care 

beds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would think that perhaps one of the reasons that 

we‟re seeing the government use perhaps the back door to many 

of these cuts is because that the mismanagement . . . [inaudible] 

. . . the finances of this great province of ours and has resulted 

in this, the debt in Saskatchewan actually increasing over the 

last couple of years. And we‟re seeing about a 55 per cent 

increase. And we‟re seeing, as a result of that, cuts to programs 

and services that really affect the ordinary people, the families 

of this great province of ours. 

 

We‟re seeing the evidence of that, this government being 

starved for cash, I guess you would say, because of their policy 

now to rip away 100 per cent of the profits from our Crown 

corporations. Most recently, a plan has been brought to our 

attention of stripping away the SaskTel profits for the next five 

years. 

 

Not only is this government starved for cash and they‟re using 

the cash from the Crown corporations, but it also plays into 

their plans to weaken the Crowns so they can privatize them, if 

not before . . . likely not before the next election but soon 

thereafter. They want to put the Crowns in a situation where 

they certainly will be able to make the argument to the people 

of Saskatchewan that the Crowns are now a debt burden to 

them, to the province, and that they should be sold off to the 

private sector. 

 

And this is interesting, Mr. Speaker, when you look at what that 

particular party said when they were in opposition, and what 

that particular party said when they were running in the last 

election. They said that by voting for the Sask Party and having 

a Sask Party government, we would all see our taxes go down. 



November 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5945 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in some ways they may be right because 

when you look at potash, you see our dollars from potash going 

down to Chicago. When you look at oil, you see our dollars 

from oil reserves going down via Calgary to Dallas. So, Mr. 

Speaker, that might not be exactly what they meant when they 

said our taxes would go down, but it certainly is the end result. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every government has a duty and a responsibility 

to ensure that its citizenship has the opportunity to live in a 

reasonable and beneficial economy and society that supports 

people of Saskatchewan. And certainly that should be the 

government‟s, any government‟s responsibility, and that should 

be any government‟s goal. 

 

Unfortunately what we‟re seeing is that no longer do people in 

Saskatchewan enjoy the lowest utility rates. In fact what we‟re 

seeing is that the people in Saskatchewan are about midway up 

the utility rate scale, and going higher. We‟re seeing the rents in 

our great province of ours skyrocket, making it increasingly 

difficult for those working people who are working on the 

bottom end of the pay scale to be able to make ends meet and 

support their family in a reasonable fashion. We‟re seeing those 

people on fixed income, many of them seniors, who are 

experiencing difficulty in making their pension cheques stretch 

to cover the increased cost of living. 

 

And this government hasn‟t stepped to the plate to provide any 

support for those who are finding it most difficult. In fact, this 

government is doing a lot of the issues that are causing the cost 

of living to escalate, such as increasing utility rates. Recent 

announcement of SaskPower rates will be increasing each year 

for the next 10 years to the point where they will have doubled 

by that time. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think once again this government is failing 

the people of this province of ours in being able to ensure that 

all people in Saskatchewan enjoy the benefits of Saskatchewan, 

enjoy the prosperity in Saskatchewan, and to do so in a fair and 

reasonable way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of my colleagues who spoke before me 

mentioned the fact that in the world of agriculture, this last year 

was certainly a huge, huge challenge. And I can agree with that. 

I think that not only have I never seen a year that experienced 

so much rain, but I have talked to many across this great 

province who‟ve been involved in agriculture their entire life, 

and some of them, Mr. Speaker, even older than me — although 

there‟s probably not too many that would fall in that category 

— but many of them who shared with me the fact that they 

could never recall a year where there was constantly so much 

rain, constantly so wet. They‟ve had wet spells, whether in the 

spring or perhaps in the fall, but never one that stretched 

throughout the entire year. 

 

I think most producers are quite pleased and thankful that the 

month of October turned quite nice. The rain stopped; the sun 

came out; and they were allowed to harvest the crop, such as it 

was. And at the end of the day it‟s surprising how well the 

crops did turn out. 

 

But there‟s a huge number of unseeded acres in this great 

province of ours that simply farmers weren‟t able to get to. 

They simply weren‟t able to seed those acres and as a result of 

that, there‟s going to be a cash crunch on the farm today. Not so 

much today, Mr. Speaker, as you know and those who‟ve been 

involved in the agriculture industry will know. It‟s not the year 

that you suffer the disaster that hurts; it‟s the year after. 

 

So there‟s a little bit of joy out in the farm today because they 

were able to salvage their crop, and in most cases in a dry 

condition. Although some of the grains, particularly cereal 

grains, were not of the quality one would like, the oilseeds came 

through pretty well. 

 

[15:15] 

 

So that there is some joy out there. But that joy will be 

short-lived as it rolls into early next year and, as farmers do in 

about January and February, start planning, putting their plans 

together to do it again another year, and they start to make 

arrangements for financing, that it‟s going to be tough. It‟s 

going to be tough because the number of unseeded acres out 

there simply equal no revenue. And that, Mr. Speaker, is really 

going to be a challenge for the farmers and for our farm 

community and for basically our rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And the announcement by the provincial government of a 

$30-an-acre program, combined with the federal government — 

12 from the province and the balance from the feds — simply 

comes up short. Simply comes up short. Thirty dollars an acre, 

Mr. Speaker, nowhere near represents the true costs that farmers 

experience in putting a crop in and taking it off, or running their 

operation, and certainly comes nowhere near being enough to 

bail them out to meet the point where they can probably farm 

again another year. They‟re going to have to look at other 

sources to be able to do that. 

 

And this summer when I was driving around, touring some of 

the highways, I did something that I haven‟t done for a long 

time, and that is I did some cold calling. I would simply stop in 

at a farmyard and introduce myself, give them a card, and in 

most cases, Mr. Speaker, I had a very warm reception. I was . . . 

As is the norm in rural Saskatchewan, you were invited in for a 

cup of coffee and a chat. And we did that. And we enjoyed that 

because we were able to sit down and talk to the people on the 

front lines, people who were experiencing the problems each 

and every day. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve always enjoyed that 

because you get the straight bill of goods when you talk to those 

folks who are on that front line. 

 

And in this case, many, many people would share with me that 

the $30 an acre that they received was welcomed — it certainly 

was — but it was certainly inadequate. In many cases it didn‟t 

do more than just cover the costs of the chemical and hiring of 

the sprayer to spray down their unseeded acres to control the 

weeds. And it certainly left them short of being able to continue 

to finance their operations and be in a position to be able to put 

in another crop. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I know that when we as opposition here spoke 

publicly about that particular issue, we were suggesting that a 

fair and a reasonable compensation rate would be more like 

$100 an acre. And certainly that does come a lot closer to 

representing the true cost of the actual costs of operating a farm, 

a grain farm today. But, Mr. Speaker, in talking to those 

farmers, they were saying that yes, they would have welcomed 



5946 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2010 

$100 an acre, and that is exactly what they would need, is $100 

an acre. But if bad turned to worse, push came to shove, they 

could probably get away with about 75 or 80. And 

unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government‟s reaction was a 

mere $30 — $30 an acre and that‟s it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it falls far short of what is actually needed for 

those producers out there to be able to find themselves in a 

position where they can continue to farm and put in next year‟s 

crop. 

 

Today‟s announcement by the Minister of Agriculture for some 

funds for livestock producers is welcome. That was something 

that livestock producers had mentioned to me throughout the 

summer and throughout this fall, that they felt that they were 

shortchanged because many of them suffered from this rain, 

from the surplus of rain probably as bad as a grain producer. 

 

I know one farmer out in the area where I have my land who cut 

his alfalfa and wasn‟t able to get it all baled before the rains 

came. And by the time it got dry enough for him to get back out 

to get the rest of the alfalfa, the second growth was so rich and 

so thick that he couldn‟t extract the cut alfalfa. He tried using a 

rake, but even the rakes wouldn‟t pull it out. So he was given no 

other choice except cut it again, cut the alfalfa again, try to lay 

one swath on the other, and it picked it up that way. And I 

believe he did salvage some. 

 

But nevertheless, the quality of his hay, whether that hay be 

used for market or whether that hay be used for his own 

purposes, the quality is down. And as a result of that, means 

that if he‟s feeding it himself, he‟s going to certainly have to 

purchase supplements in order to bring the nutrient levels up to 

feed his livestock for the winter. If he‟s selling that hay in the 

commercial market, it likely won‟t be worth the premium prices 

because the quality simply isn‟t there. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the theme of this Throne 

Speech, the theme of two roads diverging in the woods, and we 

realize that those roads . . . the choice of taking the road less 

travelled was a result, perhaps, of conservative-minded 

governments and not being able to maintain those roads. So I‟m 

wondering, Mr. Speaker, when that decision is being made to 

take the road less travelled, maybe the reason it‟s less travelled 

is because the people who have experienced the conservative 

roads in the past simply don‟t want to go down that road again. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that is the case. 

 

That‟s certainly what I‟m hearing from the good folks across 

this great province. It‟s certainly what I‟m hearing from the 

good folks in Regina Northeast. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I 

will be, when the time comes, I will be supporting the 

amendment and I will not be supporting the main motion. 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from P.A. [Prince 

Albert] Carlton. 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It‟s truly a 

pleasure to once again stand up and take part in the debate in 

this Legislative Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s always good 

when a guy gets to stand up in this House and be able to thank 

those that got you here. 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Weyburn on his 

feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — With leave to introduce a guest. 

 

The Speaker: — The member from Weyburn has asked for 

leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Weyburn. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you to the other members of the Legislative 

Assembly, I‟m pleased to introduce a guest seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker, probably the person I‟ve known other 

than my family the longest, probably my best friend. Mr. 

Speaker, seated in your gallery is Mark Schmidt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mark and I grew up in Halbrite and were school 

chums throughout our education. Mark lives in Yellow Grass 

with his wife, Jill. He‟s a plumber. Mr. Speaker, he‟s up here in 

Regina for the next couple of months upgrading his skills at 

SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology]. And, Mr. Speaker, I‟m not sure which is better, 

having a friend that‟s a politician or having a friend that‟s a 

plumber. But certainly from my point of view, I know which 

one I would choose. And Mark‟s been a great friend. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, all of the members have those people in 

our lives that helped to put real life in context outside of this 

House, and certainly Mark Schmidt is one of those. So I would 

ask all members to join me in welcoming my friend, Schmitty, 

to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from P.A. Carlton. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Gantefoer, seconded by Mr. 

Wyant, and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved 

by Mr. Broten.] 

 

Hon. Mr. Hickie: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was 

saying before, it‟s always a pleasure to get up to be able thank 

publicly the people who got you here. I think it‟s incumbent 

upon myself, as most members have already in their debates, to 

thank the staff that we work with. My CA [constituency 

assistant], Lora Parenteau. I‟ve got Joan in my office here; 

Doug Line. I‟ve got Morgan Bradshaw and Kate Verbeek in the 

office here that do great work and have for other ministers as 

well. 

 

But I think it‟s also very important that we don‟t forget our 

families who don‟t get to see much of us. We spend lots of time 

away from them, being down here working and of course going 



November 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5947 

to events and such that we do. So I was able to, you know, take 

my wife to a few events with me, my daughters as well, this last 

year. So they truly get a better picture of the kind of work that 

we do. 

 

But it‟s good for the people in my constituency to see them as 

well, to know that without them, I couldn‟t be here. And I want 

to thank my lovely wife, Charlene, and my daughters, Alyssa 

and Mackenzie, for allowing me to do this, putting up with me 

as well because this is a very demanding life. And some days I 

come home, it‟s a quick visit, and I‟m on the road again. So it‟s 

also great that we are able to thank extended family as well for 

being there for us. 

 

So I think what I‟ll just do is I want to welcome the member 

from Saskatoon Northwest. It‟s good to see he‟s here, and it‟s 

great to have him on our side and a good battle fought. And it‟s 

good to have him working with the Saskatchewan Party 

government now. 

 

The theme of this year‟s Throne Speech was, or this particular 

Throne Speech was “The New Road.” And there‟s so many 

ways the new road involved good hard work leading up to this 

new time. And there‟s some people I want to thank in Prince 

Albert as well. We have a great population growth in the last 

three years to over 1.045 million. And there‟s a few people in 

Prince Albert that I think are very helpful. 

 

A lot of those people coming in are immigrants. So Marge 

Nainaar from the Prince Albert multiculturalism society is a 

great contributor to those newcomers in helping them get settled 

in Prince Albert, helping them get connected to contribute to the 

economy and working with them in the Saskatchewan 

immigrant nominee program as well for paperwork. 

 

I think the other person we have to thank or look at as well is 

Linda Boyer from the Prince Albert Métis housing society, who 

has been able to work with the government and previous 

governments too — I‟ll give credit where it‟s due as well — in 

building affordable housing units in Prince Albert for these 

newcomers now. 

 

On that note, we‟ve been very lucky as a government to work 

with individuals such as Linda. And since November of 2007, 

you know, we‟ve actually overseen the completion of 62 

affordable housing, rental housing units in Prince Albert, 

investing over 5.6 million. Plus an additional 58 units are in 

various stages of development for a total investment of 8.2 

million for affordable housing. But again, without the people on 

the ground working with government, it could never happen. So 

I want to thank her as well. 

 

Another big piece in Prince Albert is that we see our population 

increasing. We have a lot of youth, a lot of young families, a lot 

of kids going to school. The child care spaces are critical to 

Prince Albert. And two people that have a great role to play 

with that are Gail Szautner and Donna Strauss from the two 

representative organizations that they . . . They work with the 

school divisions in Prince Albert. 

 

We‟ve been able to put in just about 200 seats of child care 

spaces in Prince Albert for these new families. These new 

emerging economies that we have allow people to work away 

from home, out of home, and have a safe place for the children 

to be at. That‟s very critical, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also want to take time, and it‟s incumbent upon me to look at 

what we did in Prince Albert for my old career, policing. We 

made a promise in the campaign to put 120 new police officers 

in the streets in this province. And up to this point, we have 90 

will be in. So 30 more to go. And I think it‟s been great for 

Prince Albert. We were able to give, at this point, 11 officers 

will be dedicated to Prince Albert. And it‟s one of those kind of 

professions that you can never have enough. But when you do 

give the officers, the chiefs of police use them, and they are able 

to use them at their discretion and will to meet the ongoing 

needs and crime trends in our cities. 

 

The other thing I thought was really incredible with this Throne 

Speech, it continues on the theme of addiction spaces, 

addictions treatment for not just families but youth as well. 

We‟ll have 100 beds, long-term addictions recovery beds 

funded. But we also have the social brief detox that opened up 

in Prince Albert recently. 

 

And I just turned sod with the Minister of Health two weeks 

ago on a new youth detox facility. That will be a 15-bed facility 

for a lot of youth that are, for whatever their reasons are, they 

get caught in the quagmire of drug use and addictions. And it‟s 

some young people, and it‟s one of those kind of things. They 

have nowhere to go. But now they will, which is going to be a 

great thing for Prince Albert. 

 

There‟s also talk of another detox centre for families or single 

parents. Parents that have children can attend there and not be 

separated from their children. So it‟s going to be a great thing 

for Prince Albert. It‟s not just Prince Albert that has those 

issues. We recognize it‟s all over the province. So it‟s just a 

nice thing for my hometown to be able to have. And it‟s part of 

the ongoing efforts to tackle the issue of addictions in our 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The thing that is also I‟m very proud of, as being the new 

Minister of Municipal Affairs, is the work that‟s been done up 

to this point with Municipal Affairs ministers of the past, our 

federal counterparts, and our municipalities for the stimulus 

funding where a lot of the funding projects that I have oversight 

on are a three-way partnership — federal, provincial, and 

municipal. So it‟s good to see that those funds are moving 

forward. 

 

As everyone‟s aware of, we had an interesting summer with a 

lot of rain. I had to answer some questions, upon becoming the 

minister, about will that funding be there. And right now with 

the federal government, we‟ve been working with the new 

Minister Strahl and his officials. 

 

And thanks to Minister Baird, the previous minister of 

Infrastructure and Transportation, on working with this 

government to ensure that the funding will be available, with 

some parameters of course. We‟ve heard about them already 

regarding the projects that were under water or delayed because 

of water and rain this summer. So I know that the officials from 

both levels of government and municipal governments are 

working together to ensure that we can get these projects done 

on time so we don‟t lose the funding, Mr. Speaker. 



5948 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2010 

The other part of my speech today, and I‟ll be wrapping up very 

quickly, is to do with the issue of pre-kindergarten programs for 

vulnerable youth. That‟s the kind of program that will be 

addressing the same issue as the child care spaces before. There 

are a lot of people in this province who before couldn‟t engage 

in the economy because they had child care issues. We also 

have now the issue where we have more people and more jobs 

posted for those people to work in. And to be able to have those 

new spaces for vulnerable youth, for three- and four-year-olds, 

across our province is going to be very important. I know 

myself, with my wife‟s job and her school, it‟s going to be a 

great thing as we see more of the children that will be 

contributing to our province‟s history, their future. 

 

We‟ll have a chance now. We‟ll have a hand up. And the 

families have that to move forward. So that‟s very important to 

look at too, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[15:30] 

 

The thing we have in this province now is a vision. I‟ve said it 

last year in the budget debate, that it‟s providing a future for our 

children and for our grandchildren. It‟s something that I think 

every government or good government should be looking at 

doing, is looking at that kind of a positive role model now, what 

you leave now for the future. And that‟s very important, Mr. 

Speaker. So I know that taking part today in this particular 

Speech from the Throne debate allows me to talk about Prince 

Albert and the future. 

 

We see Prince Albert is now ranked as the top . . . of the top 10, 

it‟s number 4 overall in Canada‟s top entrepreneurial cities. So 

that‟s a very, very big accomplishment for my city. And it‟s got 

nothing to do, I can swear, with me. I know that. But it‟s the 

women and men out there that risk their bottom line every day 

to create jobs, and that‟s what stimulates the economy. It‟s 

those mom-and-pop operations I‟ve always said, Mr. Speaker, 

that truly give the entry level work and some other 

professionals a chance to start their careers. And I look forward 

to my two daughters benefiting from a lot of that opportunity in 

the future from entrepreneurism. 

 

The thing as well that we look at now in the province is that . . . 

And I look at the overall issue of the amount of funding that‟s 

available as we plan for growth, Mr. Speaker. This particular 

ministry saw nine applications that represented 52 

municipalities in the first intake. So it‟s one of those kind of 

initiatives that this government sees as another mechanism, 

avenue to support this growing province and the growing 

economies of the province. Intake two, I‟m sure, will have a lot 

more applications. We‟ll see that in the future. 

 

As a government, we also recognized early on that the 

municipal economic enhancement program provided money, 

unconditional funds to our municipalities and cities and towns 

to utilize for various projects, from recreational projects to roofs 

on new community clubs and those kind of things. So it‟s again 

listening to our partners and working with the municipal leaders 

to ensure we can still provide that ongoing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, along with that line is the revenue-sharing 

piece that we will be delivering on the full 1 per cent of PST in 

this year‟s budget coming up. Again, unconditional funding that 

will allow the cities and towns and villages to decide if they 

want to lower the burden of taxes on their ratepayers, if they 

want to use it for infrastructure, or what they want to use it for, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So it‟s one of those things where government‟s listened. The 

stakeholders took part in developing a formula to utilize those 

funds, and I look forward to delivering on delivering that 

promise after next year‟s budget. 

 

One thing I think we see across this province, when I toured the 

province this summer, I saw it happening everywhere — new 

developments in every city and town I went to. I know in my 

particular riding of Prince Albert Carlton there‟s actually new 

. . . two private developers have come in recently. One is just 

starting up with some homes. One‟s been well-developed and 

established, and they‟re doing some infill lots there with some 

bigger homes as well. So it‟s one of those kind of beginnings 

that talks about the prosperity and optimism, not just in this 

province but in my city, Mr. Speaker. And I‟m very happy to 

say that I‟m able to support the Speech from the Throne, but not 

the amendment, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I‟m 

pleased to enter into the debate on the Throne Speech. I would 

like to take this opportunity, like many of the members here 

have, thank their family. I‟d like to thank my wife for her 

support. Also back home, the community members that support 

what I‟m trying to do and the message that I‟m trying to bring 

here on their behalf are very supportive. We don‟t always agree 

back home on every item — there are different issues — but I 

can reassure you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that their message gets 

heard. I bring it forward, whether it‟s brought here in a petition, 

whether it‟s brought here as a concern, whether you try to work 

with somebody, and you ask the government. 

 

Because I do believe the government is responsible to all 

Saskatchewan residents — not in the South, the North, the East, 

the West — I think the government‟s responsible for all 

Saskatchewan citizens. That I do believe. And I hope, at the end 

of the day, after I share my views, my thoughts, and the 

concerns from the constituents back home, the majority of the 

members here will have a true understanding of the conditions 

we‟re asked to live in in northern Saskatchewan. And I will 

share that. 

 

I also want to commend my staff who work with me, CAs Al 

Rivard, Vicky Sanderson, Bernice Custer. I‟ve lost a few of 

them. They‟ve retired. And that‟s okay. I wish them all the best 

in their retirement. But Vicky Sanderson worked very hard, and 

I just want to thank her for her years she put in, and her 

dedication has truly been very helpful, her support. 

 

But you know, you go back and there‟s so many people that you 

can thank and some of our community members, our elders that 

give us the wisdom, our leaders that tell me exactly what 

they‟re feeling, what ideas they need. And they try to work 

forward and, you know, I have to be honest, they do. They 

bring their message to the government and I encourage that. 

They have to do their job and their due diligence, and they do 



November 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5949 

that. But when they don‟t get a good response, then I guess it‟s 

up to them to make sure the opposition understands it. And you 

try to lobby on behalf of the leadership back home. 

 

And I have to be honest with you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

really thinking about some of the issues and some of the process 

that have happened and the ideas that have come forward. And I 

see the Throne Speech and they talk about a new road. It‟s very 

concerning to me that they say a new road because I look at the 

old road and I can tell you some of the things that are on the 

Sask Party‟s old road that they haven‟t addressed in the North. 

And I‟ve talked about the roads; we know that. 

 

But people back home, I‟m telling you, all they want is a fair 

shake. They just want to be treated like Saskatchewan residents. 

They want to have the same opportunities that all of us have in 

this province. They don‟t expect any more, but they sure don‟t 

expect any less, and shouldn‟t. And I have to say, with what‟s 

going on in the North in some of the areas — totally, you know 

— this government should be ashamed of themselves. And I 

can go into some of the detail. And I don‟t mind giving credit 

when credit is due. And some of the things that have gone on, I 

commend the government. It‟s helped Saskatchewan residents, 

northern residents. I commend that. 

 

But there are issues that are not being addressed. And I have to 

be very clear on those issues. And the message that I‟m getting 

back home, the frustration to sit in community meetings and see 

some of the community members so frustrated about jobs, 

opportunity. They see all the economic boom, but they‟re not 

getting any part of the boom. They‟re suffering. And they 

explain to us why, and to the leadership, why they‟re suffering. 

And you know, your heart goes out to them because these are 

good people. They want to work hard. They believe in their 

family. They believe in their culture. 

 

We talk about trappers and fishers. They work hard. They do 

the traditional life and they‟re very frustrated. And when I see 

programs that can enhance what they‟re doing cut or I see new 

ideas that the trappers want to bring forward to help their youth 

and they get no support from the government, that is appalling 

and shameful. 

 

You ask for ideas and they bring their ideas forward. And I see 

the government failing. And I ask myself, why? And I know 

they will be asking back home, why? And we look at all the 

different issues that have come forward, and ideas. And they 

have many ideas because there‟s hope. Back home — the 

leadership, the community members, our elders, our youth — 

they have hope.  

 

But we struggle. We have addictions. I know we‟ve done some 

good things. And the leadership has signed an MOU 

[memorandum of understanding] to deal with addictions, a 

commitment, terms of reference. They‟re going to come up with 

some ideas how they can work with the front-line workers. And 

I commend that because they do see a need. But they‟ll need the 

support. 

 

And I hope, when I hear all the different things on this new 

road, the new road . . . That when these new ideas come 

forward, that this government will respond because northerners 

are tired of being neglected by the current government. 

Now you talk about long-term care, and we‟re moving in that 

area. There‟s a committee that has been struck to come together 

from community members and leadership to come up with 

ideas. And I think they‟ll do an excellent job because they‟ll 

come up with ways, that if they have to fundraise or whatever. 

 

But it‟s interesting. I hope we get a sweetheart deal like 

Saskatoon and some of the other, I guess, organizations are 

getting, the way the Sask Party is doing new ideas. And if that 

is a new idea, I hope we get it back home because we truly need 

it for our seniors long-term care. The waiting list is appalling; 

it‟s almost one full year. No senior should have to wait to get 

into there. They shouldn‟t have to leave their home. So I say 

that . . . Shame, shame. Because you know, to take someone out 

of their community, they‟re away from their language and their 

culture. And it isn‟t 10 minutes and 5 minutes away; they‟re 

being taken hours away. And a lot of their loved ones don‟t 

have the finances to go to Saskatoon or P.A. and visit with 

them. So it impacts the family quite dearly. 

 

So I say this: there‟s more work has to be done. And the 

government, the current government, Sask Party government 

has a responsibility. Do something with your new roads. If you 

say you have the vision, when the ideas come forward . . . I, you 

know, I challenge you. I do. I challenge you. Do the right thing 

for all of our residents, especially our seniors. They‟ve put in 

their time. They‟re owed that. 

 

We look at, you know, education. Education is an opportunity 

for our Aboriginal people in northern Saskatchewan. I just think 

about some of the promises that were made in the Throne 

Speech about looking at First Nations and Métis education and 

giving them an opportunity and truly a chance. And I will 

monitor this. And I know we will watch it because I do want . . . 

And I commend, if it is truly a commitment and from this 

government to truly work with First Nations and Métis, on 

giving them an opportunity at education and a fair, a fair shake. 

Then I say, right on. But we will monitor that to see. 

 

Because there has been many promises made to First Nations 

and Métis. And I‟ll tell you sometimes it isn‟t for their benefit 

in the end. You find out. And we‟re going to monitor that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. We‟ll make sure. We‟ll work with the 

leadership finding out from First Nations and Métis 

communities, is there an impact and is there enough support for 

opportunity. 

 

And we look at forestry. And there‟s a new agreement. I know 

there‟s a partnership, a new management agreement. First 

Nations are involved. And I know that the Throne Speech has 

the comments from Chief Roger Bird. And he makes some 

positive comments in there, and I commend him on that. He‟s 

tried to help his young people to get an education and get in the 

forestry sector to work. And I hope it works out for him because 

I will monitor it closely with him. He‟s a fair man and I like his 

comments. It‟s an opportunity for his young people to get some 

training. I hope that this government will give him the support 

when the plan comes together: how do we educate these young 

people to take on the forestry sector jobs? 

 

That I hope this government‟s willing to give support to 

Montreal. They cannot just turn around and say, oh well yes, 

we‟re using comments and words from the chief or from the 



5950 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2010 

band or from the band memberships. But truly, if they come up 

with a plan and when they come up with their plan for 

economics in the forestry sector, that this government will 

support them with their economics, with training dollars to do 

some of that. I will monitor that very clearly. I will look at that. 

I will try to ask the questions and try to get the information 

from them. So on that note, when I look at that, that‟s good. 

 

Churchill High School, I look at Churchill High School, and I 

know in 2008 before the by-election where I was successful 

being elected, they announced Churchill High School, an 

expansion. There was a lot of work that went into that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, from the community members, the students, 

the parent council, the board of education, the leadership, 

organizations that gave letters of support that went to the 

minister of Education at that time in 2008 before the 

announcement was made. A lot of work, there was a lot of work 

that went in — years — to get our project on the capital list 

high enough. And it was there. And at that time, I was there for 

the photo ops when the ministers came up. They lined up, and 

they took photo op, and they made the announcement. And that 

was a good announcement. 

 

Unfortunately it has taken so long, frustrations by community 

members, leaders, everybody, students coming to me and 

laughing, saying, what‟s going on, appalled that they‟re treated 

like this. So you have a government committing to an 

Aboriginal education, First Nations and Métis. We want to 

make sure your education is . . . you have a fair education, a fair 

shake at it. But I see this very frustrating that we haven‟t even 

tendered. Well we call for tenders now. Now we‟ll wait and see. 

I‟m very concerned at the end of the day. There‟s a time, I 

guess, a deadline will come in where we‟ll see the tenders. 

 

[15:45] 

 

But I hope that nothing else will stall this, will stop it, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because the students have waited long enough. 

The students have waited long enough. They have a right to a 

quality education and a facility that is up to a standard like the 

rest of the province. So I hope that this happens soon. And we 

demand that. And I know the community members are 

demanding that and will accept nothing less. So I hope that 

happens, and we‟ll work hard on that. And we‟ll monitor that as 

well with them, make sure we work the . . . 

 

So there‟s been a lot of work done. You talk about employment 

opportunities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, and they talk 

about the commitment to First Nations and Métis and everyone 

else and the prosperity. And that‟s good. You know, that‟s good 

because I‟ll tell you in northern Saskatchewan if you look at the 

reports coming out — Conference Board of Canada — I‟m 

telling you there‟s some serious problems. It isn‟t good, good. 

 

Some of the community members have the lowest income. And 

we have some that are doing quite well. Don‟t get me wrong. 

Some people are doing well. Some business people are doing 

wonderful. They have a business; they operate it, and it‟s doing 

wonderful. And I commend them on that. And they employ a 

lot of people, and I commend them on it. 

 

We have a lot of other people that, you know, in the community 

don‟t have the opportunities. And whether it‟s their education, 

then we have to work on that, and we‟ll do that. I mean, there‟s 

a role here for the government to play. When the ideas come 

forward about you doing the training, it‟s up to the Sask Party 

government to make sure the funding‟s there, to make sure we 

get the training done so that the people have the jobs. 

 

If you look at overcrowding in housing, this track record right 

now, you‟re going into your fourth year as a government. There 

is such problems. Again, Conference Board of Canada report, 

overcrowding 18 per cent higher in northern Saskatchewan than 

anyone else. That‟s appalling. 

 

The health conditions of people, of babies — respiratory 

problems. It‟s appalling. All of the different issues that they‟re 

faced with. Do I hear anything out? Yes, you know, and that‟s 

good. Maybe there‟s going to be some new houses. But I think 

there‟s a focus point needs to be on northern Saskatchewan, on 

the people, with the numbers that are coming out, 

overcrowding. And we‟ll monitor this. 

 

The people back home, they know. You‟re not going to hide 

anything from them. They know, and they‟ll support somebody 

who‟s going to speak for them, somebody who‟s going to try. 

And I say this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. People elect us all, and 

they ask us to represent them, to do our best, to make sure the 

message is here, and that the ministers and the government 

hears the message. You have an obligation as a government to 

hear the concerns. 

 

I will continue with it, whether it‟s a petition, whether it‟s a 

voice of the leaders, whether it‟s in a coffee shop. The concerns 

that I‟m hearing, I bring here, will be the concerns of the 

Cumberland constituency and the people I represent. Lots are 

First Nations, Métis, northerners, but they have concerns and 

issues, and they have a right to the prosperity that the rest of the 

province has. 

 

And you know, to play games in politics is one thing, but 

people have a right to a good quality of life, and they shouldn‟t 

be bullied. They shouldn‟t be told how they have to vote or if 

they‟re going to vote, if they have photo ID[identification] or 

don‟t have photo ID. We want to encourage people to vote, not 

not to vote. And I just . . . very frustrating to see that. We have 

isolated communities that don‟t have the access to photo ID. 

Like maybe down south there, it‟s all fine and dandy, but we 

know that there‟s a group that will suffer. 

 

And I ask myself, why is that? Why is that group? You know, 

then you go back and you look at some of the communities like 

Wollaston Lake, their road. They just want a road. Yes, a new 

road. They want to join you. Give them their new road. You 

talk about a new road? They need a new road. The promises are 

there. They don‟t see anything. They‟re unhappy. They‟re 

having challenges. So I challenge this government — finish 

their new road. Give them what they need, so they can take care 

of their community members, so that we don‟t have any more 

incidents that we had this past winter with losing one of their 

community members on an ice road. It was appalling. It needs 

to change. The government has the money. It‟s time to do the 

commitment. It‟s time that this happens. 

 

So I look at the different, all the different issues that come up. 

And I mean they come up many different times when you‟re 



November 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5951 

travelling out in the constituency. Mine is a big constituency 

and I get an opportunity to meet a lot of the members. Well 

maybe the member from Athabasca thinks it‟s a little bigger. I 

don‟t know about his constituency, but you know, it‟s an 

interesting thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to think there are so 

many issues out there that have to be addressed. 

 

And it is a lot of travelling. I have a big constituency, but I try 

to go to all the communities and I try to attend the meetings that 

I‟m asked to by the leadership, by community members, to deal 

with their issues and sometimes their frustrations. And 

sometimes, you know, they‟ve got good news and there are 

some good things that happen. Granted, I‟ll give it. But there‟s 

a lot of issues that northern Saskatchewan and this government 

have to address. The leadership will. And I know the leaders, 

the community members, will bring all the issues forward. I 

will represent them. I will bring those concerns, whether they‟re 

petitions, whether they‟re notes, letters to ministers asking for 

support. I will represent the Cumberland constituency to the 

best of my ability and I will do what the leadership asks, what 

the community members ask, and also what our elders ask us to 

do. 

 

And you know, we have to be respectful. I‟ve got some 

members, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that sit in the coffee shop and 

say, Doyle, show respect. You might be frustrated, but show 

respect. There‟s 58 of you members. You‟re elected to represent 

the people. Show respect. 

 

So I will try to respect. I will honour that. I hope that the 

government and their members will respect that. I do. When I 

have community members and elders telling me that, I will 

respect that. I will try my best. 

 

But I tell you, the frustration sometimes when you see the 

community members back home and you see our young people, 

the education, the health conditions, the addictions, the suicide 

rates, when you see the frustration of community members, 

sometimes it‟s hard. But I will do my best. 

 

But you know, there are many issues. But there are positive 

things that the communities are trying. And I commend all of 

my community members that I represent because, you know, 

the leadership, they‟re trying new approaches, new programs, 

and they‟re doing new things within their communities. They‟re 

trying to help their community members. They‟re trying to help 

the youth. They‟re trying to make sure they have communities 

that are flourishing. Our trappers, they do a lot. They do a lot of 

good work, lot of economics. Our fishermen, they do a lot of 

hard work. 

 

You know, there‟s a lot — and I know there‟s other people 

want to go on — there‟s a lot of issues that we‟re facing in the 

North. But I have to be honest with you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We try to solve a lot of them. We come up with ideas. And I 

commend the leadership, the community. They do come up 

with ideas. They don‟t always lay blame. They don‟t always 

blame. They say, here are some solutions, and they bring those 

solutions forward. 

 

And they ask this government, when those solutions come 

forward in good faith, as members of this province they ask you 

to deal with them in fairness, deal with them with the respect 

that they deserve. And that‟s all we ask. We just have to be 

treated with respect and dignity as a people, as residents of this 

province. We have many issues and needs like everywhere else. 

We just ask to be treated fair. And that‟s the way I look at it. 

 

And I will continue to work on behalf of the Cumberland 

constituency. I will do all I can to bring the issues forward to 

my colleagues for their support, to the members opposite for 

their support. 

 

And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don‟t want to forget 

because I was a member that was elected new, and I had 

members from the opposite, members from my own caucus that 

greeted me and welcomed me aboard. And I don‟t want to 

forget to acknowledge the new member to the House. 

Saskatoon Northwest member, I would like to welcome you. I 

hope you have a good career. I hope it‟s not a long one here, but 

a good one. But I just want to say I wish you all the best in your 

endeavours, and welcome to the House. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this point I‟ve gone over a number, and 

I know there‟s a lot of different, I guess, issues that I would still 

like to raise, but I know we‟re getting into a time. But I would 

just like to give this last one a little bit of a . . . 

 

The duty to consult and accommodate First Nations and Métis, 

it has been a big issue. And I ask the government and I demand 

of the government that you deal with First Nations and Métis 

and the duty to consult with respect and the right way. It‟s time, 

time to move on. 

 

Resource revenue sharing is an issue that needs to be addressed. 

No longer can we ignore it. No longer can we say we don‟t 

want to discuss it. It needs to be dealt with and, once and for all, 

a deal needs to be developed. Whether it‟s under that 

government, I don‟t know if that will happen, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but it‟s time that it‟s addressed. 

 

I know our leadership, our leader is willing to discuss it and 

willing to move. I know that. I believe in that. And I think it‟s 

time. That will give us an opportunity, a level playing field. It 

will happen. It‟s going to take some time, but it will happen. 

 

You know, I talk about protected lands. And we‟ve seen what 

went on, protected lands that were sold off by the current 

government. I find it very appalling that now they want to bring 

in legislation to, whether it‟s protected lands or do a different 

thing, a different spin on it. I think there‟s been such an outcry. 

And to see what happened . . . 

 

And I guess we talked about some of the process that some of 

the ministers have to deal with. And it‟s unfortunate they get 

dealt with the way they do. Somebody says, this is what we‟re 

doing, and I guess somebody ends up having to carry that 

message. And sometimes I guess that‟s part of the job. But it‟s 

unfortunate for anyone to get . . . [inaudible] . . . place where 

they are now. And I know what some of my colleagues have 

said that, but it was a tough lesson to watch. And I guess if 

that‟s politics, it‟s an interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, very 

interesting. I‟m glad I‟m not on that side. 

 

But at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would just like to say I 

will be supporting the resolution, the amendment. I will be 



5952 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2010 

supporting the amendment and not supporting the Throne 

Speech. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I‟m glad to be able to rise and participate in the Throne Speech 

debate today. 

 

To state off the top, just so there‟s no . . . So I might clarify for 

the member from Thunder Creek or for the member from 

Canora-Pelly, I‟ll be supporting the amendment and voting 

against the resolution. 

 

But that being said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to first 

welcome the new member from Saskatoon Northwest to the 

Assembly. Congratulations on your by-election win. It was 

certainly a hard-fought affair, and we‟ll look forward to your 

contribution to this Chamber in the days to come. As my 

colleague from Cumberland had said, we wish you a good time 

here, but perhaps not a long time. But certainly, along with the 

member from Cumberland, I know what it‟s like to come into 

this Chamber through a by-election and it‟s certainly an 

interesting experience, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because you‟re in a 

bit of a hot seat come the by-election. So again, kudos to the 

member for getting through that process, for standing up in 

front of his neighbours, and congratulations on his win here, 

and may he bring something to this place, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I also want to thank my family for the supports and the love that 

they continue to give me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As is often said, 

this is not . . . You know, we may give the speeches. We may 

be the front people. But if you don‟t have a supportive family 

behind you in this effort, I don‟t think you‟ll last for very long 

in this. And in my case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there have been 

some changes in my family circumstance that have been, to be 

quite honest, a challenge, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But for that, I‟m 

thankful for the goodwill and the love and the support that my 

family has shown me and that I‟ve been able to work my way 

through some of these things. 

 

I want to particularly mention my mother, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

This past year, this past Halloween, she celebrated her 80th 

birthday. And it‟s always great to celebrate a birthday for my 

mom, taking some time out from the trick-or-treating and all of 

that. Over the years, she‟s got a bit of short shrift, because of 

course the focus on Halloween in terms of the birthday 

celebrations. But we were still able to get together as a family 

and to celebrate her reaching this milestone. 

 

There‟s a change in the living circumstance between her and my 

father. And I know that different members in this House have 

had experiences through the years in terms of, as their parents 

get older, trying to navigate and negotiate the circumstances 

that come with, say, a parent going into long-term care. And 

that‟s certainly been the change that my mom has had to deal 

with. 

 

[16:00] 

 

I know that the member from Melfort made a pretty courageous 

announcement in terms of his efforts to work through a 

diagnosis of Parkinson‟s. And I respect the work that he‟s done 

in that regard and commend him for that. And again it‟s always 

a bit of a mug‟s game getting too personal in these remarks, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but that is the diagnosis of my mother‟s. And I 

know that Parkinson‟s has had a pretty negative impact on her 

life. 

 

And it‟s kind of . . . It‟s hard to watch sometimes the struggle 

that is involved in trying to come to terms with these things, the 

impact that that has on my father. And he and my mom, having 

been together for so many years and been through so much . . . 

And it‟s the way that they‟re facing this challenge and this 

struggle in their life. And I guess from that I draw a lot of 

inspiration, watching them both do the best they can and 

bearing up the best they can in the face of a pretty significant 

challenge. But it‟s all part of the long march of life, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And I guess again I draw inspiration from watching 

them bear up in these circumstances. 

 

I guess the fact that we‟re here on the eve of Remembrance Day 

and, you know, just . . . or not long away from Remembrance 

Day, I want to draw attention to that fact as well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and the fact, you know, many of us are wearing the 

poppy and the commemoration that was held today here in the 

Assembly and the marking out of those who served and died in 

terms of the memorials located here on these legislative 

grounds. 

 

My great-uncle, Roy Calder McCall, died in northern Italy 

during the Italian campaign as a corporal for the Royal 

Canadian Signal Corps. And he left behind a wife, a pregnant 

wife and a child who he never saw be born, become a teenager, 

become an adult, and to see the grandkids. 

 

And I know that again a lot of what we do in this place is 

secured and was fought for and paid for in blood and sacrifice 

by people like my great-uncle, Roy Calder McCall. And it‟s 

with a lot of pride that I know his name is on that memorial on 

the legislative grounds. It‟s with a lot of pride for the family 

that his name is marked out on the veterans cairn in 

Montmartre. 

 

And again for me, I don‟t want to try to single out the McCall 

family because I know there are many families that that is their 

story in terms of loved ones that went to war and never came 

home . . . and to this very day, those who serve under arms to 

further the peace and security and prosperity that we enjoy in 

Canada and the sacrifice, the terrible sacrifice that is often paid 

by those people for this tremendous thing that we have here in 

Canada, this tremendous life that we‟re able to live. 

 

So it is with thinking of those individuals, those sacrifices, I 

think about the responsibility that we have here. I think about 

the democratic freedoms that we have in this Assembly and in 

Canada. And I think about the terrible responsibility that‟s 

involved in making certain that if we are to send troops into 

harm‟s way, men and women under arms into battle, then we 

better make sure that it‟s for a bloody good reason, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And we‟d better make sure that it‟s done with making 

certain that all of the other options are exhausted because, for 

all the families that know what it‟s like to lose someone — and 

we have people that work in this building that know what that 

cost is like — and for whom Remembrance Day this year will 



November 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5953 

be as painful as it has been in days past, our hearts go out to 

them . . . But as legislators, as elected officials in this 

parliamentary democracy that we call Canada, and in 

Saskatchewan, I think that we do well to be ever more mindful 

of the responsibility that we hold as elected representatives. 

 

Just down from the memorial cairns, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on 

these legislative grounds, there‟s a memorial to Woodrow 

Lloyd. And of course, you know, one-time minister of 

Education, one-time head of the Saskatchewan Teachers‟ 

Federation, elected first in 1944, and served the Biggar 

constituency for many years with distinction, before becoming 

the leader and premier of the province, leader of the CCF in 

Saskatchewan and premier of the province and did so in the 

teeth of the medicare dispute. And his life verse of course was 

Robert Frost‟s, the road less taken. And I guess when I think of 

the life‟s work of somebody like Woodrow Lloyd compared to 

what we have offered up in this Throne Speech that lays claim 

to that same kind of inspiration and same kind of idealism, I 

think this Throne Speech entitled “The New Road”, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, suffers dramatically in comparison because in a lot of 

ways it‟s down the same old road of recycled promises, 

financial mismanagement, health care privatization, and 

dressing up things that have been examined or discarded in the 

past and trying to pass them off as new. And I guess it doesn‟t 

add up. 

 

This new road, it reminds me of something that one of the 

speakers at the recent Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 

Nations Assembly had to say about this government, where he 

said that this government, I give them an A for rhetoric but I 

give them an F for action. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, you 

know, this is one commentator‟s take on the record of this 

government when it comes to First Nations and dealing in the 

province of Saskatchewan. But I certainly think that holds up 

for this speech as well. 

 

The new road in terms of the rhetoric, there are a lot of things 

that sound really great in terms of action on rural health care, in 

terms of innovative approaches to long-term care, in terms of 

actions on addictions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But again when you 

examine the record more closely . . . certainly there are some 

things that you can hang your hat on as the government 

currently can, and you know, fair enough. But in terms of 

whether or not this new road is better than what has gone 

before, in a lot of fairly key areas, that is not the case, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

It‟s interesting to note the emphasis that‟s placed on addictions 

and responding to the terrible circumstances that many youth 

find themselves in and many people find themselves when it 

comes to addictions. And certainly the member from P.A. 

Carlton spoke not long before us in the debate and spoke, I 

thought, with great compassion and interest in terms of people 

that are affected with this great blight which is addictions and 

the pride that he takes in the expansion of addiction services. 

 

On the one hand, there‟s that, Mr. Speaker. But on the other 

hand, there is the news we hear very recently of the closure of 

addiction services beds in the city of Meadow Lake. And again, 

Mr. Speaker, that‟s, I think, a direct consequence of last year‟s 

budget where, again, they put out the restrictions on the health 

districts and said, you know, here‟s your targets. You go chop 

what you have to chop. Come back with the savings to us. And 

so it‟s one thing to proclaim the importance of addiction 

services in the Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But the 

way it plays out in the budget and the way that these things, you 

know, have a way of working through, come the time for health 

regions to make their decisions, well we‟ve seen the 

circumstance of Meadow Lake where addictions services have 

been cut. So again the rhetoric and the action do not add up. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Arm River-Watrous was 

talking with pride the other day about the work that‟s been done 

with Kawacatoose Cree nation and the Touchwood area and the 

great work that‟s been done around tourism. And it‟s 

interesting. Perhaps that member from Arm River-Watrous 

could have consulted with his seatmate, the then minister for 

First Nations Métis Relations, when they cut the Aboriginal 

employment development program that actually funded a lot of 

that community development work around the tourism initiative 

that Kawacatoose has been very heavily involved in. So it‟s 

great to say that there‟s good work being done on that front, but 

how this is actually playing out on the ground, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is the rhetoric is not matched by the actions and the 

deeds. 

 

We see long-term care projects. You know, the announcements 

that have been made in past and then cancelled and then maybe 

they‟re back on or maybe they‟re not, you know. I don‟t think 

there‟s anything innovative about raising people‟s hopes like 

this and then coming in with the Amicus deal where we see a 

huge blackout when it comes to the information and the detail 

as to who‟s paying what at the end of the day. And I know 

we‟re going to hear more about that deal in the days to come, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we‟re going to be certainly 

demanding, as an official opposition, accountability and 

transparency on that deal and what the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan are going to be paying at the end of the day for 

that deal. 

 

I think about the for-profit clinics that are being heavily 

introduced or referenced in this speech. And again these are 

initiatives that you‟re taking dollars that could have gone to 

things like the surgical care centre in the city of Regina that had 

been planned, that had been endorsed by that government but 

then is cancelled out. And then you know, lo and behold, we see 

a private initiative up in its place. And we‟ll see what kind of 

private dollars go to the bottom line for individual companies 

that should be going to providing health care in this province. 

 

I think about, you know, bottom line, Mr. Speaker, the fact that 

they say in this Throne Speech that they‟ve eliminated debt. 

And of course, you know, there‟s a bit of a shell game that‟s 

going on here in terms of the Crowns and the net financial 

position of the province. And this is something of course that 

would have had the members turning back flips when they were 

in opposition. But you know, things that they once criticized, 

now they‟re past masters at the practice thereof. 

 

So when they say that debt has been reduced by 40 per cent, 

well it‟s actually increasing by 55 per cent or $4.2 billion over 

the next four years. And again that‟s a lot of money. And that‟s, 

you know, in the out years, and how does this play out? Well 

the way it plays out is that the addictions services in the town of 

Meadow Lake get cut because the health regions get 



5954 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2010 

underfunded. The way it plays out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 

the primary employment development initiative that this 

government had around Aboriginal employment gets cut. But 

you know, apparently members on that side don‟t take notice, 

and they continue to talk about the good work that‟s been done 

and being done under programs that have already been cut. So it 

makes us wonder on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, if 

they‟re not asleep at the switch over there or if there‟s some 

kind of in-group that‟s making all the decisions and expects 

everybody else to just clap along. 

 

One thing I will say good about the recent actions of the 

government, Mr. Speaker; we‟re glad to see the campaign for 

the no on potash and the BHP Billiton deal, but we think this 

points up a number of other, a number of other public policy 

areas that need to be addressed. Are the people of Saskatchewan 

getting a fair return for their resource which the members 

opposite were quite happy to talk about? 

 

It‟s been interesting listening to the revision of history in many 

cases, Mr. Speaker, in terms of, you know, who did what in the 

history. Every year that that Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan was in existence under the then Blakeney 

government up until 1982, it turned a profit and returned a 

profit to the people of Saskatchewan, and it was only in 1982 of 

course when it got driven into the ground. And then of course 

it‟s a fairly familiar tactic out of the old neo-conservative 

playbook. You turn an organization like that into a basket case, 

and then you go to the people and say, well we‟ve got no 

choice; we‟ve got to sell it off. 

 

So of course, you know, they mismanaged it for a number of 

years, up to and including the sale of PCS [Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan Inc.] in 1989. And again, Mr. Speaker, the 

deal in and of itself was something like a $1 billion-plus bath 

for the people of Saskatchewan in terms of debt that was taken 

on into the General Revenue Fund, in terms of making Potash 

Corporation more appealing for sale, the undervaluing of those 

shares when they were sold off. So again it‟s pretty interesting 

to see the actions and the rhetoric of the government these days 

when it comes to what was that historical record on the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan. And for many people they think, 

you know, if that resource had been gainsaid and held in the 

interests of the people of Saskatchewan, what would that return 

be over time to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

[16:15] 

 

So again I think I‟m happy to see the campaign, the vigorous 

campaign that was mounted by the Premier, in terms of 

campaigning for no, and so I congratulate him for that. And I 

congratulate the people of Saskatchewan for bringing that 

pressure to bear and helping those members opposite. And 

certainly the federal Conservatives know, when all the different 

market research outfits were phoning madly to get the polling 

done, to get the public opinion survey work done, that that deal 

was a no go and that there would be political consequences for 

people that went ahead with it. So I congratulate the people of 

Saskatchewan for making it very clear that they thought their 

interests weren‟t being served by that BHP Billiton deal in that 

circumstance. 

 

But it opens up a broader question, Mr. Speaker. Are we getting 

a fair return for potash in terms of the royalty levels? Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan in particular has had a dismal 

record in terms of engagement with Aboriginal people, with 

First Nations and Métis people when it comes to employment. 

And what are the plans going forward in terms of that better 

engagement? 

 

Again last year‟s budget saw the doing away with the 

Aboriginal employment development program which was the 

main initiative on the part of the provincial government in terms 

of engaging First Nations and Métis people in the economy, in 

the employment. And we‟d had some talk around what would 

the replacement be for it from that side. But of course, Mr. 

Speaker, we‟ve seen nothing. And when it comes to 

employment and procurement and all of these things, as potash 

generally relates to First Nations and Métis people in this 

province, there‟s a tremendous opportunity here that needs to be 

realized. 

 

And once again, this is in particular a situation that underlines 

the importance of unfinished treaty business. We‟re all quite 

happy to proclaim that we‟re all treaty people in this Assembly. 

Well if that is the case, what was the spirit and intent of those 

treaties? And what did that mean in terms of the sharing of 

prosperity and the mutual respect? And how does that relate to 

something like resource revenue sharing? 

 

We‟ve seen in recent days esteemed scholars such as Jim Miller 

from the University of Saskatchewan or Tom Molloy, who‟s 

been very involved in the negotiating of modern treaties, say 

that the province should get to the table in terms of resource 

revenue sharing. And we hear other things, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of the way that this government has played it backwards 

and forwards in terms of whether they‟re into resource revenue 

sharing or whether they‟re not or whether they want to call it 

something else so then they can square all the circles they‟re 

involved in. 

 

But I think what they should do, Mr. Speaker . . . and if we‟re 

going to have certainty and if we‟re going to have stability in 

the development of these resource riches in this province, and if 

we‟re also going to do something about the poverty that exists 

in the midst of this plenty, then that unfinished treaty business 

such as resource revenue sharing is something that needs to be 

addressed and not just played games with. 

 

Again in the days to come, Mr. Speaker, we‟re going to have a 

very close eye on what happens with potash, whether or not 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan lives up to their pledge to 

the people of Saskatchewan, and whether or not in fact that 

pledge was adequate to addressing what should be the needs, 

what are the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

In this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, housing was again paid 

some lip service to. 

 

And we had an interesting announcement here today in terms of 

the proceedings on Whitecap Dakota Nation, you know, 12 

units being built there, the claim it‟s historic by the Minister of 

Housing. And again, we on the opposition side, whenever that 

particular minister proclaims something to be historic, we think 

about the Muskeg Lake First Nation long-term care home and 

how that was proclaimed as historic. And of course they‟ve had 



November 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5955 

to close that home down, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we wish the folks of Chief Bear and Whitecap Dakota 

Nation the best of luck with this housing project. We‟re 

interested to see what the details are, whether or not this will be 

made available to other First Nations around the province or 

whether or not this is designed in a particular way to curtail the 

uptake on housing from First Nations for on-reserve housing. 

 

But it gets into the broader question of housing as a whole, Mr. 

Speaker. And, you know, the very first budget that those 

members brought to this House, there was really nothing in it 

for housing. In fact they took $8 million-plus back from Sask 

Housing at that time, and they‟ve continued the raid on the 

reserves of that corporation. It is the primary instrument by 

which the province participates in housing. 

 

And they‟ve ceded the field to Habitat for Humanity. They‟ve 

made a good policy change in terms of providing operational 

dollars for Habitat for Humanity, and we applaud them for that. 

But I want to say this very clearly, Mr. Speaker — thank God 

for Habitat for Humanity, because in the inner city of Regina 

they‟re the only ones building new units. 

 

And again, it‟s good to see those families taking up the habitat 

challenge and the kind of joy and stability and benefit that that 

brings, not just to those families but to the neighbourhoods, 

many of which I have the privilege to represent. But also the 

fact that you could count them on one hand, Mr. Speaker, the 

new units that are being built. Well on the other hand, 

institutions like Regina Housing have wait lists on the order of 

400-plus. 

 

And I think in particular, Mr. Speaker, about a First Nations 

elderly couple that spent April, May, June — and July they 

were able to finally find housing — but they spent that time, 

Mr. Speaker, on the powwow trail and living in a teepee behind 

the sweat lodge on the old RCMP firing range. And these are 

two individuals that do an awful lot for their community, that 

do a lot for the collective Saskatchewan community, and that 

are the first there to give. And that they would be put in such a 

circumstance where they were unable to find housing, Mr. 

Speaker, I think speaks volumes about the kind of choices that 

have been made with an abundance of resources on that side of 

the House, Mr. Speaker — their inability to manage them, to 

really meet need, and the way that ordinary people pay the price 

for this. 

 

I think about the dramatic rent increases that are having a huge 

impact on poor families, on working families, on people that are 

just struggling to keep their households together. And certainly, 

Mr. Speaker, again, you know, the first budget they had they 

took 8 million out of Sask Housing. When it dawned on them 

they had to do something about a housing crisis, they appointed 

a task force. And what has come of that task force? 

 

Well this last budget, we had an announcement of a big outlay 

of housing from HomeFirst. Well where are those houses, Mr. 

Speaker? So when they can‟t even live up to the houses that are 

promised in a budget, when they can‟t even deliver any of 

those, Mr. Speaker, when they come around for yet another 

time in the Throne Speech, and meanwhile the housing crisis 

worsens, on this side of the House we say that is a government 

that is out of touch. That is a government that is not responding 

to the needs of the people on the ground in the communities that 

we represent. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, that this is done at a time of record 

revenues, and also at a time of, apparently, record inability to 

financially manage, we think goes very hard for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As I‟d said at the outset, Mr. Speaker, we‟re coming up on 

Remembrance Day and there‟s a lot of talk about our 

democratic freedoms and how those have been fought for and 

secured at great price, Mr. Speaker. And we find it more than a 

little strange that this budget contains what has been described 

by different columnists as a dog whistle to their right wing base 

— the introduction of photo identification as a requirement for 

voting. And again, this is part of a larger sort of pattern of 

behaviour, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the way that this 

government has meddled with the selection of the Chief 

Electoral Officer and the fact that after every election there‟s a 

bipartisan committee that goes over the way that the election 

practice played out, and of course the issue of photo ID was 

nowhere in the report of that committee. 

 

But again we see this initiative coming in under the guise of 

democratic reform, and again and again when pressed to 

produce examples of where this has gone wrong or issues of 

different balloting polls, all they are able to offer up are 

anecdotes, Mr. Speaker. But it‟s also interesting that this comes 

at a time when the chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations, Guy Lonechild, is going to some length to 

encourage First Nations people to participate in federal 

elections and in provincial elections. 

 

So on the one hand, you have First Nations leadership 

encouraging First Nations people to get out there to that ballot 

box and to use that vote and to vote their aspirations and to vote 

their priorities. And on the other hand, we have a government 

that seems more interested in throwing up road blocks for what 

is, for the most part, Mr. Speaker, in terms of people that have 

challenges around photo identification, are seniors and First 

Nations. 

 

So we think it‟s pretty thinly veiled over there, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of what they‟re trying to do, in terms of trying to block 

people from participating at the ballot box. And we think it‟s 

fairly shameful, Mr. Speaker. And again this is something that 

there‟s a fair, open process by which electoral reform has been 

conducted in the past in this province, Mr. Speaker, and they‟ve 

thrown that out the window with this initiative as well. 

 

I can only hope that it goes the same way of their marquee 

initiative around cutting into the needle exchange program, and 

the way that that was highlighted in a Throne Speech last year. 

And again when, you know, their own report was coming back 

saying that this is a program that works, that it saves money, 

that it has a health benefit for people that are in a pretty, pretty 

desperate circumstance — and not only that, but to do that in 

the middle of what is an HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency 

virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome] epidemic, Mr. 

Speaker — again it made no sense. And they ultimately have 

stood down on that. 

 



5956 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2010 

And I guess we‟ll see, you know, whether or not common sense 

prevails in terms of their approach on photo identification and 

this urgent need to go out there and solve a problem that hasn‟t 

been identified by anyone other than their brain trust, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

When it comes to the environment, you know, there‟s a lot of 

talk about wind power and EnerGuide, but the greenhouse gas 

emission plan has yet to really come forward. And we‟ll see 

how that plays out in the workings of organizations like 

SaskPower and SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker, and how that, in turn, 

impacts the people of this province, both through whatever kind 

of slipshod deals are signed for power generation and I think 

. . . or secretive deals. 

 

I think about the Northland‟s deal. This is a power generation 

project in The Battlefords area where it‟s not a stone‟s throw 

from a project that SaskPower is doing. You know, you‟ve got 

the public project cheek and jowl with the private project. It‟s a 

project that could have been done by SaskPower itself. They‟ve 

got the expertise. They‟ve got the track record. There was 

nothing unique about this in terms of cogeneration, in terms of 

using waste heat that would have made that beneficial, or 

partnering with a First Nation for example. There was nothing 

more to that deal, Mr. Speaker, than a desire to privatize. And 

again how that plays out in the workings of organizations like 

SaskPower and like SaskEnergy, and how do people invariably 

wind up paying the cost for the privatization misadventures of 

the members opposite. We‟re going to be standing guard and 

we‟re going to be making sure that we say our piece and that we 

hold them to account and that we try to hold up the facts for the 

people at the ballot box to make their decision. 

 

One of the other things I want to say about the Throne Speech 

that was kind of interesting was the air ambulance is riding 

again in terms of the helicopter ambulance deal that‟s being 

ballyhooed with STARS [shock trauma air rescue service]. And 

of course, Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting that this deal had been 

promised and then it had been considered and then discarded 

and now it‟s been propped back up again. And we‟ll see how 

this plays out over the long haul. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, you get the sense that this is more 

about papering over whatever sort of cracks remain in their 

to-do list in terms of trying to go to the public with a straight 

face and saying, oh yes, we kept all our promises. But just the 

way that the turbulence involved in this particular deal, Mr. 

Speaker, you know, perhaps this is a good deal for the province. 

But you have to sit back and think, okay, they promise it; they 

consider it and discard it, and now they‟re promising it again. 

You know, it doesn‟t add up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So meanwhile on the ground we‟ve got ambulance service that, 

as was very eloquently pointed out by the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview today, the Health critic for the official 

opposition, we‟ve got actual ambulance service that is suffering 

and not doing the job that needs to be done for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Also on the health care front, Mr. Speaker, there‟s the health 

care ombudsman. Again, something that was promised and then 

played around with, and now they‟re coming up to the election 

so they want to be able to paper it over and say, oh no, it‟s on 

its way. Well I guess in some regards they‟ve promised 

transparency, Mr. Speaker, and I think this is a fairly 

transparent attempt to play around with the public record. 

 

One thing that was of special interest to me, Mr. Speaker, and 

I‟m proud to be the MLA that represents Mosaic Stadium, the 

home of the Saskatchewan Roughriders, and certainly the work 

that‟s been done around the domed stadium, a lot of that centres 

in the riding of Regina Elphinstone-Centre. And we‟ve had 

different discussions about that project, Mr. Speaker, and I 

guess what I want to add to that discussion at this point is this: 

for a project that is potentially, you know, $400 million, 

possibly half a billion dollars worth of investment and 

expenditure and something that has been ballyhooed as a 

game-changer and a generational project by the members 

opposite, it was completely absent from the Throne Speech. 

 

[16:30] 

 

And again, it‟s sort of hard to keep track over here, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of the promises that were made and then the 

way that they‟d been considered and discarded or new 

initiatives have been taken on and then just sort of dropped or 

massaged in terms of the public relations campaign. So again, 

here you‟ve got a project that‟s many hundreds of millions of 

dollars in terms of the size of the project, and it didn‟t even rate 

a mention in terms of this Throne Speech. So we find that more 

than just a little strange on this side of the Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Something else that is of critical importance to the riding of 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre, Mr. Speaker, is the North Central 

Shared Facility. And of course this is the replacement of Scott, 

of Scott Collegiate, a high school in the middle of North 

Central, the youngest neighbourhood in the city of Regina, the 

replacement of that facility with something new and that builds 

out community schools from the very bricks on up. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, we brought in the planning dollars that 

helped that project move to number two on the capital list. And 

in the summer of 2007, the then minister of Education for the 

first Sask Party budget brought in the education dollars to take 

care of the education portion of that project, but it hasn‟t moved 

since. And I know that those members opposite have been 

challenged on providing progress on this project by Paul Martin 

when he was through town, by the people that have put a lot of 

thought and effort and painstaking calculation into this project. 

And again, we don‟t see any real progress on this important 

initiative for the inner city of Regina and, I dare say, for the city 

of Regina and for education in Saskatchewan in general. 

 

So again, the health care component of that budget is one of the 

problems, as is getting the feds to the table to provide their 

share of the funding. And we look very closely to see what 

happens with that. But to date, the money sits in the bank. It 

hasn‟t moved on to the next planning stage. And the frustration 

grows because this is an institution that again should be 

providing tremendous education opportunities, and not just that, 

but a new approach to education, one that really builds on the 

decades of experience with community schools and SchoolPlus 

in this province, and that has had a lot of thought put into it. 

And it could be something unique, not just in Saskatchewan, in 

Canada, but also in North America. But there it sits, Mr. 



November 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5957 

Speaker. And the frustration of the people in the neighbourhood 

I represent and where I live grows around that project. 

 

I want to close out by saying a few things about First Nations 

and Métis Relations, along with the Provincial Secretary and 

the office of francophone affairs, SaskPower, SaskEnergy — 

the critic areas that I have been entrusted with by my leader, 

Dwain Lingenfelter . . . Pardon me, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I‟m glad that the Leader of the Opposition has been able to give 

us, to give me those responsibilities. And I‟m glad that we have 

a leader that‟s got experience, that‟s got fortitude. And I think 

we saw that in the potash debate, Mr. Speaker. And I think we 

see that on different files where that experience and that 

fortitude is brought to bear. So again, I‟m quite thankful to have 

these responsibilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I want to close out by saying some things in particular 

about First Nations and Métis Relations and as it relates to this 

Throne Speech. And a lot of this is informed, Mr. Speaker, by 

my tenants at the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 

fall assembly this past month at the Dakota Dunes on Whitecap 

Dakota Nation. 

 

And one of the more interesting points with that assembly, of 

course, Mr. Speaker, was the attendance and the presentation 

made by the new First Nations and Métis Relations minister for 

the Saskatchewan Party. And I congratulate the member from 

Silver Springs in that appointment, and I look forward to seeing 

the work that he does and holding him to account in this 

Assembly and in the other committees of this government. 

 

And it was interesting, Mr. Speaker, because of course, this is 

the third First Nations and Métis Relations minister from that 

government in three years. And you know, each one of those 

ministers comes in and talks about the importance of 

relationship-building and we‟re all treaty people and we want to 

work in partnership and respect with First Nations and Métis 

people. And you know, Mr. Speaker, that tends to wear a little 

thin over time. 

 

So I don‟t know if it‟s some kind of tactic on the side of the 

members opposite where they don‟t want to use up a minister 

too much, so they shunt him out and then fire in a new one. But 

that‟s certainly how it seems from my place in the Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker, is they want to use a new minister to appeal to that 

inherent respectfulness and politeness in terms of First Nations. 

And the First Nations in the Assembly, the leadership tends to 

sit back and say, well we‟ll give the new minister a chance. And 

again, I think two ministers so far, we‟ve seen how that has 

worked out. And I don‟t think it‟s worked out very well for 

First Nations and Métis people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And again I think of the presentation that was made by the one 

commentator who said that this government, I give them an A 

for the rhetoric, but I give them an F for action when it comes to 

square dealing with First Nations in that case, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we‟ll see how things like the cuts to Aboriginal employment 

development, how that plays out, and how that could have been 

a useful tool in terms of building on that experience and in 

terms of better engagement across the province in the different 

sectors of the economy. The then minister for First Nations and 

Métis Relations, the member from Regina South, had said that 

Aboriginal employment, the work there was done, thank you 

very much. 

 

But something we see around potash in particular, but 

throughout other sectors of the economy, is that work is very 

much not done, that it needs to . . . In terms of the pursuit of a 

representative workforce and the prosperity and the security and 

the ability to support your family and the way that that benefits 

a community and neighbourhood, that has not been realized, 

Mr. Speaker. And we see a program that should have been 

bolstered, but instead was cut by this government. 

 

And we see those chickens coming home to roost, and we‟ll see 

them more in the days to come, Mr. Speaker, in the way that the 

potash industry conducts its business. And we‟ll also wait to see 

what the response of that government was, taking a useful tool, 

discarding it for nothing but rhetoric. 

 

The way that we see things like — and this was commented on 

fairly frequently at the FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan 

Indian Nations] assembly — the way that something like treaty 

land entitlement, which has been ongoing since 1992, Mr. 

Speaker, and which has been described by different 

commentators as one of the most important economic initiatives 

in past decades in terms of raising the field for First Nations and 

participation in the economy; we hear concern at the FSIN 

assembly about how that program is not being lived up to, how 

the resources that are provided for it are not adequate to the job. 

And we also hear about how the different selections that have 

accompanied treaty land entitlement are being held up by an 

uncooperative provincial government. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, this is an initiative that has been held 

up as one of the most critical, one of the most important 

economic independence initiatives when it comes to 

participation of First Nations in the economy, and when it 

comes to First Nations self-sufficiency, and when it comes to 

living up to the original terms of the treaty. 

 

So again, if we‟re all treaty people, there is a responsibility to 

make sure that something like TLE [treaty land entitlement] is 

lived up to. And we‟ll see if that doesn‟t wind up in court, Mr. 

Speaker. There‟s been an undertaking made by that minister to 

address certain of the criticisms that were raised at the 

assembly, and again we‟ll see what that minister acts upon. 

 

But we know this. Before the minister‟s presentation, there was 

a report on different court actions being taken. And after the 

minister‟s representation, there were more reports on other 

court actions being taken. And increasingly, the way that First 

Nations see as the main means of engagement with this 

government, it would seem to be through the courts. 

 

And again, in a province where our motto is “from many 

peoples, strength,” and in this Assembly where we like to 

proclaim that we‟re all treaty people, that one of the main forms 

of engagement, or fora of engagement with First Nations people 

is through the courts, I think that‟s a sad commentary on the 

state of affairs in this province. And when it comes to things 

that they‟ve checked off their so-called promise list, Mr. 

Speaker, one of them was improving relations with First 

Nations in this province. So I don‟t see how, you know, more 



5958 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2010 

court actions, more legal actions equates to better relations with 

First Nations between the provincial government. 

 

One of the other things we heard about was roads. This is of 

course a government that cancelled the roads to reserves 

program. And again the minister stood at the front and said, 

don‟t worry. We‟re with you, chiefs. We‟re going to address 

your concerns. 

 

But again and, you know, I‟m sure most would agree there‟s 

nothing more fundamental than transportation. And if you‟re 

going to get population to opportunity, basic infrastructure is 

one of the asking prices for that. And you think what are the 

growth communities in Saskatchewan, and First Nations and 

Métis communities are up in the vanguard of what are growth 

communities. 

 

So again that you have a government that comes in, cuts the 

roads to reserve program one budget, then comes around in the 

fall and says, oh don‟t worry about that. There‟s a new road. 

Well the people in many communities in this province, many 

First Nations and Métis communities in this province will 

believe it when they see it. And they will be paying very close 

attention come election time. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, on the duty to consult and accommodate, 

you know, one year we saw $3 million allocated for this 

important initiative. And fully, I believe it was, $2.4 million of 

it went unexpended. And again, talk is cheap. And again, you 

know, they like to ballyhoo the $3 million at the front end. And 

then on the back end, the fact that they didn‟t spend 80 per cent 

of the money, well you know, tough luck. I guess there wasn‟t 

an interest from First Nations and Métis people when it came to 

the consultation front. And again, Mr. Speaker, that defies 

belief. 

 

But if this is what their new road is made of, that rhetorical 

road, again I think this speaks poorly of where we‟re headed. So 

again we‟re going to be watching very closely on the duty to 

consult and accommodate. 

 

But I would urge the members opposite to take the advice of 

people like Tom Molloy, people like Dr. Miller from the 

University of Saskatchewan and make good on the different 

rhetorical games they‟ve played, make good on what we hear 

were undertakings made behind closed doors and get to the 

table on resource revenue sharing. They‟ve got to get that work 

done, Mr. Speaker. And before that work is done, we‟re going 

to see a lot more in terms of action through the courts. And one 

of the times where this came up was during some of the actions 

around Enbridge. 

 

And unless they want to, you know, unless they want to have an 

equitable deal, and unless they want to take up that unfinished 

treaty business, it‟s going to continue to hamper not just First 

Nations‟ ability to provide economically for themselves and 

their families and their communities, but it‟s going to hamper 

the province as a whole in terms of the impact that has on 

investment, in terms of the impact that has on economic 

development. So it‟s got to be straightened out, Mr. Speaker, 

and if it isn‟t, we‟ll continue to not live up to our potential in 

this province. 

 

I want to say a few things about the Métis Nation of 

Saskatchewan. And again we‟re coming up to the close of the 

Year of the Métis. About a year ago this time, we celebrated the 

launch in the rotunda, November 16th. We‟re coming up to the 

anniversary of the death of Louis David Riel. And certainly the 

Back to Batoche celebrations this year, Mr. Speaker, there were 

a lot of things there to be proud of, a lot of things to enjoy. And 

certainly I was quite happy to participate in different of the 

things that happened there. 

 

But again, as we had said on this side of the House with the 

launch of the Year of the Métis, it should be the Year of the 

Métis every year. And we see a situation where the Métis 

Nation of Saskatchewan continues to exist in a fairly precarious 

situation. There was a good move made by this government on 

the Clarence Campeau Fund in the last budget. But in terms of 

the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan as a whole, they are on such 

a precarious footing in terms of living up to the duties that have 

been constitutionally discharged to them. That is a very, very 

neglected situation in the lifeblood of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[16:45] 

 

So again in summation, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think that this new 

road lives up to its billing. I think that the new road is a lot of 

new rhetoric. I don‟t think this serves the people of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre well. I don‟t think it serves, you know, not 

just the people who helped me through my riding association 

and do the good work there — not just Leane Goldsmith, my 

constituency assistant that I have the pleasure of working with 

— it doesn‟t help their circumstance. It doesn‟t help the people 

that have entrusted me with their support and send me to this 

legislature. And it doesn‟t help the people of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre as a whole. So for the reasons that I‟ve 

listed and for the way that it impacts the different files that I‟ve 

been entrusted with by my leader, Mr. Speaker, I‟ll be voting 

against the Throne Speech motion, and I‟ll be supporting the 

amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from P.A. Northcote. 

 

Mr. Furber: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with pleasure 

that I rise in the Assembly to speak to the Speech from the 

Throne. And I suppose it‟s always with pleasure that you get an 

opportunity to rise and represent the constituents in Prince 

Albert, the folks in Prince Albert Northcote who put me here to 

represent them as ably as I can. It‟s always a humbling 

experience, and so I thank them for that. 

 

I‟d like additionally to thank my wife, Michelle, who is an 

incredible support for me. And we spend a ton of time apart, 

and she‟s very, very supportive of the work that I do and the 

work that we do as elected members here in the Assembly. 

 

I‟d also like to thank my family. My mom and dad in Prince 

Albert, my brothers and their families because they are, while 

very supportive of the work that I do, are also very flexible in 

their own schedules. And we have a number of family events 

that are either timed early or put off so that I can be there when 

I‟m not in Prince Albert. So I‟d like to thank them for that. And 

that goes right down to Brandon, Brooklyn, Alyssa, Camryn, 

Elyse, and Jaelyn — my nieces and nephew who have on a 



November 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5959 

number of occasions had their birthday parties delayed or held 

in advance, not on the correct date, so that I can be there. Such 

will be the case three times during this fall sitting. So they 

deserve some thanks as well for the patience that they show. 

 

I‟d also like to thank my constituency assistants, Rose 

Rothenburger, who does an incredible job not only for me but 

with the literally thousands of hours that she volunteers for 

many organizations in Prince Albert, lots of which support 

women‟s issues and equity issues. And so I‟m very thankful for 

the work that she does for me, but also thankful for the work 

that she does in our community. Additionally I‟d like to thank 

Caroline Bendig for the great work that she does. And when 

Rose is away, she handles the office very ably and aptly, and 

I‟d like to thank her for that. 

 

I‟d also like to thank the teammates that I‟ve got on the various 

teams that I play on because not only am I limited in my ability 

at the age that I‟m getting to, but I‟m also not there as often as I 

should be. So I‟d like to thank them as well. 

 

Now I‟d like to, in the interest of time, speak very specifically 

about what this Throne Speech says and doesn‟t say, specific to 

the city of Prince Albert and its immediate surrounding area. 

It‟s notable that it doesn‟t include anything to address election 

promises. And as an opposition, as Her Majesty‟s Loyal 

Opposition it‟s certainly our task to hold the government to 

account for the promises that they make, whether it‟s prior to an 

election or after. 

 

And so in that spirit, I‟m here to again bring to the attention of 

those viewing and listening and reading in Hansard the 

complete lack of attention to any of the promises the 

Saskatchewan Party made prior to and during the last election 

campaign. And they‟re very specific promises, and they‟re very 

large promises. And it‟s exceedingly frustrating that I have 

brought them up now since the election at virtually every 

occasion, and they have done zero. Nothing. And again there‟s 

nothing in this Throne Speech that would lead me to believe 

that they‟ve become aware themselves that it‟s been three years 

and nothing‟s been done. And so I fully suspect that these will 

be promises that go unanswered. 

 

And the first of these promises is probably the most obvious to 

the people of Prince Albert. If you‟ll remember, during the 

election in 2007 the now member for Prince Albert Carlton took 

out an ad that said, “A vote for Daryl is a vote for the mill open 

and people working.” And so you would assume, you would 

assume as a voter that if they‟re going to carry out this promise 

that they would have a plan to do so. And you would assume 

that for a number of reasons. One, because you would think that 

they would be honouring their promises and commitments, but 

also because the member for Batoche went out as the head of a 

forestry task force and travelled the province on taxpayer 

dollars to produce a report that nobody‟s ever seen or heard of, 

that has produced results that have been exceedingly damaging 

for the forestry industry, and certainly for the pulp mill in 

Prince Albert. And it‟s a sad commentary when you would 

make a promise to a community with no intention or no ability 

or desire to fulfill that promise. 

 

And I‟m not sure if that‟s what‟s happened here, Mr. Speaker, 

but it‟s clear from the actions that brought about the promise to 

now, we are three years later and no action whatsoever. And I 

would argue this: that if something happens where that pulp 

mill does open, it would open not because of the Saskatchewan 

Party or any of its members, but in spite of them. It would 

happen solely because of a company that takes the onus to do it, 

and not because anything is done or has been done on the file 

by this government. 

 

Additionally we should talk about some other promises. And 

certainly the promise of a second bridge is a pretty big promise. 

It is one of the most popular topics on coffee row in Prince 

Albert and has been for the last 10 years. There are occasions 

where there are emergencies on the bridge, where there is an 

accident or somebody‟s using the bridge that takes up virtually 

every lane hauling things to the North. And so we lose access to 

the ability to go back and forth across the river, and normally 

that‟s concerning for the community. 

 

And so in light of that, and with the knowledge that it‟s a hot 

topic and very much of interest for Prince Albert residents, the 

Premier took the opportunity to do some campaigning. And so 

he stood on the bridge with the then mayor of Prince Albert, 

Jim Stiglitz, and thought that he would have a photo op and 

provide some commentary. And so what did he do, Mr. 

Speaker? Well he said that the city should have a second bridge, 

and did it in order to curry favour with the electorate in Prince 

Albert. 

 

And so what has been the result? What have they done on the 

file in the interest of getting a second bridge since then? 

Absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the fact that we‟ve 

asked in committee, I‟ve asked in committee what their plans 

are. The answer was as vague an answer as you could possibly 

imagine. 

 

And so again, the crass and almost vindictive nature that it 

would take to come into a community and promise something 

that you know you‟re not going to deliver is unfortunate. It‟s 

unfortunate. But the chickens will come home to roost on these 

promises. 

 

Now the third major promise that is very specific is with respect 

to airport improvements. Again the now Premier flew into 

Prince Albert, unannounced and unbeknownst to city council 

and the mayor, and announced that, if elected, they would 

provide funding for airport improvements in Prince Albert, 

especially for but not entirely exclusive to lengthening of the 

runway, but also airport improvements to the terminal. 

 

And when asked by reporters later that day, the mayor replied 

that he was uncertain as to why he hadn‟t been consulted. He 

also suggested that they would be better able to deal with issues 

on their own, and would appreciate the money and had other 

priorities for it. And in spite of that and in spite of the promise 

by the Premier and in spite of him flying in unannounced and 

unbeknownst to the mayor and council and doing again 

something that you shouldn‟t ought to do if you respect the 

electorate and the people in Prince Albert, make a promise that 

you‟re not going to keep. 

 

And so that‟s again what‟s happened here on a very specific and 

very large promise. Now what has taken place since then is the 

residents and council have taken it upon themselves to fund 



5960 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2010 

some improvements. There‟s been over $1 million of the 

people‟s money in Prince Albert spent through the city council 

on airport improvements and not one thin dime spent by this 

government to fulfill a promise made by their Premier. It‟s a 

sad, sad commentary and it‟s unfortunate that the people of 

Prince Albert are paying the price for the government that‟s 

elected. 

 

Now there are more issues obviously in Prince Albert that are 

being neglected by the government than just the promises that 

they‟ve made. Health care is a big issue across the province. It‟s 

certainly no more or less in Prince Albert. The citizens there 

value their health as much as anywhere. 

 

And so I find it interesting that, in spite of having over $10 

billion in revenue, or huge increases of over $2 billion more 

than the previous government had, the health region is grossly 

neglected and wildly underfunded. And believe it or not, their 

own statistics suggest that since 2007, surgical wait times in 

Prince Albert are worse than they were in 2007. So to this point, 

surgical wait times are longer under this government, with all of 

the resources that they‟ve got, than they were in 2007. It‟s 

unfortunate again that the people of Prince Albert have to pay 

the price for this government‟s inability to manage the 

province‟s finances. 

 

And so these are just a few of the many things that are being 

neglected by the Saskatchewan Party government. But very 

specifically, I‟d like to call on this government to fulfill the 

election promises that they made to the city of Prince Albert. 

It‟s simple and it shouldn‟t be too much to ask that they simply 

do what they say they were going to do. I can‟t imagine why — 

well I guess I know why, sitting in the government benches — 

but I think it‟s a sad, sad thing to abuse the people of Prince 

Albert by promising things that you know you‟re never going to 

deliver on. 

 

And so with that, and seeing nothing in this Throne Speech to 

address those promises and many other issues that are 

negatively affecting the city of Prince Albert and its residents, 

I‟ll support the amendment and not the Speech from the Throne. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a privilege and an honour to stand in 

this Assembly and reply to the Speech from the Throne for 

2010. 

 

[17:00] 

 

As has been indicated by many members, you know, I believe 

that this is the 16th Throne Speech that I‟ve had the privilege of 

listening to both as an opposition member and as a government 

member. And I know there are many, Mr. Speaker, in this 

Assembly who have indicated that their replies and . . . Mr. 

Speaker, for the benefit for those who don‟t quite understand 

the workings of the Legislative Assembly, we basically, as 

MLAs, have two opportunities to do a significant response here 

in the Legislative Assembly. That‟s either the Throne Speech, 

or it is the reply to the budget address which occurs in the 

springtime. 

And, Mr. Speaker, a number of MLAs on both sides of the 

House have indicated that this may be their final Throne Speech 

or this may be their final budget address in the springtime 

because they did not participate in the Throne Speech address. 

So, Mr. Speaker, to those members I say, thank you for your 

contribution to public service, because a number have been here 

for a while, in fact maybe even a few more years than me. And 

as I indicated, I‟ve been here for 16 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech that was delivered by this 

government I think indicates very clearly the path that we have 

started on in this four-year plan has come to fruition, and in fact 

we see a change. We see a new Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I get into the comments about the items 

that are very important to the people of Canora-Pelly, I do want 

to indicate my appreciation, first of all, to my family. To my 

wife, Gail, who‟s been superannuated as a teacher administrator 

now . . . She‟s into her third year of retirement, and I think she‟s 

beginning to enjoy that a little bit better than she did in the first 

year, and has been a strong support to me in terms of being able 

to advise me and help me through. Because as every member in 

this Assembly knows, there needs to be a significant 

contribution from family. There needs to be the ability for 

family members to even do something as simple as understand 

what we‟re doing and how we do it. 

 

I also want to extend my appreciation to my son and my 

daughter-in-law and even my little grandchildren. Because I 

have to tell you, Mr. Speaker, in my previous responsibility as 

minister of Education, I was responsible for daycare in this 

province, and as minister I looked at her for advice as a child 

who was involved in a daycare program, Mr. Speaker. And I 

say that of course in a humorous fashion. 

 

I also want to extend my appreciation to my daughter Lindsay, 

who lives in Calgary. And we don‟t have that opportunity to see 

her often, but she does send me emails, press releases, about the 

price of oil, Mr. Speaker, and the kinds of things that now I am 

responsible for as Minister of Finance. So to family, I want to 

say thank you. 

 

To my constituency staff, my constituency assistant in Canora 

who manages that office . . . And by the way, Mr. Speaker, we 

relocated to a brand new office this year after 15 years of being 

in one particular location in Canora. We‟re now on Main Street 

in Canora. And I want to extend my appreciation to Bob 

Blahay, to all of his years of service with me, Mr. Speaker. I 

think he‟s probably up around 13 or 14 years being with me as 

my constituency assistant. I also want to extend appreciation to 

Carol Sleeva, who serves in two capacities: one in my 

constituency office as a constituency assistant, but also here as a 

part-time ministerial assistant, to act as that liaison. 

 

My staff, Mr. Speaker, at the ministry office here has . . . As 

I‟ve indicated, we did do a change on June the 29th when the 

Premier asked me to become the Minister of Finance. And that 

has also meant that we have had new members join us, and 

we‟ve also had other members who‟ve stayed with us. And I 

want to thank Jane and Susan as well as Fred from my ministry 

staff. But especially I also want to recognise the fact that a new 

individual has joined me as my chief of staff, and I want to 

welcome Diane Ford, who‟s only been with me since 



November 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5961 

November 1st. So she‟s on a steep learning curve, but I know 

that she‟s going to do extremely well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also want to say congratulations to the member for Saskatoon 

Northwest. You know, periodically there are by-elections, and 

this time the member from Northwest has shown very clearly 

that the polling that took place this past weekend was a 

continuation of what took place on October the 18th. And I 

know that the member for Saskatoon Northwest will do just a 

terrific job as the member representing that area of the city of 

Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to quickly, quickly review some of the 

great things that have happened in Canora-Pelly because of the 

initiatives taken by this government. Whether they‟re initiatives 

that have been looked at by the Minister of Highways or 

whether they‟re initiatives that have been looked at by 

Municipal Affairs, Mr. Speaker, many great things have 

happened. 

 

And I want to begin by indicating that in the constituency of 

Canora-Pelly, provincial dollars that have flowed into towns 

and villages and rural municipalities in Canora-Pelly over the 

last three years, Mr. Speaker, total $5.6 million. Mr. Speaker, 

that‟s very significant when you look at some of the things that 

the town of Kamsack has been able to do. Mr. Speaker, you 

know, there‟s been a bridge replacement in that community that 

has been needed for years, and it has been completed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the communities of Canora and Norquay 

continued with street paving — very essential in ensuring that 

those communities attract residents. So congratulations to them. 

Mr. Speaker, water and sewer treatment improvements occurred 

in Kamsack, Endeavour, Pelly, Preeceville, Springside, and 

Hyas, Mr. Speaker. That‟s a significant number of communities 

that have either put in place new wells or they have improved 

the water treatment plants. And they have used provincial 

dollars to assist them in moving forward a very significant 

program. 

 

I also want to commend the RM [rural municipality] of Good 

Lake, Mr. Speaker. The RM of Good Lake is responsible for a 

number of communities around Good Spirit Lake and they have 

expanded the rural water pipeline program to Canora Beach. 

And now the quality of water that comes from the Canora area 

is going to be enjoyed by those residents as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, three major projects occurred for recreational 

facilities, and I want to identify a couple of them, Mr. Speaker. 

The Kamsack arena green ice project is a geothermal heating 

and cooling system, and it also involved energy-efficient 

lighting. You know, I want to compliment the council there, the 

mayor, and the individuals on the recreation board who saw fit 

to put together a project — significant amount of dollars, over 

$717,000 for that community, shared one-third by the federal 

government, one-third by the province, and one-third by the 

town of Kamsack — to put in place a geothermal heating unit. 

 

They recognized that they needed to lower the costs of 

operating their community rink. It is the, you know, focal point 

in many smaller communities. The community rink is the place 

in the wintertime. And they saw fit to ensure that they could put 

in place an upgrade that would be good for years and years and 

would also save them money. 

 

It was interesting seeing the pipes being laid, Mr. Speaker, in 

the parking lot. That is exactly where all the pipes are laid for 

the geothermal system. And they‟re drawing the heat for the 

piping for winter months and they‟re also of course using the 

cooling for summer months. So it‟s just an extremely good 

project. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that happened in the town 

of Canora . . . The town of Canora has always had a swimming 

pool that has been heated the traditional way by either using, 

you know, power or natural gas. And they decided that they 

would apply to the MRIF [Municipal Rural Infrastructure Fund] 

program and would convert the heating of that pool to solar 

heating. And, Mr. Speaker, they‟ve done that. 

 

They‟ve moved ahead with the construction of a building worth 

about $180,000 and the building actually has . . . It‟s equipped 

with a solar panel roof. And now the actual heating of the water 

during the season occurs by use of the sun‟s rays. A tremendous 

improvement, a very good green initiative, and of course it 

saves dollars for years and years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other programs that occurred, that the 

community of Sturgis took advantage . . . And, Mr. Speaker, 

there are so many other programs that have taken place 

throughout. I‟m just going to highlight a few of them. But I do 

want to mention specifically the town of Sturgis, one of the 

smaller communities. Obviously Canora, Preeceville, and 

Kamsack are the largest ones and Sturgis, you know, is sort of 

in the next tier. 

 

Sturgis understood, of course, and I was . . . Interesting 

listening to the mayor at the ribbon cutting at the town hall 

when he said he wanted to thank the insurance company. That‟s 

what he began, by saying thank you to the insurance company. I 

thought, well that‟s interesting that the mayor would stand up at 

the ribbon cutting. 

 

Well what it was is the insurance company said, we‟re going to 

close your building and you have a specific number of years to 

either renovate it, improve it, or close it because we are not 

going to offer you insurance. So the town of Sturgis took upon 

themselves, and the community, a major project, Mr. Speaker 

— $1.75 million for a brand new community hall. And of 

course they used the municipal rural infrastructure program, the 

MRIF grant as I indicated, where they receive $250,000 from 

the province. They also received 62,000 from the municipal 

economic enhancement program and they also did fundraising, 

Mr. Speaker. They‟ve raised already $160,000 towards that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But you know, it also left them with the debt of $1.39 million. 

And they understood, that community understood, that they‟re 

going to benefit by constructing that hall. So they‟ve applied for 

debentures through the Municipal Board and in fact now the 

debentures sold almost instantly. And for the next 20 years, the 

community of Sturgis is going to enjoy that hall while they 

continue to pay off those debentures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the highways initiatives in my constituency have 

been significant when we‟ve had bridges replaced on Highway 



5962 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2010 

49 at both the junction of Highway 49 and 9 as well as near 

Preeceville. We‟ve had tremendous amount of work done. 

Highway 16, a very significant primary highway, a large chunk 

of that highway by Springside is through my constituency and 

repaving has occurred there with the cost of a lot of dollars. Mr. 

Speaker, 34.7 kilometres highway projects were improved in 

my constituency alone to the tune of $15.5 million. So, Mr. 

Speaker, the Highways minister has recognized that we need to 

ensure that the deficit that was left, the infrastructure deficit that 

was left is upgraded and we need to ensure that safety continues 

to move forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the important education initiatives in my 

constituency was the opening of a project in Norquay, the 

Norquay School initiative. Norquay School, Mr. Speaker, has 

had a project dedicated to them and the board has worked 

tirelessly to ensure that it opened. And, Mr. Speaker, a $2.8 

million addition to the Norquay School, upgrading old facilities 

as well as adding new construction, has meant that the students 

at that school will have an environment that is conducive to 

good learning. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the very important things, and I think 

members across the province recognize, many urban centres . . . 

I know my colleague, the member from Melville-Saltcoats, and 

I had the opportunity to be in Langenburg to open a daycare. 

But, you know, Mr. Speaker, it‟s occurring all over the 

province. We‟re hearing from MLAs that there are initiatives 

where boards are getting together. 

 

Mr. Speaker, prior to 2007 for the election of the Saskatchewan 

Party government, there were no daycare spaces in 

Canora-Pelly constituency. Mr. Speaker, since then, 137 

daycare spaces have opened in Canora worth a total of 

$496,000. Mr. Speaker, Kamsack opened in April of 2008 with 

33 spaces; Canora, Mr. Speaker, has opened with 25 spaces, 

and we‟ve just allocated again, in the spring of 2010, an 

additional 10 spaces for a total of 35. Mr. Speaker, the 

communities of Sturgis, Preeceville have gotten together and 

were approved for 36 spaces in March of 2010 — 10 preschool 

spaces have been granted in a temporary location and 26 more 

will be added when the permanent location is completed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the small community of Pelly. Pelly now has 33 

spaces allotted to them, Mr. Speaker, and on Monday, 

November the 15th, the Pelly daycare board, in fact, is going to 

open up their facility in what was known as the former 

elementary school. It is a building that the village of Pelly 

owned, and now they are transferring that ownership to the 

village and we will have a daycare opening in Pelly on Monday 

with the prospects of moving up to as many as 33 daycare 

spaces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the areas that we recognize in Preeceville 

and the great job being done by one group and that‟s called the 

MacKenzie Society. The MacKenzie Society recognizes of 

course that there are individuals who require assistance, 

students and adults of course with disabilities. Mr. Speaker, the 

MacKenzie Society Ventures corporation owns and operates 

homes in Preeceville, Sturgis, and also now a home in Canora. I 

want to commend the group that‟s involved there, Mr. Speaker, 

because there is one group home in Sturgis that has six spaces. 

There are three group homes in Preeceville, two that have a 

three-space allotment and one that has a six-space allotment. 

And now, Mr. Speaker, in Canora there is also a three-space 

group home. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, now we have a total of 21 individuals that 

have intellectual disabilities and they are being cared for by the 

MacKenzie Society Ventures. This expansion has now created 

at least 10 permanent full- and part-time jobs. 

 

[17:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the final point I‟m going to talk about my 

constituency is that last fall we had the opportunity, Mr. 

Speaker, to see the completion of a project, and that is of course 

the opening of the integrated health care facility, the hospital 

and the long-term care facility in Preeceville. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting that the program began with the 

explanation of how the project came about, and the title on the 

program was called “The Journey.” The journey, Mr. Speaker, 

lasted 10 years. At a time in 1999 when the NDP announced the 

project, they were estimating that the project would cost about 

$4.6 million, I believe, and of course, Mr. Speaker, as in all 

projects across Saskatchewan, 35 per cent of the share has to be 

raised locally. So the community looked at that and they were 

excited. They were pleased. So they began to raise 35 per cent 

of that 4.6. Well, Mr. Speaker, years went by, and I think in 

about 2003, the estimate was that if it was going to go ahead, it 

was going to cost $6.1 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting; it‟s interesting how the former 

government . . . And I‟m not going to get into too much 

discussion about the former government, but I know the 

Minister of Health did mention this, so I have to, Mr. Speaker. 

You know, I have an article from the Preeceville Progress and 

it‟s dated September the 25th of ‟03. 

 

Mr. Speaker, September 25th, ‟03 . . . You have to remember 

that the election of 2003 was held on November the 5th. Mr. 

Speaker, the then minister of Health arrives in Preeceville to 

announce that the project is still going ahead. Keep in mind, 

they announced it for the first time in 1999; this is ‟03. And in 

this photo, Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting that there is the board 

Chair of the health district, the Co-Chair, the CEO of the health 

district, the mayor is in the photo, Mr. Speaker, and the NDP 

candidate. Nothing to do with health, nothing to do with this 

project, but he‟s in the photo, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, 

people in Preeceville recognized this, that this was very much a 

political picture, and there are still people that are very angry 

about that. 

 

Now last year, as I indicated, Mr. Speaker, last fall finally, Mr. 

Speaker, last year, finally the Saskatchewan Party government 

has completed the project. But you know, Mr. Speaker, I 

indicated that the project was announced at just over $4 million. 

Mr. Speaker, the project is in fact smaller because the costs 

were skyrocketing, and it‟s over $10 million, Mr. Speaker. The 

community is now responsible for 35 per cent of that 10 

million. So the delays by the former government have ensured 

that the community now is on the hook for $3.5 million. So, Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s something that the NDP have to understand very 

clearly: that they were not building for a growing province, they 

were willing to see things stay as they were. 



November 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5963 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that have happened this 

year in the Canora-Pelly constituency . . . And it‟s interesting 

when you watch National News and there‟s an article that 

suddenly talks about the RM of Invermay, and it caught my 

attention rather quickly because of course that‟s the RM that I 

live in. Mr. Speaker, the RM of Invermay, as according to that 

news report was the RM — in all of Saskatchewan, the 297 

RMs that we have — it received the most moisture per inches 

of rain or millimetres of rain in all of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, tremendous amounts of acres that have not been able 

to be seeded. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, you know, the Minister of Agriculture 

recognized this very quickly and worked with the federal 

government. And we announced, Mr. Speaker, through the 

expansion of quarter 1 results, the financial results, we 

announced a program of $30 an acre. That‟s in addition to, Mr. 

Speaker, the crop insurance amounts that the minister talked 

about before. So I‟m not going to get into an explanation there. 

But, Mr. Speaker, $360 million of that announcement is going 

to come to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The provincial share, we‟re going to be responsible for 

probably $144 million of that. But you know, Mr. Speaker, 

because of a growing economy, because of a province that has 

been leading in so many initiatives, we are able to meet that 

challenge. 

 

And as indicated, the minister today was able to add to that 

program because the minister has understood that there were a 

certain group that were, I guess you would say, they were left 

out by the federal government to a degree, and that‟s the cattle 

producers. That‟s those who have the responsibility of growing 

forage and ensuring that their pasture lands are there. And, Mr. 

Speaker, today the announcement was very well received, very 

well received by cattleman in my constituency and all through 

the Canora and Kelvington-Wadena constituency, because now 

they‟ll have the opportunity to receive some assistance for 

trucking feed, because we know in certain parts of the province 

there‟s an abundance of feed. We just need to move it. 

 

And the other thing, Mr. Speaker, is they‟re going to be able to 

receive a payment, a per acre payment for lands that have 

flooded. And the forage that was on those acres needs to be 

reseeded, and they‟re going to receive that information. Mr. 

Speaker, the information will be provided. I think the minister‟s 

already identified a hotline, and farmers will be able to call and 

to be able to then submit their applications. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other items that I wish to talk about for 

just a few minutes . . . And of course it‟s listening to the 

member opposite, the member for Rosemont, who has a 

tendency to talk about . . . I won‟t say they‟re exaggerated 

numbers, but they‟re certain numbers that he likes to mention. 

Mr. Speaker, you know, one of the things that the member 

opposite . . . And I know that he wasn‟t here so I can‟t fault 

him, Mr. Speaker. But the document that he should read, Mr. 

Speaker, is the document of the Saskatchewan provincial 

budget, and it‟s dated ‟07-08. It‟s the last budget of the NDP 

government. And, Mr. Speaker, the budget that was presented 

. . . an interesting twist because for years government outlined 

its next four-year projections. And in this document, Mr. 

Speaker . . . and people in the province need to understand this, 

is that the government in 2007-08, the NDP government did not 

do a four-year projection. In fact, Mr. Speaker, on page no. 19 

of their document, they indicate the previous four years. They 

don‟t talk about what‟s going to occur in the next four years. 

They talk about the previous four years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you know, the debt, the debt as indicated in 

this document, Mr. Speaker, was $12 billion, the Crown and 

general government debt, $12 billion. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve been 

able to address that debt. We‟ve been able to look at reducing 

government debt. And, Mr. Speaker, we have reduced the 

government debt down to where we‟re now at $4.1 billion. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it‟s interesting. The member opposite stands 

and he said, well you have to look at your document; on page 

62 it shows that your debt is going up. Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. 

Because you know, Mr. Speaker, I took a look at the Crown 

corporation debt under the NDP, and throughout 2000, 2001, 

2002, 2003, it remained relatively flat. You know why, Mr. 

Speaker? Because they weren‟t planning for growth. They 

weren‟t planning for replacing an infrastructure that, Mr. 

Speaker, by everyone‟s analysis needs to be upgraded, Mr. 

Speaker, needs to be upgraded. So, Mr. Speaker, we are doing 

that. 

 

One of the first responsibilities, Mr. Speaker, that I had when I 

was a member of CIC was to look at ensuring that we would 

have natural gas turbines to ensure that we could have power 

produced. Mr. Speaker, we had to put an expenditure and get 

our order in so that those generators could be produced to the 

tune, I believe, of $450 million. So, Mr. Speaker, companies 

like SaskTel, like SaskPower, like SaskEnergy are all going to 

be expanding. They‟re all going to be improving their 

infrastructure. They‟re going to be ensuring that the fact is that 

we have 1.045 million people in this province now, Mr. 

Speaker. Our Crown corporations are going to move forward. 

 

You know, and it was interesting listening to a member today 

talk about . . . in question period where he said, you know, 

reveal your plan. You must be wanting to privatize, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we‟re going to spend literally millions of 

dollars, hundreds of millions of dollars to ensure that SaskTel 

and SaskEnergy and SaskPower can continue to build the 

infrastructure that the people of this province have become 

accustomed to and understand that these are quality programs, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

So while the member uses certain numbers to talk about debt, 

he has to understand that the debt, even as forecasted in the 

fourth year of this document, Mr. Speaker, is going to be less 

than the debt that was under the NDP, less than the debt that 

was under the NDP. So, Mr. Speaker, we‟re very proud of the 

fact that we have been able to get the debt under control. 

 

Mr. Speaker, two initiatives that, I believe it was . . . the 

member from Cumberland was the speaker this afternoon. I 

think it was the member for Cumberland. And he said, you 

know, deliver your promises. Show some respect. Well, Mr. 

Speaker, we made two very important promises in the election 

platform of 2007. One was on infrastructure spending. One was 

municipal revenue sharing, and another one was on ensuring 

that the education property tax would be fulfilled. Mr. Speaker, 

I want to indicate to the people in this province that since we 



5964 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2010 

have become government, almost $3 billion — that‟s with a 

“b,” Mr. Speaker — $3 billion have been spent on 

infrastructure. And it‟s infrastructure in highways. It‟s schools. 

It‟s affordable housing. It‟s provincial parks. It‟s in municipal 

projects, Mr. Speaker. It‟s all over the province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I listened very intently this afternoon to the 

member talk about education and the fact that the promise of a 

school in La Ronge was, in his opinion, delayed, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, that project has been on the books for years and 

years and years. And, Mr. Speaker, it is going to be delivered. It 

is already into the process stage. And, Mr. Speaker, when I 

went there in June because I had heard through the member 

opposite that there were problems . . . Mr. Speaker, the $34 

million project is going forward. The commitment is there by 

this government. And the commitment is there of course by the 

school board. And that $34 million project is going to get built 

in La Ronge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the other innovative things that I think 

we‟ve looked at is being able to work with the First Nations and 

Métis Relations office as well. Very rarely do we have a project 

that is jointly shared between INAC [Indian and Northern 

Affairs Canada] and the province in terms of the Ministry of 

Education. INAC is responsible for education on-reserve. But 

you know, Mr. Speaker, in the community of Turnor Lake . . . 

Turnor Lake is a First Nations reserve that was looking at 

constructing a brand new school, a very significant cost. But, 

Mr. Speaker, there was a need for other students not on-reserve 

to attend that school. So, Mr. Speaker, we have committed and 

that is already a commitment that has been completed. The 

school is open. And, Mr. Speaker, the commitment was over 

$3.2 million, $3.2 million, Mr. Speaker, that went to a First 

Nation school on-reserve to ensure that quality education is 

delivered to everyone. 

 

And I understand the member opposite saying, well show 

respect to northern people. Mr. Speaker, that‟s exactly what 

we‟re doing. That‟s exactly what we‟re doing. We‟re trying to 

ensure that people across this province — whether they‟re in 

the South or the North or whether they‟re urban or rural — 

ensure that the benefits that this government provides are 

equitable for all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do have to spend a moment talking about 

municipal revenue sharing, because you know, Mr. Speaker, we 

made a promise. We made a promise in the platform that said 

over the course of the term of our government, we were going 

to implement a revenue sharing that was going to be 

understood. It was going to be transparent. It was going to be 

there for everyone to understand. And, Mr. Speaker, we‟re 

going to keep that promise. Mr. Speaker, the March 31st 

provincial numbers from the province of Saskatchewan, 

through the auditor‟s office, indicate that the revenue that has 

been received by the province in the category of provincial sales 

tax is $1.84 billion. 

 

[17:30] 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it‟s very specific because now we are going 

to implement a 1 per cent . . . In other words, 1 per cent of that 

5 per cent PST — and I know for people that might be 

confusing — has contributed to building that pot. We‟re going 

to ensure that we fulfill that promise. And you know what, Mr. 

Speaker? That 1 per cent, that‟s going to translate to $216.8 

million. That‟s what‟s going to be given to the municipalities. 

 

And I have some figures. I do have to go back to my ‟07-08 

document when I look at the last year of the NDP. You know 

on the urban revenue-sharing transfer, the rural revenue-sharing 

transfer and the northern revenue-sharing transfer, Mr. Speaker, 

in the last year of the NDP, do you know what that total was for 

all three of them — $122 million. Mr. Speaker, this is going to 

move that number to $216 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker a couple of comments about the education property 

tax. Mr. Speaker, the education property tax has been a sore 

spot in many . . . In fact, Mr. Speaker, you know the first NDP 

to criticize the property tax was Tommy Douglas, Mr. Speaker. 

Tommy Douglas said that there needs to be a promise made to 

the taxpayers where the education tax has to be removed from 

. . . from the property, I‟m sorry, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, at the 2003 SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] convention, 2003, then 

premier says, and I quote: “Our top priority in tax reform for 

government over the next several years must be the matter of 

funding education. The status quo is not on.” That was the NDP 

premier in 2003. Well you know, let‟s move forward to March 

3rd, 2006. Same premier says, “Three years ago, I very publicly 

stated that the level of education tax being taken from farm land 

was both unfair and too high, a problem that has been with us 

for decades.” Mr. Speaker, for decades, for decades the NDP 

government didn‟t understand this. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there 

was a time when 150 rural municipalities launched a tax revolt, 

Mr. Speaker. They were understanding that the NDP 

government was not willing to look at that, not willing to look 

at the burden that the education property tax was placing on 

landowners. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we‟re going to fulfill that promise. We‟re 

going to ensure that the promise made of 20 per cent reduction 

for all residential commercial properties and an 80 per cent 

reduction for agriculture is going to happen, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech has indicated a path that we 

need to move forward on. Mr. Speaker, we‟ve already heard 

from the members in this Assembly about very significant tax 

cuts, Mr. Speaker, the tax cuts that affected low income people. 

And one of the things, Mr. Speaker, if I could find my notes 

here, would be the tax exemptions. Mr. Speaker, one of the 

changes that we implemented very quickly was to change the 

personal exemption. And the personal exemption, Mr. Speaker, 

since ‟07 until 2010, this government, Mr. Speaker, this 

government has increased the exemption by over $4,000. Mr. 

Speaker, that‟s $4,000 tax-free dollars that we have put into the 

taxpayers of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to conclude my remarks in a couple of 

minutes, but I do want to make mention, and I know that 

members opposite will want to get on board. Mr. Speaker, 

there‟s a CBC program, and I know the member opposite 

watches CBC often. The Battle of the Blades is under way. The 

Battle of the Blades involves a very specific individual that my 

colleague, the member of Kelvington-Wadena, mentioned today 

and that‟s Kelly Chase. Mr. Speaker, the decision made by 



November 9, 2010 Saskatchewan Hansard 5965 

Kelly and his skating partner, Ina, is that if they are successful, 

if they are successful in winning the $100,000, they‟re going to 

donate that money to the Children‟s Hospital Foundation in 

Saskatoon. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I do also want to mention . . . And this is why 

people should get on board and vote because Kelly and his 

partner were successful in staying on in the competition after 

last night. But, Mr. Speaker, the Garth Brooks — and I know 

the member opposite from Regina Rosemont is a great Garth 

Brooks fan — Garth Brooks foundation has also indicated that 

whoever wins, whoever wins, they will match the $100,000. So, 

Mr. Speaker, I challenge all the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, including the NDP, to vote. Let‟s help Kelly 

Chase and his partner win the Battle of the Blades because the 

winners will be the children of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m going to conclude by mentioning just some of 

the outstanding things that have happened as a result of the role 

that other countries have brought to Saskatchewan. One of my 

responsibilities is that of Deputy Premier, and I get an 

opportunity to meet with ambassadors and councils of so many 

different countries. Mr. Speaker, honestly it has been a very 

busy schedule, meeting with all the individuals. 

 

And I had the opportunity to be in Ukraine a second time just a 

short while ago. And I want to highlight one of the things that is 

going to happen. I had the opportunity to visit five oblast, or 

provinces as they‟re called, to look at possible trade agreements 

with Saskatchewan, to look at water improvement, to look at 

uranium development, to look at clean coal, but also to look at 

some agricultural things — things even as simple as land 

registration, Mr. Speaker, because right now in Ukraine, they 

don‟t have the ability to have a land registration system because 

there‟s a moratorium on land sales. 

 

But one of the provinces, Zhytomyr, the governor is going to be 

coming to the province of Saskatchewan during Agribition, 

during one of the largest, of course, recognized international 

agricultural displays and sales. And he‟s going to be coming to 

sign an agreement that is being worked on right now with our 

Premier, the Premier of Saskatchewan, to ensure that additional 

trade can take place in livestock, embryos, genetics and all of 

the things connected with livestock. It‟s a very exciting 

competition, Mr. Speaker, because you know, there are other 

provinces that are looking at offering the same things to 

Ukraine. But Ukraine understands that Saskatchewan has so 

much to offer, and they‟re coming here to make the deal with 

us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech I think just highlights for 

the people of Saskatchewan that we‟re on a path of growth. 

We‟re on a path that‟s going to move this province forward. 

We‟re going to ensure that we recognize that there are things 

that we must do, that we must do in health, we must do in the 

infrastructure. We must provide the benefits that people in this 

province expect and, Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is laying 

that out. So, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the 

amendment of the NDP but I definitely will be supporting this 

Throne Speech. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

amendment presented by the member from Saskatoon Massey 

Place, seconded by the member from Regina Coronation Park 

that the following words be added to the government‟s motion: 

 

And, that the government has lost the confidence of this 

Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan because of the 

government‟s lack of vision for the future of our province 

and its failure to address the important issues facing 

Saskatchewan today in this Speech from the Throne, 

including maximizing the benefits for Saskatchewan 

families from our resources, improving the quality of our 

health care, addressing critical issues of affordability, and 

returning to sound financial management. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — I believe the nays have it. Call in the 

members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 17:38 until 17:43.] 

 

The Speaker: — Those in favour of the amendment, please 

rise. Order. Order. 

 

[Yeas — 18] 

 

Lingenfelter McCall Belanger 

Harper Trew Higgins 

Junor Atkinson Nilson 

Forbes Vermette Broten 

Furber Yates Iwanchuk 

Taylor Wotherspoon Chartier 

 

The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion, please rise. 

 

[Nays — 31] 

 

Morgan Bjornerud Norris 

Draude Krawetz Eagles 

Duncan Huyghebaert McMillan 

Harpauer D‟Autremont Harrison 

Hickie Reiter Hutchinson 

Brkich Elhard Hart 

Stewart Allchurch  

 

[Interjections] 

 



5966 Saskatchewan Hansard November 9, 2010 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. I‟d ask members to allow the 

vote to proceed without interference. 

 

Weekes Ross Wilson 

Gantefoer Michelson Wyant 

Ottenbreit Chisholm Kirsch 

Bradshaw Heppner  

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 18; 

those opposed, 31. 

 

The Speaker: — The amendments debated being . . . Order . . . 

being passed. Order. I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 

House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the Assembly do adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 

to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 

until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:46.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5929 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 5929 

  Quennell ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5929 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5929 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5946 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5929 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5930 

  Iwanchuk ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5930 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5930 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Year of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5930 

 New La Ronge Seniors Centre 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5930 

 Battling for Children’s Hospital Fund 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5931 

 University of Saskatchewan Alumni Awards 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5931 

 Diwali Festival 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5931 

 Sacrifice and Service 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5932 

 Saskatoon Primary Care Health Bus 

  Allchurch ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5932 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Foreign Investment in Uranium Industry 

  Lingenfelter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 5932 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5932 

 Road Ambulance Service 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5933 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5933 

 Long-Term Care Facility Funding 

  Atkinson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 5934 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5934 

  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5934 

 Crown Corporation Revenues 

  Yates ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 5936 

  McMillan ................................................................................................................................................................................. 5936 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 Whitecap Dakota First Nation Affordable Housing Initiative 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5937 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5937 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 147 — The Public Interest Disclosure Act 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5938 

 Bill No. 614 — The Autism Spectrum Disorder Strategy Act 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5938 

 Bill No. 615 — The Seniors’ Bill of Rights Act 

  Junor ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 5938 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5939 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 5939 

  Harper ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5941 

  Hickie ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 5946 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 5948 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 5952 



 

  Furber ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 5958 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 5960 

 Recorded Division (Amendment) .............................................................................................................................................. 5965 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier of Saskatchewan 

President of the Executive Council 
 

 
 

Hon. Bob Bjornerud 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of First Nations and Métis Relations 

Minister Responsible for Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. June Draude 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Education 

Provincial Secretary 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of Enterprise 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Darryl Hickie 
Minister of Municipal Affairs 

 

Hon. Bill Hutchinson 
Minister of Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. D.F. (Yogi) Huyghebaert 
Minister of Corrections, Public Safety and Policing 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Tim McMillan 
Minister Responsible for Crown 

Investments Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Technology Office 

Minister Responsible for Information 

Services Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan Workers’ 

Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Rob Norris 
Minister of Advanced Education, 

Employment and Immigration 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

Minister Responsible for Uranium 

Development Partnership 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

 

Hon. Laura Ross 
Minister of Government Services 


